---
title: Bordiga versus Pannekoek
author: Antagonism
date: 2000-2001
description: Antagonism notes this was written by "an anonymous collective" in 2000-2001. It consists of a bibliography and an introduction to two texts on the relationship between class and party. One text is by Anton Pannekoek of the German-Dutch communist left, the other is by Amadeo Bordiga of the Italian communist left. It was originally posted at <https://web.archive.org/web/20091027020653/http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/3909/class.html>.
...

## Introduction

### Party, Class and Communism

2001, over a decade has passed since the fall of the Berlin wall, and
the announcement then of the "End of History" seems now to be not just
ideological, but beneath contempt. Open warfare returns to Europe, not
as an isolated episode, but endemic like an ancient disease grown
resistant to modern antibiotics. The global economy veers headlong into
recession. Many of the political institutions of international
capitalism (G8, IMF, World Bank) are more discredited, and protested
against, than ever before. At the same time, the development of capital
has not, as many expected, seen the building of ever more and ever
larger factories in the oldest capitalist countries, but instead the
closure not just of factories, but of whole industries. As a consequence
there is a decrease in the percentage of the population who appear as
the archetypal workers of Marxist or syndicalist lore. This has led many
to regard class as an old-fashioned idea. Talk of a "party" is often
regarded as even more irrelevant because of its association with
parliamentarism (more and more people quite rightly don't vote and don't
see why they should) or Leninism (when the Bolshevik legacy of the
USSR/Eastern Europe has disintegrated).

Nevertheless, the fundamental division of society into classes remains.
Power and wealth are becoming more rather than less concentrated as
_capital_ under the control of a small minority. And whatever the
changes in work patterns, culture and identity, more people than ever
before can only survive by exchanging their life for a wage, and are
thus subjected to the vagaries of the economy. Although individuals with
origins in other classes may also be part of a revolutionary movement,
the abolition of capitalism is inconceivable without a movement of the
mass of this class of the dispossessed, the _proletariat_, that has a
material interest in change. At present, as in most historical periods,
only a small minority are actively involved in opposing capitalism on a
revolutionary basis. Whether they define themselves as a "movement",
"organisation", "party", or even if they reject all formal organisation,
the question of how a radicalised minority relates to the rest of the
proletariat is a crucial one. It is precisely this issue which Bordiga
and Pannekoek address in the following texts.

The two articles presented here, both entitled "Party and Class" were
written at different times, and places, and represent two different, and
in some ways opposed views of the relationship between communist
organisation, consciousness and class. In fact they also present
different viewpoints of what class is. These questions have remained
important, and controversial. They have been addressed by all radical
tendencies in one way or another, at least tangentially. This is the
case even for tendencies that reject the concept of the revolutionary
party. For example, many class struggle anarchists try to deal with the
problem by designating their party "the revolutionary organisation"
assuming that by changing the name they exorcise the beast. From then on
they can conflate their own organisation with the organisation of the
class. The Italian and German communist lefts dealt with these questions
directly, but each in their own way.

In 1921 when Bordiga wrote "Party and Class" as a text of the Italian
Communist Party, revolutionaries everywhere looked to Russia as the
first example of a proletarian revolution. Although both the Italian and
the Dutch/German Lefts had already disagreed with the Bolsheviks over
"tactics", and been denounced by Lenin, both tendencies still saw
themselves as part of the same movement. By the time Pannekoek wrote his
article on the same subject, both the German and Italian lefts had
recognised the capitalist nature of "Soviet" Russia. The fact that
Bordiga's "Party and Class" was written in 1921, at his most
"Bolshevik", and Pannekoek's twenty years later, at his most
"councilist" accentuates the dissimilarities of the two tendencies. This
makes a comparison of their differences easier, but perhaps obscures
some of their underlying convergences.

The work of Bordiga and the Italian left can be regarded, to some extent
at least, as representing one pole of a continuing dialectic within the
communist movement. Theoretical and organised communism bases its ideas
and practice on the real movement of the proletariat in its antagonistic
struggle against capital. Theoretical communism is an attempt at a
distillation of the lessons learned by proletarian struggle. However,
there is a continual contradiction in this endeavour. The learning of
lessons from previous struggles tends toward an ever more coherent
theory manifesting itself as a principled programme. But adherence to
this programme necessarily means maintaining a critical attitude to
proletarian struggles. As a result, the principled communists tend to
become more and more distanced from the actual struggle of proletarians.
"Bordigism", in some of its manifestations, as a principled movement
based on an "invariant" programme is one of the purest examples of this
pole.

Pannekoek and the German/Dutch left appear at the opposite pole to this
dialectic, as do such movements as "Autonomism". These tendencies try to
keep their theory in touch with the latest struggles of the proletariat,
and the changes in the organisation of capital. This can unfortunately
lead to a continual revising of political positions (or rather a refusal
to hold to any position), or else can lead to an immediatist or
spontaneist workerism.

What is necessary is to go beyond any false opposition of programme
versus spontaneity. Communism is both the self-activity of the
proletariat and the rigorous theoretical critique that expresses and
anticipates it.

### Origins of the Lefts

If the German and Italian lefts, in their final incarnations, represent
two recurring moments in the class struggle, then the question arises as
to why this is the case. After all, both movements originated at the
same time, in European states that had undergone revolutionary shocks
after WWI. What are the material differences that lead to in some ways
different attitudes? The Italian and German Left can be seen as products
of the history of the proletarian movement in their respective countries
and the social democratic parties which they issued from.

Both Bordiga and Pannekoek had already fought against "revisionism"
(reformism) prior to World War One, and the Dutch radicals had already
formed their own party. The crucial difference between the Italian and
German socialist parties was their attitude to WWI, and these
differences reflected the level of cohesion in their respective
societies. Both Germany and Italy had been fairly recently unified as
national states. Italy was a relatively weak power with a consequently
vacillating foreign policy. This meant that there was a great deal of
questioning of the war in Italian society in general. Germany was a far
stronger power, with a modern industrial economy and centralised state
with a powerful military. Support for the state's war aims was thus far
more pervasive. The leadership of the German SDP supported the war,
opposed first of all by only a small radical left, which grew as the war
dragged on. After failing to win over the party, the left was forced to
split and form their own organisations. Pannekoek's emphasis on the
"spirit" of the class, outlasting particular organisational forms, can
be seen to originate here, as can the councilist emphasis on splits. The
Italian Socialist Party on the other hand, opposed the war, if in a
half-hearted and vacillating way, with only a dissident minority around
Mussolini supporting it and leaving to found fascism. The left split
organisationally only as they made a principled break between
revolutionaries and Maximalists^[In Italy at the time, the term
Maximalism referred to reformists with revolutionary phraseology. This
contrasts with Russia where Maximalism was a revolutionary tendency.] to
form their own communist party in 1921. This perhaps is the origin of
the Italian Left's emphasis on organisational continuity and programme.
Similarly, it is possible to discern material reasons in their
respective histories for their very different attitudes to democracy.
Bordiga's fight against Freemasons within the Italian Socialist Party,
who were a democratic element within the party, but in no way Marxists,
was the beginning of a fight against democracy as such. On the other
hand, Pannekoek's support for the combatative _rank and file_ against
the revisionist leaders can be seen as the origin of his spontaneism and
democratism.

### Pannekoek

Pannekoek was a communist from the Netherlands active in both Dutch and
German social democratic parties and later the Communist Party of
Holland, and the Group of International Communists. He was influential
on the left communist movement, especially in Germany, but also further
afield. His work should be seen as a theorisation of the German/Dutch
revolutionary proletarian movement, in its strengths and weaknesses,
rather than just the product of a single intellectual. His work is an
example of a particular, re-occurring tendency in radical movements.
This tendency is characterised by such terms as councilism, workerism,
"at the point of production", immediatism and an emphasis on
spontaneity. These aspects reappear again and again in different
contexts, and in different movements: Workers Autonomy, situationist
ideas, the Industrial Workers of the World, some anarchist currents, and
in German, Dutch and British left communism.

The First International had declared that "the emancipation of the
working classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves...".
This apparently straightforward statement, which almost all modern
Marxist tendencies adhere to is actually interpreted in subtly different
ways. Are particular groups of workers, or even individual workers, to
emancipate themselves, or does the class as an entity emancipate itself?
Does every struggle by a group of workers have the possibility of
recreating the communist programme, or does the development of class
consciousness require wider discussion and experience? The council
communists put faith in "the workers themselves" and tended to assume
that communism was immanent in all workplace struggles. This belief had
a number of important corollaries. It formed the basis of their critique
of political groups -- what is their positive role if the workers can
recreate communist critique in any struggle? It formed the basis of
their democratism and self-managementism -- as the workers are
inherently communist, giving power to the workers was the same as
destroying capital. Finally, it underpinned their workerism -- if
workplace struggles are inherently communist, then everything else can
be subordinated to them.

There is a basic tension in the belief that workers become revolutionary
spontaneously, purely from their own individual experiences and the fact
that this belief itself is held and propagated by a minority of
politically active councilists (for example). The conceptions of the
councilists developed not spontaneously, but through a confrontation
with Marx, Luxembourg, Kautsky, Lenin, through reading, and political
discussion, and not just participation in a strike, or strike movement.
The tension between spontaneity and conscious minorities has been a
continuing problematic for the German left, and has tended to find a
resolution in liquidation. The councilists theorise themselves out of
existence.

Consciousness develops unevenly; it often develops first of all in
minorities and these minorities may play a positive role, "they bring
clarity" as Pannekoek puts it. These minorities are the "organs of
self-enlightenment of the working-class". But can such
"self-enlightenment" be simply a change in consciousness, as he implies?
Surely it is "enlightenment" also about tactics and action. That is the
minorities, which form the _material party_ (see below) may also lead
the class in the sense of defining a course which the most combatative
elements of the class sees as the best to follow. In this sense the
party becomes the "organ of the class" (Bordiga) and any hard
distinction between the communist minorities and the mass of the
proletariat disappears.

### Pannekoek's "Party and Class"

When Pannekoek states that "The old labour movement is organised into
parties" it is clear that he uses the word "party" primarily to refer to
formal organisations. He distinguishes the party from the class, and
does not have the concept of the "historic" or material party as a
product of the class.

According to Pannekoek, "The workers must ... think out and decide for
themselves." But workers, individuals employed in thousands of separate
enterprises, think, act and decide individually, or at best sectionally,
for the most part. Only when workers begin to combine together as a
class for itself, acting in concert, politically, can they start
thinking, acting and deciding collectively in a coherent manner that
anticipates communism. Under normal circumstances the only agreement
they have is that of bourgeois citizenry.

For Pannekoek, "classes are groupings according to economic interests".
But what is the significance of economic interests? Why look to one
class, the workers, rather than another, the peasants, say? Or why
choose our _class_, rather than our gender, nation, skin colour or eye
colour? The important thing is communism, class struggle, the
antagonisms in this society which tend toward a resolution in communism.
Class defines itself first of all through class struggle, a struggle of
the alienated, the proletarians, against alienating forces: capital, its
state, the relations of wage labour, isolation, and so forth. Economic
interests are a _determining_ element but not the _defining_ one; the
starting point is struggle, practical antagonism. Councilism makes the
error of overemphasising the objective conditions, the _class in
itself_. Setting out from that starting point it ends up at workerism,
democratism and spontaneism. Bordiga, in "Party and Class", makes the
opposite error of overemphasizing the subjective condition, the class in
struggle, the _class for itself_^[This error was corrected after WWII in
the analysis of the proletariat as a class "without reserves", e.g. in
"Marxismo e Miseria". See below.]. This overemphasis on the subjective
element results in an _idealistic_ slant to his analysis, and an
overemphasis on the political in tactics. Class needs to be grasped in
its dialectical unity, of class for itself and class in itself, of its
economic conditions as a foundation for its antagonistic position within
society. The position of the workers as elements of production is not
the defining point for class struggle, and communism, but forms part of
its material basis.

Pannekoek points out a mistaken viewpoint of the old workers movement:
"During the rise of Social Democracy it seemed that it would gradually
embrace the whole working class... because Marxian theory declared that
similar interests beget similar viewpoints..." The conception that
Pannekoek attacks was indeed wrong. It looked toward all of the class in
itself (defined, according to Pannekoek, by economic interests)
developing into the class for itself (defined by its struggle against
capital) and doing this formally, before actually, that is
organisational unity first, unity in revolutionary struggle later. In
reality, some whose economic interests lie in communism will remain
counter-revolutionary till the end. Pannekoek is correct to see that the
working class will be the main source of the movement toward communism.
Nevertheless, he still holds to the mechanistic ideal that all workers
-- or all manual workers -- will _en masse_ become socialists, which is
nonsense. Pannekoek attacks a failed strategy based on this starting
point but does not attack the erroneous starting point itself. Society
as he says does indeed proceed in "conflicts and contradictions", and
that is why revolutionary struggles break out without all workers
becoming communist. Here Pannekoek maintains a democratic, sociological,
workerist viewpoint, at odds with reality.

Pannekoek assumes that present day parties want to substitute themselves
for the class, and in fact, rule over the workers (something which
Bordiga opposes). But Pannekoek does allow the possibility of political
groupings, "entirely different ... from those of today". He correctly
emphasises the necessity for class action, both during the revolution
and after it as necessary for defeating the bourgeoisie, and ensuring
victory (with or without the formal party). He also alludes to the
necessity of mass involvement as a method of development of
consciousness. Here he echoes what Marx argued in the _Germany
Ideology_:

>"Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist
>consciousness, and for the success of the cause itself, the alteration
>of men on a mass scale is necessary, an alteration which can only take
>place in a practical movement, a revolution; this revolution is
>necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class cannot be
>overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it
>can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of all the muck of
>ages and become fitted to found society anew."

### Self-Management

One element of council communism in general is the demand for
"self-management of enterprises" (Pannekoek). This product of the German
left's democratic workerism, is one of the weakest elements of this
tendency. The council communists saw as their aim that workers take over
the factories and run them themselves. It results in a myopic view of
revolution, which looks for changes in management, rather than total
transformation of society.

Self-management, the running of the enterprise by the workers employed
in it, changes only the ownership and management of the enterprise. In
capitalist society, where different enterprises operate through market
mechanisms as elements of a single social capital, it matters not
whether an enterprise is owned privately, or by a joint stock company,
or by the state or by its employees. Likewise, whether the management is
hierarchical or democratic does not change the enterprise's nature as an
element in capitalist society. Self-management boils down to the
proletarians' self-management of their own exploitation. Worse, as a
measure that is often introduced in unprofitable, failing companies, by
workers trying to prevent closure and their own unemployment,
self-management often entails a higher level of exploitation than a
normal business. The workers "freely choose" (under pressure from the
market) to work harder for less money, in order to keep the enterprise
going. Self-management operates therefore as a weapon of capitalist
crisis management. The capitalist nature of self-managed enterprises has
not only been demonstrated theoretically, but has been shown in the fact
that self-management has been taken up by capitalist groups from time to
time^[See "LIP and the Self-Managed Counterrevolution" by Negation, for
a lengthy discussion of the politics, and political economy of
self-management.].

The problem with self-management was already being grasped by Bordiga in
1920, even if with a statist perspective. "The factory will be conquered
by the working class -- and not only by the workforce employed in it,
which would be too weak and non-communist -- only after the working
class as a whole has seized political power. Unless it has done so, the
Royal Guards, military police, etc. -- in other words, the mechanism of
force and oppression that the bourgeoisie has at its disposal, its
political power apparatus -- will see to it that all illusions are
dispelled"^["Seize Power or Seize the Factory?"].

The practical result of the self-management perspective was shown in
France in 1968. The movement of occupations started in the universities,
which were transformed by the revolutionaries into social spaces (and
_not_ collective universities). As two participants in the movement
describe:

>"The escalation had gone as far as the formation of general assemblies
>of sections of the population inside the occupied universities. The
>occupants organized their own activities.
>
>"However, the people who 'socialized' the universities did not see the
>factories as SOCIAL means of production; they did not see that these
>factories have not been created by the workers employed there, but by
>generations of working people"^[F. Perlman and F. Gregoire,
>"Worker-Student Action Committees."].

Those that held this perspective 'supported' the workers, but worried
about substituting their own activity for that of the workers. The
workers were thus relied on to liberate themselves in isolation, factory
by factory:

>"By telling themselves that it was 'up to the workers' to take the
>factories, a 'substitution' did in fact take place, but it was the
>opposite 'substitution' from the one the anarchists feared. The
>militants substituted the inaction (or rather the bureaucratic action)
>of the workers' bureaucracies, which was the only 'action' the workers
>were willing to take, for their own action"^[_ibid_].
>
>"On May 21, the second day of the occupation, the action committee
>militants found all the gates of the factory closed, and union
>delegates defended the entrances against 'provocateurs'"^[_ibid_].

The 1984-85 UK miners' strike brought the issue of the enterprise and
class struggle up again, both practically and theoretically. As Wildcat
argued: "Any workplace struggle can fall into the trap of corporatism
**as long as it remains just a workplace struggle.** ... In the miners'
strike ... the high points were when the whole of the working class in a
particular area became involved -- e.g. defence of pit villages against
the police. 'Territory' includes workplaces and it is often
strategically very important to disrupt, seize and/or destroy them.
Workplace occupations, for example, are an important opportunity for
undermining the role of the workplace as an 'enterprise' separate from
the rest of society -- by inviting other proletarians into the site
besides those who normally work there, by reappropriating resources such
as printing and communications, by giving away useful products stored at
the site...."^[Wildcat, "Outside and Against the Unions."].

The real highpoints of class struggle are where workers _break out_ of
enterprises and struggle on the terrain of society. Examples include the
Paris Commune of 1871, Kronstadt 1921. This stands in stark contrast to
the activity of leftists of various types who are always trying _to get
into_ the factories.

### Trade Unions, Factory Organisations and Soviets

The Third International argued that the workers movement had developed
from a division into party, trade union, and co-operative into a
division "which we are approaching everywhere" of party, soviets, and
trade unions. The real movement in fact developed in a different way in
the countries where the movement was most advanced, Russia and Germany.
The actual form of the movement was a division into party, soviets and
factory organisations. The factory organisations took on the form of
factory committees in Russia, factory councils in Italy, and
_Betriebsraete_, and later _Unionen_ in Germany. The distinction between
factory organisations on the one hand, and workers' councils on the
other was sometimes blurred both in fact and in theory, but was stated
most clearly in Bordiga's polemic against Gramsci. Gramsci had thrown
himself enthusiastically into support of the factory council movement in
Turin, identifying it as the beginning of a movement of soviets. Bordiga
underlined the difference between factory councils, based in particular
enterprises, and workers' councils, which grouped all proletarians
territorially. He correctly saw that factory organisations could not
play the same radical role as soviets, that they could not transform the
whole of society. Bordiga saw that they had some of the same weaknesses
as trade unions, such as sectionalism, and workerism, and so, wrongly,
dismissed them as being essentially a new form of union. This dismissal
is more understandable in the Italian context where factory councils
were only allowed to elect trade union members as delegates. In Germany,
where the communists in the factory organisations called for workers to
leave the trade unions, such a dismissal would be much harder to make.

The council communists, like Gramsci, tended to confuse factory
organisations with workers' councils. In fact at their worst, they
adopted an extreme form of workerism that denied the existence of the
proletariat outside of the factory. "Only in the factory is the worker
of today a real proletarian... Outside the factory he is a
petty-bourgeois..."^[O. Rühle, "From the Bourgeois to the Proletarian
Revolution."]. On the other hand, the post WWI revolutionary movement in
Britain called for _social soviets_, partly as a result of rising
unemployment which expelled revolutionaries from the workplace. This may
have influenced the position held by Sylvia Pankhurst who called for a
system of soviets, which would group all proletarians, including those
outside the enterprises, such as housewives ^[B. Winslow, _Sylvia
Pankhurst, Sexual Politics and Political Activism_]. In contrast to
widespread confusion about the soviets, this represented an important
recognition that they were _social_ and _proletarian_, and not simply
_workers_ organisations.

### Class composition

Soviets and factory organisations appeared at the end of a phase of
capital accumulation based on the skilled factory worker and at the
beginning of a phase based on the mass worker^[S. Bologna, "Class
Composition and the Theory of the Party at the Origins of the Worker's
Council Movement".]. Factory organisations tended to represent this
sector of the class, the skilled worker. Soviets, or workers' councils,
which originated in the Russian peasant commune ^[J. Camatte, Community
and Communism in Russia.], group proletarians territorially. In
potential, they are the self-organisation not just of workers, but of
the whole class, including groups that may be partially excluded from
the workplace but still involved in struggle, such as (in some
circumstances) soldiers, women and students.

At their best, factory organisations were fighting organisations for
workers; they fought against the unions, which had become more
conservative and been integrated into the state during the First World
War. They expressed the development of the class in itself to the class
for itself. Soviets were, at least potentially, fighting organisations
of the whole class, and formed an alternate power to the bourgeois
state. They thus represented the transition of the class for itself to
the self-abolition of the proletariat, to a communist humanity.

Bordiga was correct to point out the deficiencies of factory
organisations. Starting from the economic they cannot address the
totality, or be the organisation of the class as a whole. But after
making this valid critique, he dismisses them and fails to see what is
positive in them as opposed to trade unions. Among their strengths were
the following: the refusal of negotiation (by the Unionen), the breaking
down of barriers between different trades, the ditching of the trade
unions' reactionary leaders and bureaucracy, and the grouping of
revolutionary and combative workers in an organisation with a radical
programme. Even if social transformation cannot stop at the factory
gates, struggle at the site of exploitation remains central to the
subversive power of the proletariat. Factory organisations were formed
by radical workers in a revolutionary situation, and represented a
radical break with the unions that had been integrated into capital
through years of peaceful, piecemeal action.

In Germany the Workers' Councils or _Raete_ were dominated by the Social
Democrats, the party of counter-revolution, which neutralised these
councils, and prepared for the creation of the Weimar Republic. In this
situation, the factory organisations provided a basis for revolutionary
opposition. There is an irony of history here. The council communist
tendency appeared where the workers' councils failed to make a
revolution, and the council communists were characteristically organised
in the factory organisations. This may account for the council communist
confusion of factory organisations with workers' councils.

The formation of soviets in no way ensures the success of the
revolution. The fact that soviets operate on the social terrain, rather
than just the economic, may mean that they are even more a target of
manipulation by political tendencies than are factory organisations
(although the latter were far from being immune to such manipulation).
In Russia and Germany, the proletariat formed both types of
organisations (as well as parties) perhaps because no single
organisational form proved adequate.

The opposition soviet/factory-organisation, that appeared in the German
and Russian revolutions, has tended to be superseded in certain
highpoints of class struggle. This can be seen in the examples of some
struggles organised by mass assemblies, for instance in Spain in the
period 1976-78. One particular instance of a conflict of this form was
the struggle of dockworkers in Gijón, northern Spain between 1983
and 1985. The struggle was organised through an assembly that met in a
disused cinema. All those involved in the struggle were involved in the
assembly, irrespective of whether they were dockers, or miners or
technical students or any old proletarian. Therefore, the assembly was
no longer workplace based, but grouped all the combative proletarians in
a violent struggle on the social terrain.

### Bordiga

Bordiga was a leading member of the left of the Italian Socialist Party,
and for a time the head of the Italian Communist Party. After WWII, and
until his death in 1970, he was associated with first with the
Internationalist Communist Party and then the International Communist
Party^[See _The Italian Communist Left_ for details of the various
splits and name changes.]. His work was more than the product of an
individual but rather was important in expressing the self-conscious
revolutionary movement in Italy after WWI.

At the time that "Party and Class" was written, Bordiga regarded the
Bolsheviks, and the Third International as real communist parties. He
was later to oppose the policy of _Bolshevization_, which ordered a
mechanical unity, enforced by the "top executives", preferring an
"organic centralism" in which all members were to participate actively.
"It would be a fatal error to consider the party as dividable into two
groups, one of which is dedicated to the study and the other to action;
such a distinction is deadly for the body of the party, as well as for
the individual militant"^[A. Bordiga, "Considerations on the party's
organic activity when the general situation is historically
unfavourable", 1965.]. Later still he was to criticise Lenin.
Nonetheless, in seeing the ICP, the existing formal party, as the
essence of the proletariat as a revolutionary class, he retained
elements of a Bolshevik position throughout his life.

But the Bolsheviks in fact were part of the left of the social
democratic movement, and took up a revolutionary position only because
the democratic route to power favoured by the majority of the Second
international was not an option in Tsarist Russia. The Bolsheviks were
revolutionary vis-a-vis Russian Autocracy but they retained the
organisational and economic programme, that is, capitalist programme, of
the Second International. After the October revolution, they quickly
took up a counter-revolutionary position, first against the Russian
masses and then against the proletariat internationally, including the
revolutionary elements in the communist parties. In fact, Bordiga's
attitude was more subversive than the Bolsheviks', no matter how much he
viewed himself as in accord with Lenin. His idea of the party should not
be confused with a pure substitutionist position.

For Bordiga, the party was seen first of all as a part of the class,
that is, a _minority_ not the whole class. Later on, he emphasised the
party as an organ of the class, not simply a part, that is, as not being
representative:

>"With respect to the nature of the party, we maintain that it is an
>'organ' of the working class. To maintain that the party is a 'part'
>and not an 'organ' indicates a concern to identify the party and the
>class in a statistical manner, and is symptomatic of an opportunistic
>deviation. The statistical identification of party and class has always
>been one of the characteristics of opportunistic workerism"^[A.
>Bordiga, 1926, "_Intervento alla commissione politica per il congresso
>di Lione_". A slightly different translation of this passage appears in
>Gramsci, _Political Writings 1921-1926_.].

Bordiga saw class as a movement not a pure statistical fact. Here he
follows the attitude of Marx who in asking at the end of the third
volume of Capital "What constitutes a class?" rejects "the identity of
revenues and sources of revenue" as a criterion. The "infinite
fragmentation of interest and rank into which the division of social
labour splits labourers as well as capitalists and landlords" would in
that case imply an infinite number of classes. Far from being
sociological categories, classes are dynamic, aligned against each
other. In a central passage of "Party and Class" Bordiga writes:

>"Instead of taking a snapshot of society at a given moment (like the
>old metaphysical method) and then studying it in order to distinguish
>the different categories into which the individuals composing it must
>be classified, the dialectical method sees history as a film unrolling
>its successive scenes; the class must be looked for and distinguished
>in the striking features of this movement. In using the first method we
>would be the target of a thousand objections from pure statisticians
>and demographers ... who would re-examine our divisions and remark that
>there are not two classes, nor even three or four, but that there can
>be ten, a hundred or even a thousand classes separated by successive
>gradations and indefinable transition zones. With the second method,
>though, we make use of quite different criteria in order to distinguish
>... the class, and in order to define its characteristics, its actions
>and its objectives, which become concretised into obviously uniform
>features among a multitude of changing facts; meanwhile the poor
>photographer of statistics only records these as a cold series of
>lifeless data. Therefore, in order to state that a class exists and
>acts at a given moment in history, it will not be enough to know ...
>how many merchants there were in Paris under Louis XIV, or the number
>of English landlords in the Eighteenth Century, or the number of
>workers in the Belgian manufacturing industry at the beginning of the
>Nineteenth Century. Instead, we will have to submit an entire
>historical period to our logical investigations; we will have to make
>out a social, and therefore political, movement which searches for its
>way through the ups and downs, the errors and successes, all the while
>obviously adhering to the set of interests of a strata of people who
>have been placed in a particular situation by the mode of production
>and by its developments."

For Bordiga, consciousness appears first of all in small groups of
workers. When the mass is thrust into action, these small groups lead
the rest. The _material party_ is the collection of small leading
groups, the radical minorities. The movement that defines a class, also
necessitates a party. But that party may exist _materially_ but not
_formally_. That is the political movement of the class is not
necessarily grouped in a particular formal organisation, called a Party,
with membership cards, aims and principals, an internal bulletin. The
party may exist as a more diffuse movement, perhaps of several groups,
all or none of whom may be called parties. Or it may consist of
fractions of such groups, or of informal connections amongst individuals
who are not members of any group. This aspect of Bordiga's view of the
party was later developed by Camatte, in contrast to the organisational
fetishism of some of the Italian left groups. It is clear that this
standpoint is far removed from Kautsky's and Lenin's that socialist
consciousness could only be brought to the workers "from without" by
"bourgeois intelligentsia"^[See Lenin's _What is to Be Done?_].

Bordiga argued that "the 'collapse of the socialdemocratic parties of
the Second International was by no means the collapse of proletarian
parties in general' but, if we may say so, the failure of organisms that
had forgotten they were parties because they had stopped being parties."
That is, the formal party had ceased to be the material party. This
phenomenon was to reoccur again with the degeneration of the communist
parties.

In most situations, the members of the radical minorities are not all
grouped in the same organisations. In the period following the Russian
revolution, the different minority groups did in fact tend to cohere
into a formal party. The Third International's decree that "in each
country there must be only one Communist Party" formally expressed this
tendency. However, following the degeneracy of the Russian revolution
and the victory of the counter-revolution in Western Europe, this
tendency to cohere reversed. The Russian party increasingly favoured the
right wings of the various national sections of the International, and
sought an accommodation with the capitalist powers, especially through
an alliance with the Social Democratic parties. The left of the parties,
sometimes the majority of the membership, from then on tended to break
away from the CPs to form left communist groupings. The Communist
Parties ceased to be revolutionary groupings and became Stalinist,
capitalist parties. The material party has a dialectical relationship
with the class movement, and cannot continue to exist as a mass
organisation outside of a mass movement. Formal parties degenerate as
the movement wanes, and the radical minorities have to regroup, as
fractions or in separate organisations. In some respects, Bordiga is
close to Pannekoek on this issue:

>"The proletariat's organisation -- its most important source of
>strength -- must not be confused with the present-day forms of
>organisations ... _The nature of this organisation is something
>spiritual -- no less than the whole transformation of the proletarian
>mentality_"^[Pannekoek, "_Massenaktion und Revolution_", 1912, in
>Bricianer, p. 126.].

Both echoed the sentiments of Marx at certain points: "The League, like
the Society of Friends in Paris and a hundred other associations, was
only an episode in the history of the party which grows everywhere
spontaneously from the soil of modern society... Under the term 'party',
I understand party in the great historical sense"^[Marx to Freiligrath,
1860.].

Bordiga described the development of the party thus: it originates
dynamically from the activity of the class. Once formed it concentrates
the revolutionary consciousness and will of the class. From here on the
party leads the class, using other organisations merely as a
transmission belt. The progression of this argument sees the party's
relation to the class slipping from dynamic product, to essence, to
dominator, in a word to Bolshevism. The dialectical unity between class
and party explicit at the origin of argument, gives way in the end to a
simple hierarchy and chain of command. Undoubtedly, a centralised
disciplined organisation is an essential element at certain points, such
as the organisation of an insurrection^[See for instance, "The
Wilhelmshaven Revolt" for an insider account by a council communist of
how a naval mutiny was organised in a strictly centralised fashion.].
Bordiga however, goes too far in putting forward the centralised form as
the general form of the party. The material party is a product of the
class, and can only remain so. The breaking of the two-way interaction
between proletariat and party, and its replacement by the party's
monologue, signals the degeneration of the party.

### Workers' Democracy and Proletarian Dictatorship

Bordiga points out that the interests of the class are not the same as
one sector or trade. Therefore the interests of the class can only be
expressed by a grouping of all the radical minorities issuing from all
categories. This is the party. The party unites all tendencies of the
class, both socially, by grouping different categories, and
geographically by grouping different localities.

However, Bordiga does not go into detail as to how this unification may
come about. In fact the formation of the class, as a class and also as a
party, may involve incoherence, contradictions and conflicts between
different sections of proletarians on the basis of pay, skill, work or
non-work, sexual division of labour, "race", and so on. These complex,
but vital problems of _political re-composition_ of the class have been
a major focus of the autonomist Marxist current. The different ways in
which sections of the proletariat struggle in their own interests,
communicate their experience and fight for their needs within the wider
class, as well as against capital, continually challenge the established
truths of "revolutionary theory". The contribution of the various
"autonomist" currents is essential, but also problematic, as the
willingness to go up against any "orthodoxy" also runs the risk of
abandoning class terrain completely^[The tendency associated with the
journal _Race Traitor_ have carried out some important work. See _How
the Irish Became White_, Ignatiev. Another interesting tendency is Wages
for Housework, and especially the writings of S. James and Dalla Costa.
These have similar strengths, in looking long and hard at the conflicts
within the proletariat, but similar weaknesses in tending to
over-emphasise their own special interest group.]. In any case, class
unity can only be a product of struggle, and not a problem of
statistical representation.

If only a minority of the class is conscious of its position, interests
and revolutionary aim and possesses a will to achieve the aim, then the
majority of the class does not possess these attributes. The democratic
point of view that would put power in the hands of the majority of the
class would put power in the hands of those without class consciousness
or revolutionary will. But as Marx argued in the _German Ideology_, the
"ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas", and the

>"ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the
>dominant material relationships, the dominant material relationships
>grasped as ideas; hence of the relationships which make the one class
>the ruling one, therefore, the ideas of its dominance."

Therefore a democratic power, even a democratic workers' power would put
power in the hands of capital. Communism rejects workers' democracy and
workers' power, and supports only its own class movement. The communist
minorities, that is, the material party, fights intransigently to
realise communism.

Bordiga argued that internal party discipline was an antidote to
degeneracy. This attitude was very mistaken as was shown by the
degeneracy of both the Bolshevik party and the Italian Communist Party.
This error was surprising as Bordiga correctly argued that "revolution
is not a form of organisation". In fact there are no guarantees against
degeneracy. If the revolution fails, then mass organisations (party,
council, factory organisation) cannot co-exist indefinitely with capital
without accommodating to it and eventually being absorbed. For a formal
party the choice is betrayal, diminution to an insignificant sect, or
dissolution. No amount of internal discipline can avoid this. The
forging of a disciplined centralised party, far from preventing the
party from going over to the counter-revolution, in fact merely provided
the counter-revolution with a disciplined centralised party.

Bordiga denounced syndicalist (and councilist) faith in economic
organisations as democratic. He also pointed out that decentralisation
of the economy was bourgeois (because separate _enterprises_ are a
specifically capitalist form). Organisation of workers in unions is
accepted by the both democratic and fascist bourgeoisie, and both in
theory and in practice.

Opposed to the overemphasis on economic struggle, Bordiga lays stress
instead on the political act of the revolution, the destruction of the
bourgeois state and its replacement by the dictatorship of the
proletariat, which he identifies as a form of state. But communism has a
critique of politics, both practical and theoretical. Marx:

>"The more developed and the more comprehensive is the political
>understanding of a nation, the more the proletariat will squander its
>energies -- at least in the initial stages of the movement -- in
>senseless, futile uprisings that will be drowned in blood. Because it
>thinks in political terms, it regards the will as the cause of all
>evils and force and the overthrow of a particular form of the state as
>the universal remedy. Proof: the first outbreaks of the French
>proletariat. The workers in Lyons imagined their goals were entirely
>political, they saw themselves purely as soldiers of the republic,
>while in reality they were the soldiers of socialism. Thus their
>political understanding obscured the roots of their social misery, it
>falsified their insight into their real goal, their political
>understanding deceived their social instincts"^[Marx, "Critical Notes
>on the Article 'The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a
>Prussian'".].

The communist critique of politics itself derives from the real
situation of the proletariat:

>"the community from which the workers is isolated is a community of
>quite different reality and scope than the political community. ... The
>community from which his own labour separates him is life itself,
>physical and spiritual life, human morality, human activity, human
>enjoyment, human nature"^[_ibid_].

It is precisely Bordiga's overemphasis on the political which results in
a lack of interest in ongoing class struggles, and results, for example
in a failure to adequately critique the trade unions. Bordiga saw
revolution in the first instance as the transfer of state power from the
bourgeoisie to the party. Any real social transformation was to begin
only after this point. In contrast, the German-Dutch left sought a
transfer of power within the factories from the bosses to the workers,
neglecting the question of the state. Each of the communist lefts saw
only half the picture. Neither state power nor workers control is a real
foundation for social transformation. Revolution is the communisation of
society, the development of class struggle through the re-appropriation
of the whole of society, a dis-alienation in which the centralised
political assault on the state is only one act, even if a decisive one.
The proletariat aims neither to become the ruler of the state (rejecting
a statist interpretation of "dictatorship of the proletariat") nor ruler
of the enterprise (rejecting self-management), but abolishes its own
conditions of existence and so itself as a class.

### Marx on Class

The Italian and German lefts, in the texts presented here each seem to
have taken up only _one side_ of the dialectical view of the proletariat
analysed by Marx: "The combination of capital has created for this mass
a common situation, common interests. This mass is thus already a class
as against capital, but not yet for itself"^[ Marx, _The Poverty of
Philosophy_.]. The class, defined by common interests, exists as an
_object_, as a factor of capital, but also with separate interests from,
and against, capital. That is, the proletariat is (potentially) opposed
to _capital_ rather than specifically the bourgeoisie. This was
important in the analysis of the Soviet Union, a society with capital,
but without a (local) bourgeoisie as such. As Bordiga argued, "we are
concerned about the extremely developed form of _capital_, not the
_capitalist_. This director does not need fixed people"^[Bordiga,
"Doctrine of the Body Possessed by the Devil".]. Marx continues: "In the
struggle, of which we have noted only a few phases, this mass becomes
united, and constitutes itself as a class for itself." Only in class
struggle does the proletariat constitute itself as a _subject_, as an
historical actor, only then does it really exist as an active factor of
social development. The distinction between _class in itself_ and _class
for itself_ is analogous to that made by the Italian autonomists in
their analysis of _labour power_ (factor of production) and _working
class_ (political composition). The French "ultra-left" made a similar
distinction between _working class_ (this time as factor of capital) and
_proletariat_ (as revolutionary subject). These different terminologies
are obviously incompatible, but the real tendency of the proletariat is
nonetheless recognised in each case.

The class is defined objectively as those separated from the means of
procuring the necessaries of life, and who have no choice but to
repeatedly sell their life-activity in order to obtain them.
"Labour-power finds itself in a state of separation from its means of
production (including the means of subsistence as means of production of
the labour-power itself), and because this separation can be overcome
only by the sale of the labour-power to the owner of the means of
production"^[Marx, _Capital_, volume II, chapter 1.].

Bordiga summarised this condition with the phrase "without-reserves" to
indicate the reproduction of the proletariat, and the cyclical, dynamic
reproduction of poverty. The workers receive a wage, perhaps a high
wage, but as soon as this wage is spent, they are back in the initial
condition of having no way of living except through the sale of their
life activity:

>"With its primitive accumulation, capitalism empties everyone's purses,
>houses, fields, and shops, and turns everyone into paupers, destitute,
>without-reserves, propertyless, in growing numbers. It reduces them to
>being, within Marx's meaning, 'wage slaves'. Poverty [_miseria_] grows
>and wealth concentrates, because there is a disproportionate increase
>in the absolute and relative number of property-less proletarians who
>must every day eat what every day they earn. The economic phenomenon is
>not altered if some day the wages of some of them, in certain trades,
>in certain countries, allow them the brothel, the cinema and, joy of
>joys, a subscription to _Unita_^[The Communist Party daily paper.]. The
>proletariat is not poorer if wages fall, as it is not wealthier if
>wages increase and prices go down. It is not wealthier when it works
>than when it is unemployed. Whoever has fallen into the class of wage
>workers [_salariata_] is poor in an absolute way" ^[Bordiga, "_Marxismo
>e Miseria_".].

This understanding of wealth and poverty as being something other than
purely the level of consumption is suggestive of the situationist
analysis of the "new poverty" existing among proletarians in modern
societies alongside the refrigerators, colour TVs and package holidays.

Marx argued in the "Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right.
Introduction", that "the proletariat ... is ... formed ...from the mass
of people issuing from society's acute disintegration and in particular
from the ranks of the middle class". This identification of the middle
class origin of the proletariat ties in with comments in the "Economic
and Philosophical Manuscripts" on the workers' alienation from the
product of their labour:

>"...man reproduces himself not only intellectually, in his
>consciousness, but actively and actually, and he can therefore
>contemplate himself in a world he himself created. In tearing away the
>object of his production from man, estranged labour therefore tears
>away from him his species-life..."

This idea that workers create themselves in the creation of their
product is almost incomprehensible in really modern industry. Most
workers hardly see the product they collectively produce. Where they are
really directly involved in its production, then the division of labour
is so acute, that they have no room to assert their individuality in the
productive process. This was not true in Marx's day. At this time,
petty-bourgeois producers were being collected together to produce as
proletarians for a single capitalist in manufacturing. Or else
petit-bourgeois or manufacturing workers were being collected together
in the new social institution of the factory. These new proletarians,
issuing from the disintegration of middle-class society, would really
have directly felt the alienation of the product of their labour, which
previously they themselves would have owned, but which now was possessed
by the capitalist. From this can be seen the importance of alienation,
ahead of simple impoverishment in Marx's theory. Alienation is still the
crucial pre-condition for the proletariat, but today takes on yet more
acute forms. Nowadays, the worker is alienated from their product to the
degree that they hardly recognise it as their own product. The process
of producing yourself through your product is itself an almost alien
concept. It belongs to another world.

### Into the 21st Century

In discussing articles written in the 1920's or the 1940's, however
important, and however emblematic of the real class movements of the
time, particular limitations are set. Certainly, it is possible to look
at differing tendencies and attempt to go beyond them in some way, but
it cannot be ignored that they are expressions of a time now past.
Capitalist society has developed enormously in the decades since the
German and Italian Lefts analysed it, both quantitatively and
qualitatively. Many differences could be pointed out, in respect to war,
television, means of transport, the development of social democracy, the
history of the "Soviet" Union, the end of colonialism. One important
feature of the last couple of decades that is particularly relevant here
is the development of the "new economy" of lean production, of
flexibilisation, with its increase in temporary and contract labour, and
general decrease in job security. These changes have been introduced by
capital as way of optimising exploitation of labour in the short term.

These changes in the organisation of labour, together with other social,
cultural and political changes, have as a corollary a decline in the
self-identification of the worker with their work, a decline of a
producer consciousness. Nowadays, at least in countries such as the US
and the UK, it has become less common for people to identify themselves
as a "factory worker" or a "printer" or even a "worker". Workers have
less of a tendency to find meaning in their particular trade or
particular industry. Instead, more than ever before, workers see work
merely as a means to an end. Casualisation was promoted by capital as a
way of weakening its "responsibilities" to workers, but it has also had
the result that workers are far less likely to identify, however
critically, with "their" boss, or "their" job. In this manner, capital
has already started to dissolve part of what was meant by the term
"working class" or even "proletariat" (if that is meant in a partly
sociological sense). If that is the case, then what of "Party and
Class", what of "the Dictatorship of the Proletariat"?

Communism always aimed at the abolition of all classes, through the
proletariat's abolition of itself. Capitalism, as it has universalised
itself, has always tended to dissolve classes (the petit bourgeoisie,
the peasantry, the aristocracy, etc.). This dissolution of classes, in
the sociological sense, has continued leaving us not with working class
and bourgeoisie but with an ever growing proletariat and an increasingly
proletarianised humanity facing capital and its functionaries (CEO's,
directors, high-up state officials and so on), who as individuals are
more and more disposable. Any attempt to resurrect a working class
identity, a pride in the values of work, of the positive side of labour,
is conservative, and anti-communist. Communism has always been the
movement of those who are nothing and must be everything, of the
alienated who can only liberate themselves by liberating the whole of
society.

### Concluding remarks

Bordiga and Pannekoek theorised the highest points of the proletarian
movements in Italy and Germany respectively. Bordiga's tactical
failings, (e.g. on the question of unions), like his strengths (such as
the critique of democracy), are a product of the proletarian movement.
The incompleteness of the Italian Left's critique, and its need for
modification by the theses of the Dutch German Left, are a consequence
of the national basis of its experience, and of the particular form that
the class struggle took in Italy. Similarly, the texts of Pannekoek who
analysed the movement in Germany, and was a major theorist of the KAPD,
should not be treated as the ideas of an individual but as an expression
of the movement of the German and Dutch working class. For all the ICP's
internationalism, they did not go through the same class struggles as
those of the German movement, and so did not generate the same
theorisation, especially in respect of unions. These tactical
inadequacies in fact verifies elements of Bordiga's theory of the party.
The party needs to group proletarians from all sections of the class and
synthesise all radical tendencies in the class. The _national_ basis of
the ICP, and of the KAPD, is the cause of the particularity of their
theory, including the limitations.

An examination of these two tendencies, amongst the most radical of the
twentieth century, points beyond their respective limitations. Communism
is neither "the power of the workers' councils" nor the dictatorship of
the vanguard party, nor is it reliant on any other predetermined
organisational form. Communism is neither the "self-activity of the
workers" nor the "programme", but specifically a proletarian
self-activity that re-appropriates or recreates the communist programme.
What is important is not the form of organisation, but what exactly is
being organised; the essential is _communisation_, humanity's collective
re-appropriation and transformation of the whole of life now alienated
through capital. But the issues discussed here, organisation (party,
union, soviet), consciousness, class, cannot be solved at the
theoretical level. It is possible to learn from the theory developed by
previous class movements, but only a future movement can resolve or
supersede the dilemmas that Pannekoek and Bordiga pose. "Communism is
for us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to
which reality will have to adjust itself. We call communism the real
movement which abolishes the present state of things. The conditions of
this movement result from premises now in existence"^[Marx and Engels,
_The German Ideology_.]. The rejection of existing struggles in favour
of purity of principal is a rejection of communism, of revolution.
"Every step of real movement is more important than a dozen programmes"
^[Marx, Letter to Bracke, 1875]. Revolution is not the emergence into
the real world of the utopias that live now only in literature or in
people's heads. It is not the manifestation of some absolute principal
or principals. Communism is the creation of humanity, a creation that is
already underway, unfolding before our eyes. The proletariat does not
simply "learn" from the struggles it makes. These struggles, rooted in
necessity, are themselves an essential element of the communist
movement, the transformation both of society and of consciousness.
Pannekoek and Bordiga, despite their weaknesses, despite the change in
circumstances in the years since these texts were written, remain
important precisely because they were able to express the real movements
of their time.

## Bibliography

Here are some of the books that we have found useful in researching the
introduction. We have not included information on Marx's works, as there
are many different and readily available editions but we have given
details of two useful collections.

Anweiler, Oskar, _The Soviets: The Russian Workers, Peasants, and
Soldiers Councils 1905-1921_, Pantheon, 1974

Bologna, S., "Class Composition and the Theory of the Party at the
Origins of the Worker's Council Movement",
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091026180622/https://www.geocities.com/cordobakaf/bologna.html>

Bricianer, Serge, _Pannekoek and the Workers' Councils_, Telos Press,
1978

Camatte, Jacques, "Community and Communism in Russia",
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091026180755/https://www.geocities.com/~johngray/comrus01.htm>

Camatte, Jacques, _This World We Must Leave_, Autonomedia, 1995

Camatte, Jacques and Collu, Gianni, "Origin and Function of the Party
Form", 1997

Dauvé, Gilles and Martin, Francois, _The Eclipse and Re-emergence of the
Communist Movement_, Antagonism Press, 1997,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091021091514/https://www.geocities.com/antagonism1/etoc.html>

Dodd, Kathryn, _A Sylvia Pankhurst Reader_, 1993

Goldner, Loren, "Communism is the Material Human Community: Amadeo
Bordiga Today", Collective Action Notes, 1997,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091018192600/https://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/2379/gold62.htm>

Gombin, Richard, _The Origins of Modern Leftism_, Pelican, 1975

Gramsci, Antonio, _Selections from Political Writings 1910-1920_,
Lawrence and Wishart, 1975

Gramsci, Antonio, _Selections from Political Writings 1921-1926_,
Lawrence and Wishart, 1978

Gregoire, Roger and Perlman, Fredy, "Worker-Student Action Committees,
France May 1969", Red and Black, 1969,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091027055933/http://www.geocities.com/~johngray/peractil.htm>

Icarus, "The Wilhelmshaven Revolt", Simian, 1975,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20040707164303/http://kurasje.tripod.com/arkiv/3100f.htm>

Ignatiev, Noel, _How the Irish Became White_, Routledge, 1995

International Communist Current, _The Dutch and German Communist Left_,
ICC/Porcupine Press, 2001

International Communist Current, _The Italian Communist Left, 1926-45_,
ICC, 1992

International Communist Current, "Communist Organisations and Class
Consciousness", ICC

International Communist Party, "Revolution and Counter-Revolution in
Russia", ICP, 1991

International Communist Party, "The Democratic
Principle", In _Communist Program_ #7, 1981,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20030513112327/http://www.geocities.com/antagonism1/bordtdp.html>

International Communist Party, Party and Class, ICP, sinistra.net

McLellan, David, _Karl Marx: Selected Writings_, Oxford University
Press, 1977

McLellan, David, _The Thought of Karl Marx_, Macmillan, 1980

Negation, "LIP and the self-managed counter-revolution", Black and Red,
1975, <https://web.archive.org/web/20091027055851/https://www.geocities.com/~johngray/lip.htm>

Pannekoek, Anton, "From the Bottom Up, Three Texts by Anton Pannekoek",
Collective Action, 1996,
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091018192526/http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/Lobby/2379/>

Rachleff, Peter, "Soviet and Factory Committees in the Russian
Revolution", In _Radical America_ Vol 8 #6, November-December 1994

Rubel, Maximilien and Crump, John, _Non-Market Socialism in the 19th
and 20th Centuries_, Macmillan, 1987

Rühle, Otto, "From the Bourgeois to the Proletarian Revolution",
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091026180745/http://www.geocities.com/~johngray/borpro.htm>

Smith, Chris, _Technical Workers: Class, Labour and Trade Unionism_,
Macmillan, 1987

Smith, S.A., _Red Petrograd_, Cambridge University Press, 1983

Wildcat, "Outside and Against the Unions", Wildcat,
<http://www.angelfire.com/pop2/pkv/OATU.html>

Wildcat, Spanish Dockers on the Barricades", Wildcat #9, 1986

Williams, Gwyn, _Proletarian Order_, Pluto, 1975

Winslow, Barbara, _Sylvia Pankhurst, Social politics and political
action_, UCL Press, 1996

## Party and Class - Bordiga

From "Partito e classe", _Rassegna Comunista_ no 2, April 15, 1921

The Theses on the Role of the Communist Party in the Proletarian
Revolution approved by the Second Congress of the Communist
International are genuinely and deeply rooted in the Marxist doctrine.
These theses take the definition of the relations between party and
class as a starting point and establish that the class party can include
in its ranks only a part of the class itself, never the whole nor even
perhaps the majority of it. This obvious truth would have been better
emphasised if it had been pointed out that one cannot even speak of a
class unless a minority of this class tending to organise itself into a
political party has come into existence. What in fact is a social class
according to our critical method? Can we possibly recognise it by the
means of a purely objective external acknowledgement of the common
economic and social conditions of a great number of individuals, and of
their analogous positions in relationship to the productive process?
That would not be enough. Our method does not amount to a mere
description of the social structure as it exists at a given moment, nor
does it merely draw an abstract line dividing all the individuals
composing society into two groups, as is done in the scholastic
classifications of the naturalists. The Marxist critique sees human
society in its movement, in its development in time; it utilises a
fundamentally historical and dialectical criterion, that is to say, it
studies the connection of events in their reciprocal interaction.
Instead of taking a snapshot of society at a given moment (like the old
metaphysical method) and then studying it in order to distinguish the
different categories into which the individuals composing it must be
classified, the dialectical method sees history as a film unrolling its
successive scenes; the class must be looked for and distinguished in the
striking features of this movement. In using the first method we would
be the target of a thousand objections from pure statisticians and
demographers (short-sighted people if there ever were) who would
re-examine our divisions and remark that there are not two classes, nor
even three or four, but that there can be ten, a hundred or even a
thousand classes separated by successive gradations and indefinable
transition zones. With the second method, though, we make use of quite
different criteria in order to distinguish that protagonist of
historical tragedy, the class, and in order to define its
characteristics, its actions and its objectives, which become
concretised into obviously uniform features among a multitude of
changing facts; meanwhile the poor photographer of statistics only
records these as a cold series of lifeless data. Therefore, in order to
state that a class exists and acts at a given moment in history, it will
not be enough to know, for instance, how many merchants there were in
Paris under Louis XIV, or the number of English landlords in the
Eighteenth Century, or the number of workers in the Belgian
manufacturing industry at the beginning of the Nineteenth Century.
Instead, we will have to submit an entire historical period to our
logical investigations; we will have to make out a social, and therefore
political, movement which searches for its way through the ups and
downs, the errors and successes, all the while obviously adhering to the
set of interests of a strata of people who have been placed in a
particular situation by the mode of production and by its developments.
It is this method of analysis that Frederick Engels used in one of his
first classical essays, where he drew the explanation of a series of
political movements from the history of the English working class, and
thus demonstrated the existence of a class struggle. This dialectical
concept of the class allows us to overcome the statistician's pale
objections. He does not have the right any longer to view the opposed
classes as being clearly divided on the scene of history as are the
different choral groups on a theatre scene. He cannot refute our
conclusions by arguing that in the contact zone there are undefinable
strata through which an osmosis of individuals takes place, because this
fact does not alter the historical physiognomy of the classes facing one
another.

Therefore the concept of class must not suggest to us a static image,
but instead a dynamic one. When we detect a social tendency, or a
movement oriented towards a given end, then we can recognise the
existence of a class in the true sense of the word. But then the class
party exists in a material if not yet in a formal way. A party lives
when there is the existence of a doctrine and a method of action. A
party is a school of political thought and consequently an organisation
of struggle. The first characteristic is a fact of consciousness, the
second is a fact of will, or more precisely of a striving towards a
final end. Without those two characteristics, we do not yet have the
definition of a class. As we have already said, he who coldly records
facts may find affinities in the living conditions of more or less large
strata, but no mark is engraved in history's development. It is only
within the class party that we can find these two characteristics
condensed and concretised. The class forms itself as certain conditions
and relationships brought about by the consolidation of new systems of
production are developed -- for instance the establishment of big
factories hiring and training a large labour force; in the same way, the
interests of such a collectivity gradually begin to materialise into a
more precise consciousness, which begins to take shape in small groups
of this collectivity. When the mass is thrust into action, only these
first groups can foresee a final end, and it is they who support and
lead the rest. When referring to the modern proletarian class, we must
conceive of this process not in relationship to a trade category but to
the class as a whole. It can then be realised how a more precise
consciousness of the identity of interests gradually makes its
appearance; this consciousness, however, results from such a complexity
of experiences and ideas, that it can be found only in limited groups
composed of elements selected from every category. Indeed only an
advanced minority can have the clear vision of a collective action which
is directed towards general ends that concern the whole class and which
has at its core the project of changing the whole social regime. Those
groups, those minorities, are nothing other than the party. When its
formation (which of course never proceeds without arrests, crises and
internal conflicts) has reached a certain stage, then we may say that we
have a class in action. Although the party includes only a part of the
class, only it can give the class its unity of action and movement, for
it amalgamates those elements, beyond the limits of categories and
localities, which are sensitive to the class and represent it. This
casts a light on the meaning of this basic fact: the party is only a
part of the class. He who considers a static and abstract image of
society, and sees the class as a zone with a small nucleus, the party,
within it, might easily be led to the following conclusion: since the
whole section of the class remaining outside the party is almost always
the majority, it might have a greater weight and a greater right.
However if it is only remembered that the individuals in that great
remaining mass have neither class consciousness nor class will yet and
live for their own selfish ends, or for their trade, their village,
their nation, then it will be realised that in order to secure the
action of the class as a whole in the historical movement, it is
necessary to have an organ which inspires, unites and heads it -- in
short which officers it; it will then be realised that the party
actually is the nucleus without which there would be no reason to
consider the whole remaining mass as a mobilisation of forces. The class
presupposes the party, because to exist and to act in history it must
possess a critical doctrine of history and an aim to attain in it.

In the only true revolutionary conception, the direction of class action
is delegated to the party. Doctrinal analysis, together with a number of
historical experiences, allow us to easily reduce to petty bourgeois and
anti-revolutionary ideologies, any tendency to deny the necessity and
the predominance of the party's function. If this denial is based on a
democratic point of view, it must be subjected to the same criticism
that Marxism uses to disprove the favourite theorems of bourgeois
liberalism. It is sufficient to recall that, if the consciousness of
human beings is the result, not the cause of the characteristics of the
surroundings in which they are compelled to live and act, then never as
a rule will the exploited, the starved and the underfed be able to
convince themselves of the necessity of overthrowing the well-fed
satiated exploiter laden with every resource and capacity. This can only
be the exception. Bourgeois electoral democracy seeks the consultation
of the masses, for it knows that the response of the majority will
always be favourable to the privileged class and will readily delegate
to that class the right to govern and to perpetuate exploitation. It is
not the addition or subtraction of the small minority of bourgeois
voters that will alter the relationship. The bourgeoisie governs with
the majority, not only of all the citizens, but also of the workers
taken alone. Therefore if the party called on the whole proletarian mass
to judge the actions and initiatives of which the party alone has the
responsibility, it would tie itself to a verdict that would almost
certainly be favourable to the bourgeoisie. That verdict would always be
less enlightened, less advanced, less revolutionary, and above all less
dictated by a consciousness of the really collective interest of the
workers and of the final result of the revolutionary struggle, than the
advice coming from the ranks of the organised party alone. The concept
of the proletariat's right to command its own class action is only an
abstraction devoid of any Marxist sense. It conceals a desire to lead
the revolutionary party to enlarge itself by including less mature
strata, since as this progressively occurs, the resulting decisions get
nearer and nearer to the bourgeois and conservative conceptions. If we
looked for evidence not only through theoretical enquiry, but also in
the experiences history has given us, our harvest would be abundant. Let
us remember that it is a typical bourgeois cliche to oppose the good
"common sense" of the masses to the "evil" of a "minority of agitators",
and to pretend to be most favourably disposed towards the exploited's
interests. The right-wing currents of the workers' movement, the
social-democratic school, whose reactionary tenets have been clearly
shown by history, constantly oppose the masses to the party and pretend
to be able to find the will of the class by consulting on a scale wider
than the limited bounds of the party. When they cannot extend the party
beyond all limits of doctrine and discipline in action, they try to
establish that its main organs must not be those appointed by a limited
number of militant members, but must be those which have been appointed
for parliamentary duties by a larger body -- actually, parliamentary
groups always belong to the extreme right wing of the parties from which
they come. The degeneration of the social-democratic parties of the
Second International and the fact that they apparently became less
revolutionary than the unorganised masses, are due to the fact that they
gradually lost their specific party character precisely through
workerist and "labourist" practices. That is, they no longer acted as
the vanguard preceding the class but as its mechanical expression in an
electoral and corporative system, where equal importance and influence
is given to the strata that are the least conscious and the most
dependent on egotistical claims of the proletarian class itself. As a
reaction to this epidemic, even before the war, there developed a
tendency, particularly in Italy, advocating internal party discipline,
rejecting new recruits who were not yet welded to our revolutionary
doctrine, opposing the autonomy of parliamentary groups and local
organs, and recommending that the party should be purged of its false
elements. This method has proved to be the real antidote for reformism,
and forms the basis of the doctrine and practice of the Third
International, which puts primary importance on the role of the party --
that is a centralised, disciplined party with a clear orientation on the
problems of principles and tactics. The same Third International judged
that the "collapse of the socialdemocratic parties of the Second
International was by no means the collapse of proletarian parties in
general" but, if we may say so, the failure of organisms that had
forgotten they were parties because they had stopped being parties.

There is also a different category of objection to the communist concept
of the party's role. These objections are linked to another form of
critical and tactical reaction to the reformist degeneracy: they belong
to the syndicalist school, which sees the class in the economic trade
unions and pretends that these are the organs capable of leading the
class in revolution. Following the classical period of the French,
Italian and American syndicalism, these apparently left-wing objections
found new formulations in tendencies which are on the margins of the
Third International. These too can be easily reduced to semi-bourgeois
ideologies by a critique of their principles as well as by acknowledging
the historical results they led to. These tendencies would like to
recognise the class within an organisation of its own -- certainly a
characteristic and a most important one -- that is, the craft or trade
unions which arise before the political party, gather much larger masses
and therefore better correspond to the whole of the working class. From
an abstract point of view, however, the choice of such a criterion
reveals an unconscious respect for that selfsame democratic lie which
the bourgeoisie relies on to secure its power by the means of inviting
the majority of the people to choose their government. In other
theoretical viewpoints, such a method meets with bourgeois conceptions
when it entrusts the trade unions with the organisation of the new
society and demands the autonomy and decentralisation of the productive
functions, just as reactionary economists do. But our present purpose is
not to draw out a complete critical analysis of the syndicalist
doctrines. It is sufficient to remark, considering the result of
historical experience, that the extreme right wing members of the
proletarian movement have always advocated the same point of view, that
is, the representation of the working class by trade unions; indeed they
know that by doing so, they soften and diminish the movement's
character, for the simple reasons that we have already mentioned. Today
the bourgeoisie itself shows a sympathy and an inclination, which are by
no means illogical, towards the unionisation of the working class.
Indeed, the more intelligent sections of the bourgeoisie would readily
accept a reform of the state and representative apparatus in order to
give a larger place to the "apolitical" unions and even to their claims
to exercise control over the system of production. The bourgeoisie feels
that, as long as the proletariat's action can be limited to the
immediate economic demands that are raised trade by trade, it helps to
safeguard the status-quo and to avoid the formation of the perilous
"political" consciousness -- that is, the only consciousness which is
revolutionary for it aims at the enemy's vulnerable point, the
possession of power. Past and present syndicalists, however, have always
been conscious of the fact that most trade unions are controlled by
right wing elements and that the dictatorship of the petty bourgeois
leaders over the masses is based on the union bureaucracy even more than
on the electoral mechanism of the social-democratic pseudo-parties.
Therefore the syndicalists, along with very numerous elements who were
merely acting in reaction to the reformist practice, devoted themselves
to the study of new forms of union organisation and created new unions
independent from the traditional ones. Such an expedient was
theoretically wrong for it did not go beyond the fundamental criterion
of the economic organisation: that is, the automatic admission of all
those who are placed in given conditions by the part they play in
production, without demanding special political convictions or special
pledges of actions which may require even the sacrifice of their lives.
Moreover, in looking for the "producer" it could not go beyond the
limits of the "trade", whereas the class party, by considering the
"proletarian" in the vast range of his conditions and activities, is
alone able to awaken the revolutionary spirit of the class. Therefore,
that remedy which was wrong theoretically also proved inefficient in
actuality. In spite of everything, such recipes are constantly being
sought for even today. A totally wrong interpretation of Marxist
determinism and a limited conception of the part played by facts of
consciousness and will in the formation, under the original influence of
economic factors, of the revolutionary forces, lead a great number of
people to look for a "mechanical" system of organisation that would
almost automatically organise the masses according to each individual's
part in production. According to these illusions, such a device by
itself would be enough to make the mass ready to move towards revolution
with the maximum revolutionary efficiency. Thus the illusory solution
reappears, which consists of thinking that the everyday satisfaction of
economic needs can be reconciled with the final result of the overthrow
of the social system by relying on an organisational form to solve the
old antithesis between limited and gradual conquests and the maximum
revolutionary program. But -- as was rightly said in one of the
resolutions of the majority of the German Communist Party at a time when
these questions (which later provoked the secession of the KAPD) were
particularly acute in Germany -- revolution is not a question of the
form of organisation. Revolution requires an organisation of active and
positive forces united by a doctrine and a final aim. Important strata
and innumerable individuals will remain outside this organisation even
though they materially belong to the class in whose interest the
revolution will triumph. But the class lives, struggles, progresses and
wins thanks to the action of the forces it has engendered from its womb
in the pains of history. The class originates from an immediate
homogeneity of economic conditions which appear to us as the primary
motive force of the tendency to destroy and go beyond the present mode
of production. But in order to assume this great task, the class must
have its own thought, its own critical method, its own will bent on the
precise ends defined by research and criticism, and its own organisation
of struggle channelling and utilising with the utmost efficiency its
collective efforts and sacrifices. All this constitutes the Party.

## Party and Class - Pannekoek

The old labour movement is organized in parties. The belief in parties
is the main reason for the impotence of the working class; therefore we
avoid forming a new party -- not because we are too few, but because a
party is an organization that aims to lead and control the working
class. In opposition to this, we maintain that the working class can
rise to victory only when it independently attacks its problems and
decides its own fate. The workers should not blindly accept the slogans
of others, nor of our own groups but must think, act, and decide for
themselves. This conception is on sharp contradiction to the tradition
of the party as the most important means of educating the proletariat.
Therefore many, though repudiating the Socialist and Communist parties,
resist and oppose us. This is partly due to their traditional concepts;
after viewing the class struggle as a struggle of parties, it becomes
difficult to consider it as purely the struggle of the working class, as
a class struggle. But partly this concept is based on the idea that the
party nevertheless plays an essential and important part in the struggle
of the proletariat. Let us investigate this latter idea more closely.

Essentially the party is a grouping according to views, conceptions; the
classes are groupings according to economic interests. Class membership
is determined by one's part in the process of production; party
membership is the joining of persons who agree in their conceptions of
the social problems. Formerly it was thought that this contradiction
would disappear in the class party, the "workers" party. During the rise
of Social Democracy it seemed that it would gradually embrace the whole
working class, partly as members, partly as supporters. Because Marxian
theory declared that similar interests beget similar viewpoints and
aims, the contradiction between party and class was expected gradually
to disappear. History proved otherwise. Social Democracy remained a
minority, other working class groups organized against it, sections
split away from it, and its own character changed. Its own program was
revised or reinterpreted. The evolution of society does not proceed
along a smooth, even line, but in conflicts and contradictions.

With the intensification of the workers' struggle, the might of the
enemy also increases and besets the workers with renewed doubts and
fears as to which road is best. And every doubt brings on splits,
contradictions, and fractional battles within the labour movement. It is
futile to bewail these conflicts and splits as harmful in dividing and
weakening the working class. The working class is not weak because it is
split up -- it is split up because it is weak. Because the enemy is
powerful and the old methods of warfare prove unavailing, the working
class must seek new methods. Its task will not become clear as the
result of enlightenment from above; it must discover its tasks through
hard work, through thought and conflict of opinions. It must find its
own way; therefore, the internal struggle. It must relinquish old ideas
and illusions and adopt new ones, and because this is difficult,
therefore the magnitude and severity of the splits.

Nor can we delude ourselves into believing that this period of party and
ideological strife is only temporary and will make way to renewed
harmony. True, in the course of the class struggle there are occasions
when all forces unite in a great achievable objective and the revolution
is carried on with the might of a united working class. But after that,
as after every victory, come differences on the question: what next? And
even if the working class is victorious, it is always confronted by the
most difficult task of subduing the enemy further, of reorganizing
production, creating new order. It is impossible that all workers, all
strata and groups, with their often still diverse interests should, at
this stage, agree on all matters and be ready for united and decisive
further action. They will find the true course only after the sharpest
controversies and conflicts and only thus achieve clarity.

If, in this situation, persons with the same fundamental conceptions
unite for the discussion of practical steps and seek clarification
through discussions and propagandise their conclusions, such groups
might be called parties, but they would be parties in an entirely
different sense from those of today. Action, the actual class struggle,
is the task of the working masses themselves, in their entirety, in
their real groupings as factory and millhands, or other productive
groups, because history and economy have placed them in the position
where they must and can fight the working class struggle. It would be
insane if the supporters of one party were to go on strike while those
of another continue to work. But both tendencies will defend their
positions on strike or no strike in the factory meetings, thus affording
an opportunity to arrive at a well founded decision. The struggle is so
great, the enemy so powerful that only the masses as a whole can achieve
a victory -- the result of the material and moral power of action, unity
and enthusiasm, but also the result of the mental force of thought, of
clarity. In this lies the great importance of such parties or groups
based on opinions: that they bring clarity in their conflicts,
discussions and propaganda. They are the organs of the
self-enlightenment of the working class by means of which the workers
find their way to freedom.

Of course such parties are not static and unchangeable. Every new
situation, every new problem will find minds diverging and uniting in
new groups with new programs. They have a fluctuating character and
constantly readjust themselves to new situations.

Compared to such groups, the present workers' parties have an entirely
different character, for they have a different objective: they want to
seize power for themselves. They aim not at being an aid to the working
class in its struggle for emancipation but to rule it themselves and
proclaim that this constitutes the emancipation of the proletariat. The
Social-Democracy which arose in the era of parliamentarism conceived of
this rule as a parliamentary government. The Communist Party carried the
idea of part rule through to its fullest extreme in the party
dictatorship.

Such parties, in distinction to the groups described above, must be
rigid structures with clear lines of demarcation through membership
cards, statues, party discipline and admission and expulsion procedures.
For they are instruments of power -- they fight for power, bridle their
members by force and constantly seek to extend the scope of their power.
It is not their task to develop the initiative of the workers; rather do
they aim at training loyal and unquestioning members of their faith.
While the working class in its struggle for power and victory needs
unlimited intellectual freedom, the party rule must suppress all
opinions except its own. In "democratic" parties, the suppression is
veiled; in the dictatorship parties, it is open, brutal suppression.

Many workers already realize that the rule of the Socialist or Communist
party will be only the concealed form of the rule of the bourgeois class
in which the exploitation and suppression of the working class remains.
Instead of these parties, they urge the formation of a "revolutionary
party" that will really aim at the rule of the workers and the
realization of communism. Not a party in the new sense as described
above, but a party like those of today, that fight for power as the
"vanguard" of the class, as the organization of conscious, revolutionary
minorities, that seize power in order to use it for the emancipation of
the class.

We claim that there is an internal contradiction in the term:
"revolutionary party." Such a party cannot be revolutionary. It is no
more revolutionary than were the creators of the Third Reich. When we
speak of revolution, we speak of the proletarian revolution, the seizure
of power by the working class itself.

The "revolutionary party" is based on the idea that the working class
needs a new group of leaders who vanquish the bourgeoisie for the
workers and construct a new government -- (note that the working class
is not yet considered fit to reorganize and regulate production.) But is
not this as it should be? As the working class does not seem capable of
revolution, is it not necessary that the revolutionary vanguard, the
party, make the revolution for it? And is this not true as long as the
masses willingly endure capitalism?

Against this, we raise the question: what force can such a party raise
for the revolution? How is it able to defeat the capitalist class? Only
if the masses stand behind it. Only if the masses rise and through mass
attacks, mass struggle, and mass strikes, overthrow the old regime.
Without the action of the masses, there can be no revolution.

Two things can follow. The masses remain in action: they do not go home
and leave the government to the new party. They organize their power in
factory and workshop and prepare for further conflict in order to defeat
capital; through the workers' councils they establish a form union to
take over the complete direction of all society -- in other words, they
prove, they are not as incapable of revolution as it seemed. Of
necessity then, conflict will arise with the party which itself wants to
take control and which sees only disorder and anarchy in the self-action
of the working class. Possibly the workers will develop their movement
and sweep out the party. Or, the party, with the help of bourgeois
elements defeats the workers. In either case, the part is an obstacle to
the revolution because it wants to be more than a means of propaganda
and enlightenment; because it feels itself called upon to lead and rule
as a party.

On the other hand the masses may follow the party faith and leave it to
the full direction of affairs. They follow the slogans from above, have
confidence in the new government (as in Germany and Russia) that is to
realize communism -- and go back home and to work. Immediately the
bourgeoisie exerts its whole class power the roots of which are
unbroken; its financial forces, its great intellectual resources, and
its economic power in factories and great enterprises. Against this the
government party is too weak. Only through moderation, concessions and
yielding can it maintain that it is insanity for the workers to try to
force impossible demands. Thus the party deprived of class power becomes
the instrument for maintaining bourgeois power.

We said before that the term "revolutionary party" was contradictory
from a proletarian point of view. We can state it otherwise: in the term
"revolutionary party," "revolutionary" always means a bourgeois
revolution. Always, when the masses overthrow a government and then
allow a new party to take power, we have a bourgeois revolution -- the
substitution of a ruling caste by a new ruling caste. It was so in Paris
in 1830 when the finance bourgeoisie supplanted the landed proprietors,
in 1848 when the industrial bourgeoisie took over the reins.

In the Russian revolution the party bureaucracy came to power as the
ruling caste. But in Western Europe and America the bourgeoisie is much
more powerfully entrenched in plants and banks, so that a party
bureaucracy cannot push them aside as easily. The bourgeoisie in these
countries can be vanquished only by repeated and united action of the
masses in which they seize the mills and factories and build up their
council organizations.

Those who speak of "revolutionary parties" draw incomplete, limited
conclusions from history. When the Socialist and Communist parties
became organs of bourgeois rule for the perpetuation of exploitation,
these well-meaning people merely concluded that they would have to do
better. They cannot realize that the failure of these parties is due to
the fundamental conflict between the self-emancipation of the working
class through its own power and the pacifying of the revolution through
a new sympathetic ruling clique. They think they are the revolutionary
vanguard because they see the masses indifferent and inactive. But the
masses are inactive only because they cannot yet comprehend the course
of the struggle and the unity of class interests, although they
instinctively sense the great power of the enemy and the immenseness of
their task. Once conditions force them into action they will attack the
task of self-organization and the conquest of the economic power of
capital.
