---
title: "Now and After: The ABC of Communist Anarchism"
author: Berkman, Alexander
date: 1929
description: Often republished as the "ABC of Anarchism" or "What Is Communist Anarchism?" This red texts edition was based on a copy from the Anarchist Library (in turn taken from dwardmac.pitzer.edu) but has been proofread against the 1972 Dover print edition. Many digitization errors have been fixed. From <https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/alexander-berkman-what-is-communist-anarchism>.
...

### Author's foreword

I consider anarchism the most rational and practical conception of a
social life in freedom and harmony. I am convinced that its realization
is a certainty in the course of human development.

The time of that realization will depend on two factors: first, on how
soon existing conditions will grow spiritually and physically unbearable
to considerable portions of mankind, particularly to the laboring
classes; and, secondly, on the degree in which Anarchist views will
become understood and accepted.

Our social institutions are founded on certain ideas; as long as the
latter are generally believed, the institutions built on them are safe.
Government remains strong because people think political authority and
legal compulsion necessary. Capitalism will continue as long as such an
economic system is considered adequate and just. The weakening of the
ideas which support the evil and oppressive present-day conditions means
the ultimate breakdown of government and capitalism. Progress consists
in abolishing what man has outlived and substituting in its place a more
suitable environment.

It must be evident even to the casual observer that society is
undergoing a radical change in its fundamental conceptions. The World
War and the Russian Revolution are the main causes of it. The war has
unmasked the vicious character of capitalist competition and the
murderous incompetency of governments to settle quarrels among nations,
or rather among the ruling financial cliques. It is because the people
are losing faith in the old methods that the Great Powers are now
compelled to discuss limitation of armaments and even the outlawing of
war. It is not so long ago that the very suggestion of such a
possibility met with utmost scorn and ridicule.

Similarly is breaking down the belief in other established institutions.
Capitalism still "works," but doubt about its expediency and justice is
gnawing at the heart of ever-widening social circles. The Russian
Revolution has broadcasted ideas and feelings that are undermining
capitalist society, particularly its economic bases and the sanctity of
private ownership of the means of social existence. For not only in
Russia did the October change take place: it has influenced the masses
throughout the world. The cherished superstition that what exists is
permanent has been shaken beyond recovery.

The war, the Russian Revolution, and the post-war developments have
combined also to disillusion vast numbers about Socialism. It is
literally true that, like Christianity, Socialism has conquered the
world by defeating itself. The Socialist parties now run or help to run
most of the European governments, but the people do not believe any more
that they are different from other bourgeois r√©gimes. They feel that
Socialism has failed and is bankrupt.

In like manner have the Bolsheviks proven that Marxian dogma and
Leninist principles can lead only to dictatorship and reaction.

To the Anarchists there is nothing surprising in all this. They have
always claimed that the State is destructive to individual liberty and
social harmony, and that only the abolition of coercive authority and
material inequality can solve our political, economic and national
problems. But their arguments, though based on the age-long experience
of man, seemed mere theory to the present generation, until the events
of the last two decades have demonstrated in actual life the truth of
the Anarchist position.

The breakdown of Socialism and of Bolshevism has cleared the way for
Anarchism.

There is considerable literature on Anarchism, but most of its larger
works were written before the World War. The experience of the recent
past has been vital and has made certain revisions necessary in the
Anarchist attitude and argumentation. Though the basic propositions
remain the same, some modifications of practical application are
dictated by the facts of current history. The lessons of the Russian
Revolution in particular call for a new approach to various important
problems, chief among them the character and activities of the social
revolution.

Furthermore, Anarchist books, with few exceptions, are not accessible to
the understanding of the average reader. It is the common failing of
most works dealing with social questions that they are written on the
assumption that the reader is already familiar to a considerable extent
with the subject, which is generally not the case at all. As a result
there are very few books treating of social problems in a sufficiently
simple and intelligible manner.

For the above reason I consider a restatement of the Anarchist position
very much needed at this time -- a restatement in the plainest and
clearest terms which can be understood by every one. That is, an ABC of
Anarchism.

With that object in view the following pages have been written.

-- Paris, 1928.

### Introduction

I want to tell you about Anarchism.

I want to tell you what Anarchism is, because I think it is well you
should know it. Also because so little is known about it, and what is
known is generally hearsay and mostly false.

I want to tell you about it, because I believe that Anarchism is the
finest and biggest thing man has ever thought of; the only thing that
can give you liberty and well-being, and bring peace and joy to the
world.

I want to tell you about it in such plain and simple language that there
will be no misunderstanding it. Big words and high sounding phrases
serve only to confuse. Straight thinking means plain speaking.

But before I tell you what Anarchism is, I want to tell you what it _is
not_.

That is necessary because so much falsehood has been spread about
Anarchism. Even intelligent persons often have entirely wrong notions
about it. Some people talk about Anarchism without knowing a thing about
it. And some lie about Anarchism, because they don't want _you_ to know
the truth about it.

Anarchism has many enemies; they won't tell you the truth about it. Why
Anarchism has enemies and who they are, you will see later, in the
course of this story. Just now I can tell you that neither your
political boss nor your employer, neither the capitalist nor the
policeman will speak to you honestly about Anarchism. Most of them know
nothing about it, and all of them hate it. Their newspapers and
publications -- the capitalistic press -- are also against it.

Even most Socialists and Bolsheviks misrepresent Anarchism. True, the
majority of them don't know any better. But those who do know better
also often lie about Anarchism and speak of it as "disorder and chaos."
You can see for yourself how dishonest they are in this: the greatest
teachers of Socialism -- Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels -- had taught
that Anarchism would come from Socialism. They said that we must first
have Socialism, but that after Socialism there will be Anarchism, and
that it would be a freer and more beautiful condition of society to live
in than Socialism. Yet the Socialists, who swear by Marx and Engels,
insist on calling Anarchism "chaos and disorder," which shows you how
ignorant or dishonest they are.

The Bolsheviki do the same, although their greatest teacher, Lenin, had
said that Anarchism would follow Bolshevism, and that then it will be
better and freer to live.

Therefore I must tell you, first of all, what Anarchism _is not_.

It is _not_ bombs, disorder, or chaos.

It is _not_ robbery and murder.

It is _not_ a war of each against all.

It is _not_ a return to barbarism or to the wild state of man.

_Anarchism is the very opposite of all that_.

Anarchism means that you should be free; that no one should enslave you,
boss you, rob you, or impose upon you.

It means that you should be free to do the things you want to do; and
that you should not be compelled to do what you don't want to do.

It means that you should have a chance to choose the kind of a life you
want to live, and live it without anybody interfering.

It means that the next fellow should have the same freedom as you, that
every one should have the same rights and liberties.

It means that all men are brothers, and that they should live like
brothers, in peace and harmony.

That is to say, that there should be no war, no violence used by one set
of men against another, no monopoly and no poverty, no oppression, no
taking advantage of your fellow-man.

In short, Anarchism means a condition or society where all men and women
are free, and where all enjoy equally the benefits of an ordered and
sensible life.

"Can that be?" you ask; "and how?"

"Not before we all become angels," your friend remarks.

Well, let us talk it over. Maybe I can show you that we can be decent
and live as decent folks even without growing wings.

## Part one: Now

### Chapter 1: What Do You Want Out Of Life?

What is it that every one wants most in life? What do _you_ want most?

After all, we are all the same under our skins. Whoever you be -- man or
woman, rich or poor, aristocrat or tramp, white, yellow, red or black,
of whatever land, nationality, or religion -- we are all alike in
feeling cold and hunger, love and hate; we all fear disaster and
disease, and try to keep away from harm and death.

What _you_ most want out of life, what you fear most, that also is true,
in the main, of your neighbor.

Learned men have written big books, many of them, on sociology,
psychology, and many other "ologies," to tell you what you want, but no
two of those books ever agree. And yet I think that you know very well
without them what you want.

They have studied and written and speculated so much about this, for
them so difficult a question, that you, the individual, have become
entirely lost in their philosophies. And they have at last come to the
conclusion that you, my friend, don't count at all. What's important,
they say, is not you, but "the whole," all the people together. This
"whole" they call "society," "the commonwealth," or "the State," and the
wiseacres have actually decided that it makes no difference if you, the
individual, are miserable so long as "society" is all right. Somehow
they forget to explain how "society" or "the whole" can be all right if
the single members of it are wretched.

So they go on spinning their philosophic webs and producing thick
volumes to find out where _you_ really enter in the scheme of things
called life, and what you really want.

But you yourself know very well what you want, and so does your
neighbor.

You want to be well and healthy; you want to be free, to serve no
master, to crawl and humiliate yourself before no man; you want to have
well-being for yourself, your family, and those near and dear to you.
And not to be harassed and worried by the fear of to-morrow.

You may feel sure that every one else wants the same. So the whole
matter seems to stand this way:

_You_ want health, liberty, and well-being. Every one is like yourself
in this respect.

Therefore we all seek the same thing in life.

Then why should we not all seek it together, by joint effort, helping
each other in it?

Why should we cheat and rob, kill and murder each other, if we all seek
the same thing? Aren't _you_ entitled to the things you want as well as
the next man?

Or is it that we can secure our health, liberty, and well-being better
by fighting and slaughtering each other?

Or because there is no other way?

Let us look into this.

Does it not stand to reason that if we all want the same thing in life,
if we have the same aim, then our _interests_ must also be the same? In
that case we should live like brothers, in peace and friendship; we
should be good to each other, and help each other all we can.

But you know that it is not at all that way in life. You know that we do
not live like brothers. You know that the world is full of strife and
war, of misery, injustice, and wrong, of crime, poverty, and oppression.

Why is it that way then?

It is because, though we all have the same aim in life, our _interests
are different_. It is this that makes all the trouble in the world.

Just think it over yourself.

Suppose you want to get a pair of shoes or a hat. You go into the store
and you try to buy what you need as reasonably and cheaply as you can.
That is _your_ interest. But the store-keeper's interest is to sell it
to you as dearly as he can, because then his _profit_ will be greater.
That is because everything in the life we live is built on making a
profit, one way or another. We live in a _system of profit-making_.

Now, it is plain that if we have to make profits out of each other, then
our interests cannot be the same. They must be different and often even
opposed to each other.

In every country you will find people who live by making a profit out of
others. Those who make the biggest profits are rich. Those who cannot
make profits are poor. The only people who cannot make any profits are
the workers. You can therefore understand that the interests of the
workers cannot be the same as the interests of the other people. That is
why you will find in every country several classes of people with
entirely different interests.

Everywhere you will find:

1. a comparatively small class of persons who make big profits and who
are very rich, such as bankers, great manufacturers and land owners --
people who have much capital and who are therefore called capitalists.
These belong to _the capitalistic class;_

2. a class of more or less well-to-do people, consisting of business men
and their agents, real estate men, speculators, and professional men,
such as doctors, lawyers, inventors, and so on. This is the middle class
or _the bourgeoisie_.

3. great numbers of workingmen employed in various industries -- in
mills and mines, in factories and shops, in transport and on the land.
This is the working class, also called _the proletariat_.

The bourgeoisie and the capitalists really belong to the same
capitalistic class, because they have about the same interests, and
therefore the people of the bourgeoisie also generally side with the
capitalist class as against the working class.

You will find that the working class is always the poorest class, in
every country. Maybe you yourself belong to the workers, to the
proletariat. Then you know that your wages will never make you rich.

Why are the workers the poorest class? Surely they labor more than the
other classes, and harder. Is it because the workers are not very
important in the life of society? Perhaps we can even do without them?

Let us see. What do we need to live? We need food, clothing, and
shelter; schools for our children; street cars and trains for travel,
and a thousand and one other things.

Can you look about you and point out a single thing that was made
without labor? Why, the shoes you stand in, and the streets you walk on,
are the result of labor. Without labor there would be nothing but the
bare earth, and human life would be entirely impossible.

So it means that labor has created everything we have -- all the wealth
of the world. It is all the _product of labor_ applied to the earth and
its natural resources.

But if all the wealth is the product of labor, then why does it not
belong to labor? That is, to those who have worked with their hands or
with their heads to create it -- the manual worker and the brain worker.

Everybody agrees that a person has a right to own the thing that he
himself has made.

But _no one_ person has made or can make anything all by himself. It
takes many men, of different trades and professions, to create
something. The carpenter, for instance, cannot make a simple chair or
bench all by himself; not even if he should cut down a tree and prepare
the lumber himself. He needs a saw and a hammer, nails and tools, which
he cannot make himself. And even if he should make these himself, he
would first have to have the raw materials -- steel and iron -- which
other men would have to supply.

Or take another example -- let us say a civil engineer. He could do
nothing without paper and pencil and measuring tools, and these things
other people have to make for him. Not to mention that first he has to
learn his profession and spend many years in study, while others enable
him to live in the meantime. This applies to every human being in the
world to-day.

You can see then that no person can by his own efforts alone make the
things he needs to exist. In early times the primitive man who lived in
a cave could hammer a hatchet out of stone or make himself a bow and
arrow, and live by that. But those days are gone. To-day no man can live
by his own work: he must be helped by the labor of others. Therefore all
that we have, all wealth, is the product of the labor of many people,
even of many generations. That is to say: _all labor and the products of
labor are social_, made by society as a whole.

But if all the wealth we have is social, then it stands to reason that
it should belong to society, to the people as a whole. How does it
happen, then, that the wealth of the world is owned by some individuals
and not by the people? Why does it not belong to those who have toiled
to create it -- the masses who work with hand or brain, the working
class as a whole?

You know very well that it is the capitalistic class which owns the
greatest part of the world's wealth. Must we therefore not conclude that
the working people have lost the wealth they created, or that somehow it
was taken away from them?

They did not lose it, for they never owned it. Then it must be that it
was taken away from them.

This is beginning to look serious. Because if you say that the wealth
they created has been taken away from the people who created it, then it
means that it has been stolen from them, that they have been robbed, for
surely no one has ever willingly consented to have his wealth taken away
from him.

It is a terrible charge, but it is true. The wealth the workers have
created, as a class, has indeed been stolen from them. And they are
being robbed in the same way every day of their lives, even at this very
moment. That is why one of the greatest thinkers, the French philosopher
Proudhon, said that the possessions of the rich are stolen property.

You can readily understand how important it is that every honest man
should know about this. And you may be sure that if the workers knew
about it, they would not stand for it.

Let us see then _how_ they are robbed and _by whom_.

### Chapter 2: The Wage System

Did you ever stop to ask yourself this question: why were you born from
_your_ parents and not from some others?

You understand, of course, what I am driving at. I mean that _your
consent was not asked_. You were simply born; you did not have a chance
to select the place of your birth or to choose your parents. It was just
chance.

So it happened that you were not born rich. Maybe your people are of the
middle class; more likely, though, they belong to the workers, and so
you are one of those millions, the masses, who have to work for a
living.

The man who has money can put it into some business or industry. He
invests it and lives _on the profits_. But you have no money. You have
only your ability to work, your _labor power_.

There was a time when every workingman worked for himself. There were no
factories then and no big industries. The laborer had his own tools and
his own little workshop, and he even bought himself the raw materials he
needed. He worked for himself, and he was called an artisan or
craftsman.

Then came the factory and the large workshop. Little by little they
crowded out the independent workman, the artisan, because he could not
make things as cheaply as the factory -- he could not compete with the
big manufacturer. So the artisan had to give up his little workshop and
go to the factory to work.

In the factories and large plants things are produced on a big scale.
Such big-scale production is called _industrialism_. It has made the
employers and manufacturers very rich, so that the lords of industry and
commerce have accumulated much money, much capital. Therefore that
system is called _capitalism_. We all live to-day in the capitalist
system.

In the capitalist system the workingman cannot work for himself, as in
the old days. He cannot compete with the big manufacturers. So, if you
are a workman, you must find an employer. You work for him; that is, you
give him your labor for so and so many hours a day or week, and he pays
you for it. You sell him your labor power and he pays you _wages_.

In the capitalist system the whole working class sells its labor power
to the employing class. The workers build factories, make machinery and
tools, and produce goods. The employers keep the factories, the
machinery, tools and goods for themselves _as their profit_. The workers
get only wages.

This arrangement is called the _wage system_.

Learned men have figured out that the worker receives as his wage only
about _one-tenth_ of what he produces. The other _nine-tenths_ are
divided among the landlord, the manufacturer, the railroad company, the
wholesaler, the jobber, and other middlemen.

It means this:

Though the workers, as a class, have built the factories, a slice of
their daily labor is taken from them for the privilege of _using_ those
factories. That's the landlord's profit.

Though the workers have made the tools and the machinery, another slice
of their daily labor is taken from them for the privilege of _using_
those tools and machinery. That's the manufacturer's profit.

Though the workers built the railroads and are running them, another
slice of their daily labor is taken from them for the transportation of
the goods they make. That's the railroad's profit.

And so on, including the banker who lends the manufacturer other
people's money, the wholesaler, the jobber, and other middlemen, all of
whom get their slice of the worker's toil.

What is left then -- one-tenth of the real worth of the worker's labor
-- is _his_ share, his wage.

Can you guess now why the wise Proudhon said that _the possessions of
the rich are stolen property_? Stolen from the producer, the worker.

It seems strange, doesn't it, that such a thing should be permitted?

Yes, indeed, it is very strange; and the strangest thing of all is that
the whole world looks on and doesn't do a thing about it. Worse yet, the
workers themselves don't do anything about it. Why, most of them think
that everything is all right, and that the capitalist system is good.

It is because the workers don't see what is happening to them. They
don't understand that they are being robbed. The rest of the world also
understands very little about it, and when some honest man tries to tell
them, they shout "anarchist!" at him, and they shut him up or put him in
prison.

Of course, the capitalists are very much satisfied with the capitalist
system. Why shouldn't they be? They get rich by it. So you can't expect
_them_ to say it's no good.

The middle classes are the helpers of the capitalists and they also live
off the labor of the working class, so why should they object? Of
course, here and there you will find some man or woman of the middle
class stand up and speak the truth about the whole matter. But such
persons are quickly silenced and cried down as "enemies of the people,"
as crazy disturbers and anarchists.

But you would think that the workers should be the first to object to
the capitalist system, for it is _they_ who are robbed and who suffer
most from it.

Yes, so it should be. But it isn't so, which is very sad.

The workers know that the shoe pinches somewhere. They know that they
toil hard all their lives and that they get just enough to exist on, and
sometimes not even enough. They see that their employers can ride about
in fine automobiles and live in the greatest luxury, with their wives
decked out in expensive clothes and diamonds, while the worker's wife
can hardly afford a new calico dress. So the workers seek to improve
their condition by trying to get better wages. It is the same as if I
woke up at night in my house and found that a burglar had collected all
my things and is about to get away with them. Suppose that instead of
stopping him, I should say to him: "Please, Mr. Burglar, leave me at
least one suit of clothes so I can have something to put on," and then
thank him if he gives me back a tenth part of the things he has stolen
from me.

But I am getting ahead of my story. We shall return to the worker and
see how he tries to improve his condition and how little he succeeds.
Just now I want to tell you why the worker does not take the burglar by
the neck and kick him out; that is, why he begs the capitalist for a
little more bread or wages, and why he does not throw him off his back,
altogether.

It is because the worker, like the rest of the world, has been made to
believe that everything is all right and must remain as it is; and that
if a few things are not quite as they should be, then it is because
"people are bad," and everything will right itself in the end, anyhow.

Just see if that is not true of yourself. At home, when you were a
child, and when you asked so many questions, you were told that "it is
right so," that "it must be so," that "God made it so," and that
everything was all right.

And you believed your father and mother, as they had believed their
fathers and mothers, and that is why you now think just as your
grandfather did.

Later, in school, you were told the same things. You were taught that
God had made the world and that all is well; that there must be rich and
poor, and that you should respect the rich and be content with your lot.
You were told that your country stands for justice, and that you must
obey the law. The teacher, the priest, and the preacher all impressed it
upon you that your life is ordained by God and that "His will be done."
And when you saw a poor man dragged off to prison, they told you that he
was bad because he had stolen something, and that it was a great crime.

But neither at home, nor in school, nor anywhere else were you ever told
that it is a crime for the rich man to steal the product of the worker's
labor, or that the capitalists are rich because they have possessed
themselves of the wealth which labor created.

No, you were never told that, nor did any one else ever hear it in
school or church. How can you then expect the workers to know it?

On the contrary, your mind -- when you were a child and later on, too --
has been stuffed so full of false ideas that when you hear the plain
truth you wonder if it is really possible.

Perhaps you can see now why the workers do not understand that the
wealth they have created has been stolen from them and is being stolen
every day.

"But the law," you ask, "the government -- does it permit such robbery?
Is not theft forbidden by law?"

### Chapter 3: Law and Government

Yes, you are right: the law forbids theft.

If I should steal something from you, you can call a policeman and have
me arrested. The law will punish the thief, and the government will
return to you the stolen property, if possible, because the law forbids
stealing. It says that no one has a right to take anything from you
without your consent.

But your employer takes from you what you produce. The whole wealth
produced by labor is taken by the capitalists and kept by them as their
property.

The law says that your employer does not steal anything from you,
because it is done with your consent. You have agreed to work for your
boss for certain pay, he to have all that you produce. Because you
_consented_ to it, the law says that he does not steal anything from
you.

But did you really consent?

When the highwayman holds his gun to your head, you turn your valuables
over to him. You "consent" all right, but you do so because you cannot
help yourself, because you are _compelled_ by his gun.

Are you not _compelled_ to work for an employer? Your need compels you,
just as the highwayman's gun. You must live, and so must your wife and
children. You can't work for yourself; under the capitalist industrial
system you must work for an employer. The factories, machinery, and
tools belong to the employing class, so you _must_ hire yourself out to
that class in order to work and live. Whatever you work at, whoever your
employer may be, it always comes to the same: you must work _for him_.
You can't help yourself. You are _compelled_.

In this way the whole working class is compelled to work for the
capitalist class. In this manner the workers are compelled to give up
all the wealth they produce. The employers keep that wealth as their
profit, while the worker gets only a wage, just enough to live on, so he
can go on producing more wealth for his employer. Is that not cheating,
robbery?

The law says it is a "free agreement." Just as well might the highwayman
say that you "agreed" to give up your valuables. The only difference is
that the highwayman's way is called stealing and robbery, and is
forbidden by law. While the capitalist way is called business, industry,
profit making, and is protected by law.

But whether it is done in the highwayman's way or in the capitalist way,
you know that you are _robbed_.

The whole capitalist system rests on such robbery.

The whole system of law and government upholds and justifies this
robbery.

That's the order of things called capitalism, and law and government are
there to protect this order of things.

Do you wonder that the capitalist and employer, and all those who profit
by this order of things, are strong for "law and order?"

But where do you come in? What benefit have _you_ from that kind of "law
and order?" Don't you see that this "law and order" only robs you, fools
you, and just _enslaves_ you?

"Enslave me?" you wonder. "Why, I am a free citizen!"

Are you free, really? Free to do what? To live as you please? To do what
you please?

Let's see. How do you live? What does your freedom amount to?

You _depend_ on your employer for your wages or your salary, don't you?
And your wages determine your way of living, don't they? The conditions
of your life, even what you eat and drink, where you go and with whom
you associate, -- all of it _depends on your wages_.

No, you are not a free man. You are _dependent_ on your employer and on
your wages. You are really a wage slave.

The whole working class, under the capitalist system, is dependent on
the capitalist class. The workers are wage slaves.

So, what becomes of your freedom? What can you do with it? Can you do
more with it than your wages permit?

Can't you see that your wage -- your salary or income -- is all the
freedom that you have? Your freedom, your liberty, don't go a step
further than the wages you get.

The freedom that is given you on paper, that is written down in law
books and constitutions, does not do you a bit of good. Such freedom
only means that you have the _right_ to do a certain thing. But it
doesn't mean that you _can_ do it. To be able to do it, you must have
the chance, the opportunity. You have a _right_ to eat three fine meals
a day, but if you haven't the means, the _opportunity_ to get those
meals, then what good is that right to you?

So freedom really means opportunity to satisfy your needs and wants. If
your freedom does not give you that opportunity, than it does you no
good. Real freedom means opportunity and well-being. If it does not mean
that, it means nothing.

You see, then, that the whole situation comes to this:

Capitalism robs you and makes a wage slave of you.

The law upholds and protects that robbery.

The government fools you into believing that you are independent and
free.

In this way you are fooled and duped every day of your life.

But how does it happen that you didn't think of it before? How is it
that most other people don't see it, either?

It is because you and every one else are lied to about this all the
time, from your earliest childhood.

You are told to be honest, while you are being robbed all your life.

You are commanded to respect the law, while the law protects the
capitalist who is robbing you.

You are taught that killing is wrong, while the government hangs and
electrocutes people and slaughters them in war.

You are told to obey the law and government, though law and government
stand for robbery and murder.

Thus all through life you are lied to, fooled, and deceived, so that it
will be easier to make profits out of you, to _exploit_ you.

Because it is not only the employer and the capitalist who make profits
out of you. The government, the church, and the school -- they all live
on your labor. You support them all. That is why all of them teach you
to be content with your lot and behave yourself.

"Is it really true that I support them all?" you ask in amazement.

Let us see. They eat and drink and are clothed, not to speak of the
luxuries they enjoy. Do _they_ make the things they use and consume, do
_they_ do the planting and sowing and building and so on?

"But they pay for those things," your friend objects.

Yes, they pay. Suppose a fellow stole fifty dollars from you and then
went and bought with it a suit of clothes for himself. Is that suit by
right his? Didn't he pay for it? Well, just so the people who don't
produce anything or do no useful work pay for things. Their money is the
profits they or their parents before them squeezed out of you, out of
the workers.

"Then it is not my boss who supports me, but I him?"

Of course. He gives you a job; that is, permission to work in the
factory or mill which was not built by him but by other workers like
yourself. And for that permission you help to support him for the rest
of your life or as long as you work for him. You support him so
generously that he can afford a mansion in the city and a home in the
country, even several of them, and servants to attend to his wants and
those of his family, and for the entertainment of his friends, and for
horse races and for boat races, and for a hundred other things. But it
is not only to him that you are so generous. Out of your labor, by
direct and indirect taxation, are supported the entire government,
local, state, and national, the schools and the churches, and all the
other institutions whose business it is to protect profits and keep you
fooled. You and your fellow workers, labor as a whole, support them all.
Do you wonder that they all tell you that everything is all right and
that you should be good and keep quiet?

It is good for _them_ that you should keep quiet, because they could not
keep on duping and robbing you once you open your eyes and see what's
happening to you.

That's why they are all strong for this capitalist system, for "law and
order."

But is that system good for _you_? Do you think it right and just? If
not, then why do you put up with it? Why do you support it? "What can I
do?" you say; "I'm only one."

Are you really only one? Are you not rather one out of many thousands,
out of millions, all of them exploited and enslaved the same as you are?
Only they don't know it. If they knew it, they wouldn't stand for it.
That's sure. So the thing is to make them know it.

Every workingman in your city, every toiler in your country, in every
country, in the whole world, is exploited and enslaved the same as you
are.

And not only the workingmen. The farmers are duped and robbed in the
same manner.

Just like the workingmen, the farmer is dependent on the capitalist
class. He toils hard all his life, but most of his labor goes to the
trusts and monopolies of the land which by right is no more theirs than
the moon is.

The farmer produces the food of the world. He feeds all of us. But
before he can get his goods to us, he is made to pay tribute to the
class that lives by the work of others, the profit-making, capitalist
class. The farmer is mulcted out of the greater part of his product just
as the worker is. He is mulcted by the land owner and by the mortgage
holder; by the steel trust and the railroad. The banker, the commission
merchant, the retailer, and a score of other middlemen squeeze their
profits out of the farmer before he is allowed to get his food to you.

Law and government permit and help this robbery by ruling that

>the land, which no man created, belongs to the landlord; the railroads,
which the workers built, belong to the railroad magnates; the
warehouses, grain elevators, and storehouses, erected by the workers,
belong to the capitalists; all those monopolists and capitalists have a
right to get profits from the farmer for using the railroads and other
facilities before he can get his food to you.

You can see then, how the farmer is robbed by big capital and business,
and how the law helps in that robbery, just as with the workingman.

But it is not only the worker and the farmer who are exploited and
forced to give up the greater part of their product to the capitalists,
to those who have monopolized the land, the railroads, the factories,
the machinery, and all natural resources. The entire country, the whole
world is made to pay tribute to the kings of finance and industry.

The small business man depends on the wholesaler; the wholesaler on the
manufacturer; the manufacturer on the trust magnates of his industry;
and all of them on the money lords and banks for their credit. The big
bankers and financiers can put any man out of business by just
withdrawing their credit from him. They do so whenever they want to
squeeze any one out of business. The business man is entirely at their
mercy. If he does not play the game as they want it, to _suit their
interests_, then they simply drive him out of the game.

Thus the whole of mankind is dependent upon and enslaved by just a
handful of men who have monopolized almost the entire wealth of the
world, but who have themselves never created anything.

"But those men work hard," you say.

Well, some of them don't work at all. Some of them are just idlers,
whose business is managed by others. Some of them _do_ work. But what
kind of work do they do? Do they produce anything, as the worker and the
farmer do? No, they produce nothing, though they may work. They work to
mulct people, to get profits out of them. Does their work benefit _you_?
The highwayman also works hard and takes great risks to boot. His
"work," like the capitalist's, gives employment to lawyers, jailers, and
a host of other retainers, all of whom _your_ toil supports.

It seems indeed ridiculous that the whole world should slave for the
benefit of a handful of monopolists, and that all should have to depend
upon them for their right and opportunity to live. But the fact is just
that. And it is the more ridiculous when you consider that the workers
and farmers, who alone create all wealth, should be the most dependent
and the poorest of all the other classes in society.

It is really monstrous, and it is very sad. Surely your common sense
must tell you that such a situation is nothing short of madness. If the
great masses of people, the millions throughout the world, could see how
they are fooled, exploited and enslaved, as you see it now, would they
stand for such goings on? Surely they would not!

The capitalists know they wouldn't. That is why they need the government
to legalize their methods of robbery, to protect the capitalist system.

And that is why the government needs laws, police and soldiers, courts
and prisons to protect capitalism.

But who are the police and the soldiers who protect the capitalists
against you, against the people?

If they were capitalists themselves, then it would stand to reason why
they want to protect the wealth they have stolen, and why they try to
keep up, even by force, the system that gives them the privilege of
robbing the people.

But the police and the soldiers, the defenders of "law and order," are
not of the capitalist class. They are men from the ranks of the people,
poor men who for pay protect the very system that keeps them poor. It is
unbelievable, is it not? Yet it is true. It just comes down to this:
some of the slaves protect their masters in keeping them and the rest of
the people in slavery. In the same way Great Britain, for instance,
keeps the Hindoos in India in subjection by a police force of the
natives, of the Hindoos themselves. Or as Belgium does with the black
men in the Congo. Or as any government does with a subjugated people.

It is the same system.

Here is what it amounts to:

>Capitalism robs and exploits the whole of the people; the laws legalize
and uphold this capitalist robbery; the government uses one part of the
people to aid and protect the capitalists in robbing the whole of the
people.

The entire thing is kept up by educating the people to believe that
capitalism is right, that the law is just, and that the government must
be obeyed.

Do you see through this game now?

### Chapter 4: How the System Works

But take a closer look at it and see how the system "works."

Consider how life and its real meaning have become turned upside down
and topsy-turvy. See how your own existence is poisoned and made
miserable by the crazy arrangement.

Wherein is the purpose of your life, where the joy of it?

The earth is rich and beautiful, the bright sunshine should gladden your
heart. Man's genius and labor have conquered the forces of nature and
harnessed the lightning and the air to the service of humanity. Science
and invention, human industry and toil have produced untold wealth.
We've bridged the shoreless seas, the steam engine has annihilated
distance, the electric spark and gasoline motor have unfettered man from
the earth and chained even the atmosphere to do his bidding. We have
triumphed over space, and the farthest corners of the globe have been
brought close together. The human voice now circles the hemispheres, and
through the azure there dart-fleet messengers, carrying man's greeting
to all the peoples of the world.

Yet the people groan under heavy burdens, and there is no joy in their
hearts. Their lives are full of misery, their souls cold with want and
need. Poverty and crime fill every land; thousands are a prey to disease
and insanity, war slaughters millions and brings to the living tyranny
and oppression.

Why all this misery and murder in a world so rich and beautiful? Why all
the pain and sorrow upon an earth so full of nature's bounty and
sunshine?

"It's God's will," says the church.

"People are bad," says the lawmaker.

"It must be so," says the fool.

Is it true? Must it really be so?

You and I and each of us, we all want to live. We have but one life and
we want to make the best of it -- rightly so. We want some joy and
sunshine while we live. What will happen to us when we are dead, we
don't know. No one knows. The chances are that once dead we'll stay
dead. But whether so or not, while we live our whole being hungers for
joy and laughter, for sunshine and happiness. Nature has made us that
way. Made you and me, and millions of others like us, to long for life
and joy. Is it right and just that we should be deprived of it and
forever remain the slaves of a handful of men who lord it over us and
over life?

Can that be "God's will," as the church tells you?

But if there be a God, he must be just. Would he permit us to be cheated
and despoiled of life and its joys? If there be a God, he must be our
father, and all men his children. Would a good father let some of his
children go hungry and miserable while others have so much they don't
know what to do with it? Would he suffer thousands, even millions, of
his children to be killed and slaughtered, just for the glory of some
king or the profit of the capitalist? Would he sanction injustice,
outrage, and murder? No, my friend, you cannot believe that of a good
father, of a just God. If people tell you that God wants such things
they just lie to you.

Maybe you say that God is good, but it is people who are bad, and that
is why things are so wrong in the world.

But if people are bad, who made them so? Surely you don't believe that
God made people bad, because in that case he himself would be
responsible for it. Then it means that if people are bad, something else
has made them so. That may well be. Let us look into it.

Let us see how people are, what they are, and how they live. Let us see
how _you_ live.

From your earliest childhood it has been drilled into you that you must
become successful, must "make money." Money means comfort, security,
power. It does not matter who you are, you are valued by what you are
"worth," by the size of your bank account. So _you_ have been taught,
and everybody else has been taught the same. Can you wonder that every
one's life becomes a chase for money, for the dollar and your whole
existence is turned into a struggle for possession, for wealth?

The money hunger grows on what it feeds. The poor man struggles for a
living, for a bit of comfort. The well-to-do man wants greater riches to
give him security and protect him against the fear of to-morrow. And
when he becomes a big banker he must not relax his efforts, he must keep
a sharp eye on his competitors, for fear of losing the race to some
other man.

So every one is compelled to take part in the wild chase, and the hunger
for possession gets ever stronger hold of man. It becomes the most
important part of life; every thought is on money, all the energies are
bent on getting rich, and presently the thirst for wealth becomes a
mania, a madness that possesses those who have and those who have not.

Thus life has lost its sole true meaning of joy and beauty; existence
has become an unreasoning, wild dance around the golden calf, a mad
worship of God Mammon. In that dance and in that worship man has
sacrificed all his finer qualities of heart and soul -- kindness and
justice honor and manhood, compassion and sympathy with his fellow-man.

"Each for himself and the devil take the hindmost" -- that must perforce
become the principle and urge of most people under such conditions. Is
it any wonder that in this mad money chase are developed the worst
traits of man -- greed, envy, hatred, and the basest passions? Man grows
corrupt and evil; he becomes mean and unjust; he resorts to deceit,
theft, and murder.

Look closer about you and see how many wrongs and crimes are perpetrated
in your city, in your country, in the world at large, for money, for
property, for possession. See how full the world is of poverty and
misery, see the thousands falling a prey to disease and insanity, to
folly and outrage, to suicide and murder -- all because of the inhuman
and brutalizing _conditions_ we live under.

Truly has the wise man said that money is the root of all evil. Wherever
you look you will see the corroding and degrading effect of money, of
possession, of the mania to have and to hold. Every one is wild to get,
to grab by hook or crook, to accumulate as much as he can, so that he
may enjoy to-day and secure himself for to-morrow.

But can you therefore say that man is bad? Is he not _compelled_ to take
part in this money chase by the conditions of existence, by the crazy
system we live in? For you have no choice -- you must get into the race
or go under.

Is it your fault, then, that life forces you to be and act like that? Is
it the fault of your brother or your neighbor or of any one? Is it not
rather that we are all born into this mad scheme of things and that we
have to fall into line?

But is not the scheme itself wrong that makes us act like that? Think it
over and you will see that at heart you are not bad at all, but that
conditions often compel you to do things that you know are wrong. You
would rather not do them. When you can afford it, your urge is to be
kind and helpful to others. But if you should follow your inclinations
in this direction, you would neglect your own interests and you would
soon be in want yourself.

So the conditions of existence suppress and stifle the instincts of
kindness and humanity in us, and harden us against the need and misery
of our fellow-man.

You will see this in _every_ phase of existence, in all the relations of
men, all through our social life. Of course, if our interests were the
same, there would be no need of any one taking advantage of another.
Because what would be good for Jack would also be good for Jim. To be
sure, as human beings, as children of one humanity, we really do have
the same interests. But as members of a foolish and criminal social
arrangement, our present-day capitalist system, our interests are not at
all the same. In fact, the interests of the different classes in society
are opposed to each other; they are inimical and antagonistic, as I have
pointed out in preceding chapters.

That is why you see men taking advantage of each other when they can
profit by it, when their interests dictate it. In business, in commerce,
in the relations between employer and employee -- everywhere you will
find this principle at work. Every one is trying to get ahead of the
other fellow. Competition becomes the soul of capitalistic life,
beginning with the billionaire banker, the great manufacturer and lord
of industry, all through the social and financial scale, down to the
last worker in the factory. For even the workers are compelled to
compete with each other for jobs and better pay.

In this way our whole life becomes a struggle of man against man, of
class against class. In that struggle every method is used to achieve
success, to down your competitor, to raise yourself above him by every
means possible.

It is clear that such conditions will develop and cultivate the worst
qualities of man. It is just as clear that the law will protect those
who have power and influence, the rich and the wealthy, however they got
their riches. The poor man must inevitably get the worst of it under
such circumstances. He will try to do the same as the rich man does. But
as he has not the same opportunity to advance his interests under the
protection of the law, he will often attempt it outside of the law and
he will fall into its meshes. Though he did nothing more than the rich
man -- took advantage of some one, cheated some one -- he did it
"illegally," and you call him a criminal.

Look at that poor boy, for instance, on the street corner there. He is
ragged, pale, and half-starved. He sees another boy, the son of wealthy
parents, and that boy wears nice clothes, he is well fed, and he does
not even deign to play with the poor kid. The ragged boy is angry at him
he resents and hates the rich boy. And everywhere the poor boy goes he
experiences the same thing: he is ignored and scorned, often kicked
about -- he feels people don't think him as good as the rich boy, to
whom every one is respectful and attentive. The poor boy gets
embittered. And when he grows up, he again sees the same thing: the rich
are admired and respected, the poor are kicked about and looked down
upon. So the poor boy gets to hate his poverty, and he thinks of how he
might become rich, get money, and he tries to get it in any way he can,
by taking advantage of others, as others have always taken advantage of
him, by cheating and lying, and sometimes even by committing crime.

Then you say that he is "bad." But don't you see what made him bad?
Don't you see that the _conditions_ of his whole life have made him what
he is? And don't you see that the _system_ which keeps up such
conditions is a greater criminal than the petty thief? The law will step
in and punish him, but is it not the same law that permits those bad
conditions to exist and upholds the system that makes criminals?

Think it over and see if it is not the law itself, the government which
really creates crime by compelling people to live in conditions that
make them bad. See how law and government uphold and protect the biggest
crime of all, the mother of all crimes, the capitalistic wage system,
and then proceeds to punish the poor criminal.

Consider: does it make any difference whether you do wrong protected by
the law, or whether you do it unlawfully? The thing is the same and the
effects are the same. Worse even: legal wrongdoing is the greater evil
because it causes more misery and injustice than illegal wrong. Lawful
crime goes on all the time; it is not punishable and it is made easy,
while unlawful crime is not so frequent and is more limited in its scope
and effect.

Who causes more misery: the rich manufacturer reducing the wages of
thousands of workers to swell his profits, or the jobless man stealing
something to keep from starving?

Who commits the greater wrong: the wife of the industrial magnate
spending a thousand dollars for a silver collar for her lapdog, or the
underpaid girl in the magnate's department store unable to withstand
temptation and appropriating some trinket?

Who is the greater criminal: the speculator cornering the wheat market
and making a million-dollar profit by raising the price of the poor
man's bread, or the homeless tramp committing some theft?

Who is the greater enemy of man: the greedy coal baron responsible for
the sacrifice of human lives in his badly ventilated and dangerous
mines, or the desperate man guilty of assault and robbery?

It is _not_ the wrongs and crimes punishable by law that cause the
greatest evil in the world. It is the _lawful_ wrongs and unpunishable
crimes, justified and protected by law and government, that fill the
earth with misery and want, with strife and conflict, with class
struggles, slaughter, and destruction.

We hear much about crime and criminals, about burglary and robbery,
about offenses against person and property. The columns of the daily
press are filled with such reports. It is considered the "news" of the
day.

But do you hear much about the crimes of capitalistic industry and
business? Do the papers tell you anything about the constant robbery and
theft represented by low wages and high prices? Do they write much about
the widespread misery caused by market speculation, by adulterating
food, by the thousand and one other forms of fraud, extortion, and usury
on which business and trade thrive? Do they tell you of the wrong and
evils, of the poverty, of the broken hearts and blasted hearths of
disease and premature death, of desperation and suicide that follow in
constant and regular procession in the wake of the capitalist system?

Do they tell you of the woe and worry of the thousands thrown out of
work, no one caring whether they live or die? Do they tell you about the
starvation wages paid to women and girls in our industries, pittances,
that directly compel many of them to prostitute their bodies to help eke
out a living? Do they tell you of the army of unemployed that capitalism
holds ready to take the bread from your mouth when you go on strike for
better pay? Do they tell you that unemployment, with all its heartache,
suffering, and misery is due directly to the system of capitalism? Do
they tell you how the wage slave's toil and sweat are coined into
profits for the capitalist? How the worker's health, his mind and body
are sacrificed to the greed of the lords of industry? How labor and
lives are wasted in stupid capitalist competition and planless
production?

Indeed, they tell you a lot about crimes and criminals, about the
"badness" and "evil" of man, especially of the "lower" classes, of the
workers. But they don't tell you that capitalist conditions produce most
of our evils and crime, and that capitalism itself is the greatest crime
of all; that it devours more lives in a single day than all the
murderers put together. The destruction of life and property caused by
criminals throughout the world since human life began is mere child's
play when compared with the ten millions killed and twenty millions
wounded and the incalculable havoc and misery wrought by a single
capitalist event, the recent World War. That stupendous holocaust was
the legitimate child of capitalism, as all wars of conquest and gain are
the result of the conflicting financial and commercial interests of the
international bourgeoisie. It was a war for profits, as later admitted
even by Woodrow Wilson and his class.

Profits again, as you see. Coining human flesh and blood into profits in
the name of patriotism.

"Patriotism!" you protest; "why, that is a noble cause!"

"And unemployment," inquires your friend, "is capitalism responsible for
that, too? Is it the fault of my boss that he has no work for me?"

### Chapter 5: Unemployment

I am glad your friend asked the question, for every workingman realises
how important this matter of unemployment is to him. You know what your
life is when you are out of work; and when you do have a job, how the
fear of losing it hangs over you. You are also aware what a danger the
standing army of unemployed is to you when you are out on strike for
better conditions. You know that strikebreakers are enlisted from the
unemployed whom capitalism always keeps on hand, to help break your
strike.

"How does capitalism keep the unemployed on hand?" you ask.

Simply by compelling you to work long hours and as hard as possible, so
as to produce the greatest amount. All the modern schemes of
"efficiency," the Taylor and other systems of "economy" and
"rationalization" serve only to squeeze greater profits out of the
worker. It is economy in the interest of the employer _only_. But as
concerns you, the worker, this "economy" spells the greatest expenditure
of your effort and energy, a fatal waste of your vitality.

It pays the employer to use up and exploit your strength and ability at
the highest tension. True, it ruins your health and breaks down your
nervous system, makes you a prey to illness and disease (there are even
special proletarian diseases), cripples you and brings you to an early
grave -- but what does your boss care? Are there not thousands of
unemployed waiting for your job and ready to take it the moment you are
disabled or dead?

That is why it is to the profit of the capitalist to keep an army of
unemployed ready at hand. It is part and parcel of the wage system, a
necessary and inevitable characteristic of it.

It is in the interest of the people that there should be no unemployed,
that all should have an opportunity to work and earn their living; that
all should help, each according to his ability and strength, to increase
the wealth of the country, so that each should be able to have a greater
share of it.

But capitalism is not interested in the welfare of the people.
Capitalism, as I have shown before, is interested only in profits. By
employing less people and working them long hours larger profits can be
made than by giving work to more people at shorter hours. That is why it
is to the interest of your employer, for instance, to have 100 people
work 10 hours daily rather than to employ 200 at 5 hours. He would need
more room for 200 than for 100 persons -- a larger factory, more tools
and machinery, and so on. That is, he would require a greater investment
of capital. The employment of a larger force at less hours would bring
less profits, and that is why your boss will not run his factory or shop
on such a plan. Which means that a system of profit-making is not
compatible with considerations of humanity and the well-being of the
workers. On the contrary, the harder and more "efficiently" you work and
the longer hours you stay at it, the better for your employer and the
greater his profits.

You can therefore see that capitalism is not interested in employing all
those who want and are able to work. On the contrary: a minimum of
"hands" and a maximum of effort is the principle and the profit of the
capitalist system. This is the whole secret of all "rationalization"
schemes. And that is why you will find thousands of people in every
capitalist country willing and anxious to work, yet unable to get
employment. This army of unemployed is a constant threat to your
standard of living. They are ready to take your place at lower pay,
because necessity compels them to it. That is, of course, very
advantageous to the boss: it is a whip in his hands constantly held over
you, so you will slave hard for him and "behave" yourself.

You can see for yourself how dangerous and degrading such a situation is
for the worker, not to speak of the other evils of the system.

"Then why not do away with unemployment?" you demand.

Yes, it would be fine to do away with it. But it could be accomplished
only by doing away with the capitalist system and its wage slavery. As
long as you have capitalism -- or any other system of labor exploitation
and profit-making -- you will have unemployment. Capitalism can't exist
without it: it is inherent in the wage system. It is the fundamental
condition of successful capitalist production.

"Why?"

Because the capitalist industrial system does not produce for the
_needs_ of the people; it produces for _profit_. Manufacturers do not
produce commodities because the people want them and as much of them as
is required. They produce what they expect to sell, and sell at a
profit.

If we had a sensible system, we would produce the things which the
people want and the quantity they need. Suppose the inhabitants of a
certain locality needed 1,000 pairs of shoes; and suppose we'd have 50
shoemakers for the job. Then in 20 hours work those shoemakers would
produce the shoes our community needs.

But the shoemaker of to-day does not know and does not care how many
pairs of shoes are needed. Thousands of people may need new shoes in
your city, but they cannot afford to buy them. So what good is it to the
manufacturer to know who needs shoes? What he wants to know is who can
_buy_ the shoes he makes: how many pairs he can _sell_ at a profit.

What happens? Well, he will manufacture about as many pairs of shoes as
he thinks he will be able to sell. He will try his best to produce them
as cheaply and sell them as dearly as he can, so as to make a good
profit. He will therefore employ as few workers as possible to
manufacture the quantity of shoes he wants, and he will have them work
as "efficiently" and hard as he can compel them to.

You see that production _for profit_ means longer hours and fewer
persons employed than would be the case if production were _for use_.

Capitalism is the system of production for profit, and that is why
capitalism always must have unemployed.

But look further into this system of production for profit and you will
see how its basic evil works a hundred other evils.

Let us follow the shoe manufacturer of your city. He has no way of
knowing, as I have already pointed out, who will or will not be able to
buy his shoes. He makes a rough guess, he "estimates," and he decides to
manufacture, let us say, 50,000 pairs. Then he puts his product on the
market. That is, the wholesaler, the jobber, and the storekeeper put
them up for sale.

Suppose only 30,000 pairs were sold; 20,000 pairs remain on hand. Our
manufacturer, unable to sell the balance in his own city, will try to
dispose of it, in some other part of the country. But the shoe
manufacturers there have also had the same experience. They also can't
sell all they have produced. The supply of shoes is greater than the
demand for them, they tell you. They have to cut down production. That
means the discharge of some of their employees, thus increasing the army
of the unemployed.

"Over-production" this is called. But in truth it is not over-production
at all. It is under-consumption, because there are many people who need
new shoes, but they can't afford to buy them.

The result? The warehouses are stocked with the shoes the people want
but cannot buy, shops and factories close because of the "oversupply."
The same things happen in other industries. You are told that there is a
"crisis" and your wages must be reduced.

Your wages are cut; you are put on part time or you lose your work
altogether. Thousands of men and women are thrown out of employment in
that manner. Their wages stop and they cannot buy the food and other
things they need. Are those things not to be had? No, on the contrary;
the warehouses and stores are filled with them, there is too much of
them there's "over-production."

So the capitalist system of production for profit results in this crazy
situation:

1. people have to starve -- not because there is not enough food but
because there is too much of it; they have to do without the things they
need, because there is too much of those things on hand;

2. because there is too much, manufacture is cut down, throwing
thousands out of work;

3. being out of work and therefore not earning, those thousands lose
their buying capacity. The grocer, the butcher, the tailor all suffer as
a result. That means increased unemployment all around, the crisis gets
worse.

Under capitalism this happens in _every_ industry.

Such crises are inevitable in a system of production for profit. They
come from time to time; they return periodically, always getting worse.
They deprive thousands and hundreds of thousands of employment causing
poverty, distress, and untold misery. They result in bankruptcy and bank
failures, which swallow up whatever little the worker have saved in time
of "prosperity." They cause want and need, drive people to despair and
crime, to suicide and insanity.

Such are the results of production for profit; such the fruits of system
of capitalism.

Yet that is not all. There is another result of this system, are even
worse than all the others combined.

That is _War_.

### Chapter 6: War

War! Do you realize what it means? Do you know of any more terrible word
in our language? Does it not bring to your mind pictures of slaughter
and carnage, of murder, pillage, and destruction? Can't you hear the
belching of cannon, the cries of the dying and wounded? Can you not see
the battlefield strewn with corpses? Living humans torn to pieces, their
blood and brains scattered about, men full of life suddenly turned to
carrion. And there, at home, thousands of fathers and mothers' wives and
sweethearts living in hourly dread lest some mischance befall their
loved ones, and waiting, waiting for the return of those who will return
nevermore.

You know what war means. Even if you yourself have never been at the
front, you know that there is no greater curse than war with its
millions of dead and maimed, its countless human sacrifices, its broken
lives, ruined homes its indescribable heartache and misery.

"It's terrible," you admit, "but it can't be helped." You think that war
must be, that times come when it is inevitable, that you must defend
your country when it is in danger.

Let us see, then, whether you really defend your country when you go to
war. Let us see what causes war, and whether it is for the benefit of
your country that you are called upon to don the uniform and start off
on the campaign of slaughter.

Let us consider whom and what you defend in war: who is interested in it
and who profits by it.

We must return to our manufacturer. Unable to sell his product at a
profit in his own country, he (and manufacturers of other commodities
likewise) seeks a market in some foreign land. He goes to England,
Germany, France, or to some other country, and tries to dispose there of
his "over-production," of his "surplus."

But there he finds the same conditions as in his own country. There they
also have "over-production"; that is, the workers are so exploited and
underpaid that they cannot buy the commodities they have produced. The
manufacturers of England, Germany, France, etc., are therefore also
looking for other markets, just as the American manufacturer.

The American manufacturers of a certain industry organize themselves
into a big combine, the industrial magnates of the other countries do
the same, and the national combines begin competing with each other. The
capitalists of each country try to grab the best markets, especially new
markets. They find such new markets in China, Japan India, and similar
countries; that is, in countries that have not yet developed their own
industries. When each country will have developed its own industries,
there will be no more foreign markets, and then some powerful
capitalistic group will become the international trust of the whole
world. But in the meantime the capitalistic interests of the various
industrial countries fight for the foreign markets and compete with each
other there. They compel some weaker nation to give them special
privileges, "favored treatment"; they arouse the envy of their
competitors get into trouble about concessions and sources of profit,
and call upon their respective governments to defend their interests.
The American capitalist appeals to his government to protect "American"
interests. The capitalists of France, Germany, and England do the same:
they call upon _their_ governments to protect _their_ profits. Then the
various governments call upon their people to _"defend their country"_.

Do you see how the game is played? You are not told that you are asked
to protect the privileges and dividends of some American capitalist in a
foreign country. They know that if they tell you that, you would laugh
at them and you would refuse to get yourself shot to swell the profits
of plutocrats. But without _you_ and others like you they can't make
war! So they raise the cry of "Defend your country! Your flag is
insulted!" Sometimes they actually hire thugs to insult your country's
flag in a foreign land, or get some American property destroyed there,
so as to make sure the people at home will get wild over it and rush to
join the Army and Navy.

Don't think I exaggerate. American capitalists are known to have caused
even revolutions in foreign countries (particularly in South America) so
as to get a more "friendly" new government there and thus secure the
concessions they wanted.

But generally they don't need to go to such lengths. All they have to do
is appeal to your "patriotism," flatter you a bit, tell you that you can
"lick the whole world," and they get you ready to don the soldier's
uniform and do their bidding.

This is what your patriotism, your love of country is used for. Truly
did the great English thinker Carlyle write:

>"What, speaking in quite unofficial language, is the net purport and
upshot of war? To my own knowledge, for example, there dwell and toil,
in the British village of Dumdrudge, usually some five hundred souls.
From these, by certain 'natural enemies' of the French there are
successively selected, during the French war, say thirty able-bodied
men. Dumdrudge, at her own expense, has suckled and nursed them; she
has, not without difficulty and sorrow, fed them up to man hood, and
even trained them to crafts, so that one can weave, another build,
another hammer, and the weakest can stand under thirty stone
avoirdupois. Nevertheless, amid much weeping and swearing, they are
selected; all dressed in red; and shipped away, at public charge, some
two thousand miles, or say only to the south of Spain, and fed there
till wanted.
>
>"And now to that same spot in the south of Spain are thirty similar
French artisans, from a French Dumdrudge, in like manner wending, till
at length, after infinite effort, the two parties come into actual
juxtaposition; and Thirty stands fronting Thirty, each with a gun in his
hand.
>
>"Straightway the word 'Fire!' is given, and they blow the souls out of
one another, and in the place of sixty brisk useful craftsmen, the world
has sixty dead carcasses, which it must bury, and anon shed tears for.
Had these men any quarrel? Busy as the devil is, not the smallest! They
lived far enough apart; were the entirest strangers; nay, in so wide a
universe, there was even, unconsciously, by commerce, some mutual
helpfulness between them. How then? Simpleton! Their governors had
fallen out; and instead of shooting one another, had the cunning to make
these poor blockheads shoot."

It is not for your country that you fight when you go to war. It's for
your governors, your rulers, your capitalistic masters.

Neither your country, nor humanity, neither you nor your class -- the
workers -- gain anything by war. It is only the big financiers and
capitalists who profit by it.

War is bad for _you_. It is bad for the workers. They have everything to
lose and nothing to gain by it. They don't even get any glory from it,
for that goes to the big generals and field marshals.

What do _you_ get in war? You get lousy, you get shot, gassed, maimed,
or killed. That is all the workers of any country get out of war.

War is bad for your country, bad for humanity: it spells slaughter and
destruction. Everything that war destroys -- bridges and harbors, cities
and ships, fields and factories -- all must be built up again. That
means that the people are taxed, directly and indirectly, to build it
up. For in the last analysis everything comes from the pockets of the
people. So war is bad for them materially, not to speak of the
brutalizing effect war has upon mankind in general. And don't forget
that 999 out of every 1,000 who are killed, blinded, or maimed in war
are of the laboring class, sons of workers and farmers.

In modern war there is no victor, for the winning side loses almost as
much as the defeated one. Sometimes even more, like France in the late
struggle: France is poorer to-day than Germany. The workers of both
countries are taxed to starvation to make good the losses sustained in
the war. Labor's wages and standards of living are much lower now in the
European countries that participated in the World War than they were
before the great catastrophe.

"But the United States got rich through the war," you object.

You mean that a handful of men gained millions, and that the big
Capitalists made huge profits. Surely they did: the great financiers by
lending Europe money at a high rate of interest and by supplying war
material and munitions. But where do you come in?

Just stop to consider how Europe is paying off its financial debt to
America or the interest on it. It does so by squeezing more labor and
profits out of the workers. By paying lower wages and producing goods
more cheaply the European manufacturers can undersell their American
competitors, and for this reason the American manufacturer is compelled
also to produce at lower cost. That's where his "economy" and
"rationalization" come in, and as a result you must work harder or have
your wages reduced, or be thrown out of employment altogether. Do you
see how low wages in Europe directly affect your own condition? Do you
realize that you, the American worker, are helping to pay the American
bankers the interest on their European loans?

There are people who claim that war is good because it cultivates
physical courage. The argument is stupid. It is made only by those who
have themselves never been to war and whose fighting is done by others.
It is a dishonest argument, to induce poor fools to fight for the
interests of the rich. People who have actually fought in battles will
tell you that modern war has nothing to do with personal courage: it is
mass fighting at a great distance from the enemy. Personal encounters,
in which the best man may win, are extremely rare. In modern war you
don't see your antagonists: you fight blindly, like a machine. You go
into battle scared to death, fearing that the next minute you may be
shot to pieces. You go only because you don't have the courage to
refuse.

The man who can face vilification and disgrace, who can stand up against
the popular current, even against his friends and his country when he
knows he is right, who can defy those in authority over him who can take
punishment and prison and remain steadfast -- that is a man of courage.
The fellow whom you taunt as a "slacker" because he refuses to turn
murderer -- he needs courage. But do you need much courage just to obey
orders, to do as you are told and to fall in line with thousands of
others to the tune of general approval and the "Star Spangled Banner?"

War paralyzes your courage and deadens the spirit of true manhood. It
degrades and stupefies with the sense that you are not responsible that
"'tis not yours to think and reason why, but to do and die," like the
hundred thousand others doomed like yourself. War means blind obedience,
unthinking stupidity, brutish callousness, wanton destruction, and
irresponsible murder.

I have met persons who say that war is good because it kills many
people, so that there is more work for the survivors.

Consider what a terrible indictment this is against the present system.
Imagine a condition of things where it is good for the people of a
certain community to have some of their number killed off, so the rest
could live better! Would it not be the worst man-eating system, the
worst cannibalism?

That is just what capitalism is: a system of cannibalism in which one
devours his fellow-man or is devoured by him. This is true of capitalism
in time of peace as in war, except that in war its real character is
unmasked and more evident.

In a sensible, humane society that could not be. On the contrary, the
greater the population of a certain community the better it would be for
all, because the work of each would then be lighter.

A community is no different in this regard than a family. Every family
needs a certain amount of work to be done in order to keep its wants
supplied. Now the more persons there are in the family to do the
necessary work, the easier for each member, the less work for each.

The same holds true of a community or a country, which is only a family
on a large scale. The more people there are to do the work necessary to
supply the needs of the community, the easier the task of each
member.[^01]

If the contrary is the case in our present-day society, it merely goes
to prove that conditions are wrong, barbaric, and perverse. Nay, more:
that they are absolutely criminal if the capitalist system can thrive on
the slaughter of its members.

It is evident then that for the workers war means only greater burdens,
more taxes, harder toil, and the reduction of their pre-war standard of
living.

But there is _one_ element in capitalist society for whom war is good.
It is the element that coins money out of war, that gets rich on your
"patriotism" and self-sacrifice. It is the munitions manufacturers, the
speculators in food and other supplies, the warship builders. In short,
it is the great lords of finance, industry, and commerce who alone
benefit by war.

For these war is a blessing. A blessing in more than one way. Because
war also serves to distract the attention of the laboring masses from
their everyday misery and turns it to "high politics" and human
slaughter. Governments and rulers have often sought to avoid popular
uprising and revolution by staging a war. History is full of such
examples. Of course, war is a double-edged sword. Often it, in turn,
leads to revolt. But that is another story to which we shall return when
we come to the Russian Revolution.

If you have followed me thus far, you must realize that war is just as
much a direct result and inevitable effect of the capitalist system as
are the regular financial and industrial crises.

When a crisis comes, in the manner in which I have described it, with
its unemployment and hardships, you are told that it is no one's fault,
that it is "bad times," the result of "over-production" and similar
humbug. And when capitalistic competition for profits brings about a
condition of war, the capitalists and their flunkies -- the politicians
and the press -- raise the cry "Save your country!" in order to fill you
with false patriotism and make you fight their battles for them.

In the name of patriotism you are ordered to stop being decent and
honest, to cease being yourself, to suspend your own judgment, and give
up your life; to become a will-less cog in a murderous machine, blindly
obeying the order to kill, pillage, and destroy; to give up your father
and mother, wife and child, and all that you love, and proceed to
slaughter your fellow-men who never did you any harm -- who are just as
unfortunate and deluded victims of their masters as you are of yours.

Only too truly did Carlyle say that "patriotism is the refuge of
scoundrels."

Can't you see how you are fooled and duped?

Take the World War, for instance. Consider how the people of America
were tricked into participation. They did not want to mix in European
affairs. They knew little of them, and they did not care to be dragged
into the murderous brawls. They elected Woodrow Wilson on a "he kept us
out of the war" slogan.

But the American plutocracy saw that huge fortunes could be gained in
the war. They were not satisfied with the millions they were reaping by
selling ammunition and other supplies to the European combatants;
immeasurably greater profits were to be made by getting a big country
like the United States, with its over 100 millions of population, into
the fray. President Wilson could not withstand their pressure. After
all, government is but the maid-servant of the financial powers: it is
there to do their bidding.

But how get America into the war when her people were expressly against
it? Didn't they elect Wilson as President on the clear promise to keep
the country out of war?

In former days, under absolute monarchs, the subjects were simply
compelled to obey the king's command. But that often involved resistance
and the danger of rebellion. In modern times there are surer and safer
means of making the people serve the interests of their rulers. All that
is necessary is to talk them into believing that they themselves want
what their masters want them to do; that it is to their own interests,
good for their country, good for humanity. In this manner the noble and
fine instincts of man are harnessed to do the dirty work of the
capitalistic master class, to the shame and injury of mankind.

Modern inventions help in this game and make it comparatively easy. The
printed word, the telegraph, the telephone, and radio are all sure aids
in this matter. The genius of man, having produced those wonderful
things, is exploited and degraded in the interests of Mammon and Mars.

President Wilson invented a new device to snare the American people into
the war for the benefit of Big Business. Woodrow Wilson, the former
college president, discovered a "war for democracy," a "war to end war."
With that hypocritical motto a country-wide campaign was started,
rousing the worst tendencies of intolerance, persecution, and murder in
American hearts; filling them with venom and hatred against every one
who had the courage to voice an honest and independent opinion; beating
up, imprisoning, and deporting those who dared to say that it was a
capitalistic war for profits. Conscientious objectors to the taking of
human life were brutally maltreated as "slackers" and condemned to long
penitentiary terms; men and women who reminded their Christian
countrymen of the Nazarene's command, "Thou shalt not kill," were
branded cowards and shut up in prison; radicals who declared that the
war was only in the interests of capitalism were treated as "vicious
foreigners, and "enemy spies." Special laws were rushed through to
stifle every free expression of opinion. Dire punishment was meted out
to every objector. From the Atlantic to the Pacific hundred-percenters,
drunk with murderous patriotism, spread terror. The whole country went
mad with the frenzy of jingoism. The nation-wide militarist propaganda
at last swept the American people into the field of carnage.

Wilson was "too proud to fight," but not too proud to send others to do
the fighting for his financial backers. He was "too proud to fight," but
not too proud to help the American plutocracy coin gold out of the lives
of seventy thousand Americans left dead on European battlefields.

The "war for democracy," the "war to end war" proved the greatest sham
in history. As a matter of fact, it started a chain of new wars not yet
ended. It has since been admitted, even by Wilson himself, that the war
served no purpose except to reap vast profits for Big Business. It
created more complications in European affairs than had ever existed
before. It pauperized Germany and France, and brought them to the brink
of national bankruptcy. It loaded the peoples of Europe with stupendous
debts, and put unbearable burdens upon their working classes. The
resources of every country were strained. The progress of science was
registered by new facilities of destruction. Christian precept was
proven by the multiplication of murder, and the treaties were signed
with human blood.

The World War built huge fortunes for the lords of finance -- and tombs
for the workers.

And to-day? To-day we stand again on the brink of a new war, far greater
and more terrible than the last holocaust. Every government is preparing
for it and appropriating millions of dollars of the workers' sweat and
blood for the coming carnage.

Think it over, my friend, and see what capital and government are doing
for you, doing _to_ you.

Soon they will again be calling on you to "defend your country!"

In times of peace you slave in field and factory, in war you serve as
cannon fodder -- all for the greater glory of your masters.

Yet you are told that "everything is all right," that it is "God's
will," that it "must be so."

Don't you see that it is not God's will at all, but the doings of
capital and government? Can't you see that it is so and "must be so"
only because you permit your political and industrial masters to fool
and dupe you, so _they_ can live in comfort and luxury off your toil and
tears, while they treat you as the "common" people, the "lower orders,"
just good enough to slave for them?

"It has always been so," you remark meekly.

### Chapter 7: Church and School

Yes, my friend, it has always been so. That is, law and government have
always been on the side of the masters. The rich and powerful have
always doped you by "God's will," with the help of the church and the
school.

But must it always remain so?

In olden days, when the people were the slaves of some tyrant -- of a
tsar or other autocrat -- the church (of every religion and
denomination) taught that slavery existed by "the will of God," that it
was good and necessary, that it could not be otherwise, and that whoever
was against it went against God's will and was a godless man, a heretic,
a blasphemer and a sinner.

The school taught that this was right and just, that the tyrant ruled by
"the grace of God," that his authority was not to be questioned, and
that he was to be served and obeyed.

The people believed it and remained slaves.

But little by little there arose some men who had come to see that
slavery was wrong: that it was not right for one man to hold a whole
people in subjection and be lord and master over their lives and toil.
And they went among the people and told them what they thought.

Then the government of the tyrant pounced upon those men. They were
charged with breaking the laws of the land; they were called disturbers
of the public peace, criminals, and enemies of the people. They were
killed, and the church and the school said that it was right, that they
deserved death as rebels against the laws of God and man. And the slaves
believed it.

But the truth cannot be suppressed forever. More and more persons
gradually came to see that the "agitators" who had been killed were
right. They came to understand that slavery was wrong and bad for them,
and their numbers grew all the time. The tyrant made severe laws to
suppress them: his government did everything to stop them and their
"evil designs." Church and school denounced those men. They were
persecuted and hounded and executed in the manner of those days.

Sometimes they were put on a big cross and nailed to it, or they had
their heads cut off with an axe. At other times they were strangled to
death, burned at the stake, quartered, or bound to horses and slowly
torn apart.

This was done by the church and the school and the law, often even by
the deluded mob, in various countries, and in the museums to-day you can
still see the instruments of torture and death which were used to punish
those who tried to tell the truth to the people.

But in spite of torture and death, in spite of law and government, in
spite of church and school and press, slavery was at last abolished,
though people had insisted that "it was always so and must remain so."

Later, in the days of serfdom, when the nobles lorded it over the common
people, church and school were again on the side of the rulers and the
rich. Again they threatened the people with the wrath of God if they
should dare to become rebellious and refuse to obey their lords and
governors. Again they brought down their maledictions upon the heads of
the "disturbers" and heretics who dared defy the law and preach the
gospel of greater liberty and well-being. Again those "enemies of the
people" were persecuted, hounded, and murdered -- but the day came when
serfdom was abolished.

Serfdom gave place to capitalism with its wage slavery, and again you
find church and school on the side of the master and ruler. Again they
thunder against the "heretics," the godless ones who wish the people to
be free and happy. Again church and school preach to you "the will of
God": capitalism is good and necessary, they tell you; you must be
obedient to your masters, for "it is God's will" that there be rich and
poor, and whoever goes against it is a sinner, a non-conformist, an
anarchist.

So you see that church and school are still with the masters against
their slaves, just as in the past. Like the leopard, they may change
their spots, but never their nature. Still church and school side with
the rich against the poor, with the powerful against their victims, with
"law and order" against liberty and justice.

Now as formerly they teach the people to respect and obey their masters.
When the tyrant was king, church and school taught respect for and
obedience to the "law and order" of the king. When the king is abolished
and a republic instituted, church and school teach respect for and
obedience to republican "law and order." OBEY! that is the eternal cry
of church and school, no matter how vile the tyrant, no matter how
oppressive and unjust "law and order."

OBEY! For if you will cease obedience to authority you might begin to
think for yourself! That would be most dangerous to "law and order," the
greatest misfortune for church and school. For then you would find out
that everything they taught you was a lie, and was only for the purpose
of keeping you enslaved, in mind and body, so that you should continue
to toil and suffer and keep quiet.

Such an awakening on your part would indeed be the greatest calamity for
church and school, for Master and Ruler.

But if you have gone thus far with me, if you have now begun to think
for yourself if you understand that capitalism robs you and that
government with its "law and order" is there to help it do it; if you
realize that all the agencies of institutionalized religion and
education serve only to delude you and keep you in bondage, then you
might rightly feel outraged and cry out, "Is there no justice in the
world?"

### Chapter 8: Justice

No, my friend, terrible as it is to admit it, there is no justice in the
world.

Worse yet: there _can be no justice_ as long as we live under conditions
which enable one person to take advantage of another's need, to turn it
to his profit, and exploit his fellow man.

There can be no justice as long as one man is ruled by another; as long
as one has the authority and power to compel another against his will.

There can be no justice between master and servant.

Nor equality.

Justice and equality can exist only among equals. Is the poor street
cleaner the social equal of Morgan? Is the washer woman the equal of
Lady Astor?

Let the washer woman and Lady Astor enter any place, private or public.
Will they receive equal welcome and treatment? Their very apparel will
determine their respective reception. Because even their clothes
indicate, under present conditions, the difference in their social
position, their station in life, their influence, and wealth.

The washer woman may have toiled hard all her life long, may have been a
most industrious and useful member of the community. The Lady may have
never done a stroke of work, never been of the least use to society. For
all that it is the rich lady who will be welcomed, who will be
preferred.

I have chosen this homely example because it is typical of the entire
character of our society, of our whole civilization.

It is money and the influence and authority which money commands, that
alone count in the world.

Not justice, but possession.

Broaden this example to cover your own life, and you will find that
justice and equality are only cheap talk, lies which you are taught,
while money and power are the real thing, realities.

Yet there is a deep-seated sense of justice in mankind, and your better
nature always resents it when you see injustice done to any one. You
feel outraged and you become indignant over it: because we all have an
instinctive sympathy with our fellow-man, for by nature and habit we are
social beings. But when your interests or safety are involved, you act
differently; you even feel differently.

Suppose you see your brother do wrong to a stranger. You will call his
attention to it, you will chide him for it.

When you see your boss do an injustice to some fellow worker, you also
resent it and you feel like protesting. But you will most probably
refrain from expressing your sentiments because you might lose your job
or get in bad with your boss.

Your _interests_ suppress the better urge of your nature. Your
dependence upon the boss and his economic power over you influence your
behavior.

Suppose you see John beat and kick Bill when the latter is on the
ground. Both may be strangers to you, but if you are not afraid of John,
you'll tell him to stop kicking a fellow who is down.

But when you see the policeman do the same thing to some citizen you
will think twice before interfering, because he might beat you up too
and arrest you to boot. He has the authority.

John, who has no authority and who knows that some one might interfere
when he is acting unjustly, will -- as a rule -- be careful what he is
about.

The policeman, who is vested with some authority and who knows there is
little chance of any one interfering with him, will be more likely to
act unjustly.

Even in this simple instance you can observe the effect of authority:
its effect on the one who possesses it and on those over whom it is
exercised. Authority tends to make its possessor unjust and arbitrary;
it also makes those subject to it acquiesce in wrong, subservient, and
servile. Authority corrupts its holder and debases its victims.

If this is true of the simplest relations of existence, how much more so
in the larger field of our industrial, political, and social life?

We have seen how your economic dependence upon your boss will affect
your actions. Similarly it will influence others who are dependent upon
him and his good will. Their interests will thus control their actions,
even if they are not clearly aware of it.

And the boss? Will he also not be influenced by _his_ interests? Will
not his sympathies, his attitude and behavior be the result of his
particular interests?

The fact is, every one is controlled, in the main, by his interests. Our
feelings, our thoughts, our actions, our whole life is shaped,
consciously and unconsciously, by our interests.

I am speaking of ordinary human nature, of the average man. Here and
there you will find cases that seem to be exceptions. A great idea or an
ideal, for example, may take such hold of a person that he will entirely
devote himself to it and sometimes even sacrifice his life for it. In
such an instance it might look as if the man acted against his
interests. But that is a mistake -- it only seems so. For in reality the
idea or ideal for which the man lived or even gave his life, was his
chief interest. The only difference is that the idealist finds his main
interest in living for some idea, while the strongest interest of the
average man is to get on in the world and live comfortably and
peacefully. But both are controlled by their dominant interests.

The interests of men differ, but we are all alike in that each of us
feels, thinks, and acts according to _his_ particular interests, his
conception of them.

Now, then, can you expect your boss to feel and act against his
interests? Can you expect the capitalist to be guided by the interests
of his employees? Can you expect the mine owner to run his business in
the interests of the miners?

We have seen that the interests of the employer and employee are
different; so different that they are opposed to each other.

Can there be justice between them? Justice means that each gets his due.
Can the worker get his due or have justice in capitalist society?

If he did, capitalism could not exist: because then your employer could
not make any profits out of your work. If the worker would get his due
-- that is, the things he produces or their equivalent -- where would
the profits of the capitalist come from? If labor owned the wealth it
produces, there would be no capitalism.

It means that the worker cannot get what he produces, cannot get what is
due to him, and therefore cannot get justice under wage slavery.

"If that is the case," you remark, "he can appeal to the law, to the
courts."

What are the courts? What purpose do they serve? They exist to uphold
the law. If someone has stolen your overcoat and you can prove it, the
courts would decide in your favor. If the accused is rich or has a
clever lawyer, the chances are that the verdict will be to the effect
that the whole thing was a misunderstanding, or that it was an act of
aberration, and the man will most likely go free.

But if you accuse your employer of robbing you of the greater part of
your labor, of exploiting you for his personal benefit and profit, can
you get your due in the courts? The judge will dismiss the case, because
it is not against the law for your boss to make profits out of your
work. There is no law to forbid it. You will get no justice that way.

It is said that "justice is blind." By that is meant that it recognizes
no distinction of station, of influence, of race, creed, or color.

This proposition needs only to be stated to be seen as thoroughly false.
For justice is administered by human beings, by judges and juries, and
every human being has his particular interests, not to speak of his
personal sentiments, opinions, likes, dislikes, and prejudices, from
which he can't get away by merely putting on a judge's gown and sitting
on the bench. The judge's attitude to things -- like every one else's --
will be determined, consciously and unconsciously, by his education and
bringing up, by the environment in which he lives, by his feelings and
opinions, and particularly by his interests and the interests of the
social group to which he belongs.

Considering the above, you must realize that the alleged impartiality of
the courts of justice is in truth a psychological impossibility. There
is no such thing, and cannot be. At best the judge can be relatively
impartial in cases in which neither his sentiments nor his interests --
as an individual or member of a certain social group -- are in any way
concerned. In such cases you might get justice. But these are usually of
small importance, and they play a very insignificant r√¥le in the general
administration of justice.

Let us take an example. Suppose two business men are disputing over the
possession of a certain piece of property, the matter involving no
political or social considerations of any kind. In such a case the
judge, having no personal feeling or interest in the matter, may decide
the case on its merits. Even then his attitude will to a considerable
extent depend on his state of health and his digestion, on the mood in
which he left home, on a probable quarrel with his spouse, and other
seemingly unimportant and irrelevant yet very decisive human factors.

Or suppose that two workingmen are in litigation over the ownership of a
chicken coop. The judge may in such a case decide justly, since a
verdict in favour of one or other of the litigants in no way affects the
position, feelings, or interests of the judge.

But suppose the case before him is that of a workingman in litigation
with his landlord or with his employer. In such circumstances the entire
character and personality of the judge will affect his decision. Not
that the latter will necessarily be unjust. That is not the point I am
trying to make. What I want to call your attention to is that, in the
given case, the attitude of the judge cannot and will not be impartial.
His sentiments toward workingmen, his personal opinion of landlords or
employers, and his social views will influence his judgment, sometimes
even unconsciously to himself. His verdict may or may not be just; in
any case it will not be based exclusively on the evidence. It will be
affected by his personal, subjective feelings and by his views regarding
labor and capital. His attitude will generally be that of his circle of
friends and acquaintances, of his social group, and his opinions in the
matter will correspond with the interests of that group. He may even
himself be a landlord or have stock in a corporation which employs
labor. Consciously or unconsciously his view of the evidence given at
the trial will be colored by his own feelings and prejudices, and his
verdict will be a result of that.

Besides, the appearance of the two litigants, their manner of speech and
behavior, and particularly their respective ability to employ clever
counsel, will have a very considerable influence on the impressions of
the judge and consequently on his decision.

It is therefore clear that in such cases the verdict will depend more on
the mentality and class-consciousness of the particular judge than on
the merits of the case.

This experience is so general that the popular voice has expressed it in
the sentiment that "the poor man can't get justice against the rich."
There may be exceptions now and then, but generally it is true and can't
be otherwise as long as society is divided into different classes with
differing interests. So long as that is the case, justice must be
one-sided, _class justice_; that is, injustice in favor of one class as
against the other.

You can see it still more clearly illustrated in cases involving
definite class issues, cases of the class struggle.

Take, for instance, a strike of workers against a corporation or a rich
employer. On what side will you find the judges, the courts? Whose
interests will the law and government protect? The workers are striking
for better conditions of living; they have wives and children at home
for whom they are trying to get a little bigger share of the wealth they
are creating. Does the law and government help them in this worthy aim?

What actually happens? Every branch of government comes to the aid of
capital as against labor. The courts will issue an injunction against
the strikers, they will forbid picketing or make it ineffectual by not
permitting the strikers to persuade outsiders not to take the bread out
of their mouths, the police will beat up and arrest the pickets, the
judges will impose fines on them and railroad them to jail. The whole
machinery of the government will be at the service of the capitalists to
break the strike, to smash the union, if possible, and reduce the
workers to submission. Sometimes the Governor of the State will even
call out the militia, the President will order out the regular troops --
all in support of capital against labor.

Meanwhile the trust or corporation where the strike is taking place will
order their employees to vacate the company houses, will throw them and
their families out in the cold, and will fill their places in the mill,
mine, or factory with strikebreakers, under the protection and with the
aid of the police, the courts, and the government, all of whom are
supported by _your_ labor and taxes.

Can you speak of justice under such circumstances? Can you be so na√Øve
as to believe that justice is possible in the struggle of the poor
against the rich, of labor against capital? Can't you see that it is a
bitter fight, a struggle of opposed interests, a _war of two classes_?
Can you expect justice in war?

Truly the capitalistic class knows that it is war, and it uses every
means at its command to defeat labor. But the workers unfortunately do
not see the situation as clearly as their masters, and so they still
foolishly twaddle about "justice," "equality before the law," and
"liberty."

It is useful to the capitalist class that the workers should believe in
such fairy tales. It guarantees the continuation of the rule of the
masters. Therefore they use every effort to keep up this belief. The
capitalistic press, the politician, the public speaker, never miss an
opportunity to impress it upon you that law means justice, that all are
equal before the law, and that every one enjoys liberty and has the same
opportunity in life as the next fellow. The whole machinery of law and
order, of capitalism and government, our entire civilization is based
upon this gigantic lie, and the constant propaganda of it by school,
church, and press is for the sole purpose of keeping conditions as they
are, of sustaining and protecting the "sacred institutions" of your wage
slavery and keeping you obedient to law and authority.

By every method they seek to instill this lie of "justice," "liberty,"
and "equality" in the masses, for full well they know that their whole
power and mastery rest on this faith. On every appropriate and
inappropriate occasion they feed you this buncombe; they have even
created special days to impress the lesson more emphatically upon you.
Their spellbinders fill you full of this stuff on the Fourth of July,
and you are permitted to shoot your misery and dissatisfaction off in
firecrackers and forget your wage slavery in the big noise and
hullabaloo. What an insult to the glorious memory of that great event,
the American Revolutionary War, which abolished the tyranny of George
III and made the American Colonies an independent republic! Now the
anniversary of that event is used to mask your servitude in the country
where the workers have neither freedom nor independence. To add insult
to injury, they have given you a Thanksgiving Day, that you may offer up
pious thanks for what you have not!

So great is the assurance of your masters in your stupidity that they
dare do such things. They feel safe in having duped you so thoroughly
and reduced your naturally rebellious spirit to such abject worship of
"law and order" that you will never dream of opening your eyes and
letting your heart cry out in outraged protest and defiance.

At the least sign of your rebellion the entire weight of the government,
of law and order, comes down upon your head, beginning with the
policeman's club, the jail, the prison, and ending with the gallows or
the electric chair. The whole system of capitalism and government is
mobilized to crush every symptom of dissatisfaction and rebellion; aye,
even any attempt to improve your condition as a workingman. Because your
masters well understand the situation and fully know the danger of your
waking up to the actual facts of the case, to your real condition of
slave \[sic?\]. They are aware of their interests, of the interests of
their class. They are class conscious, while the workers remain muddled
and befuddled.

The industrial lords know that it is good for them to keep you
unorganized and disorganized, or to break up your unions when they get
strong and militant. By hook and crook they oppose your every advance as
a class-conscious worker. Every movement for the improvement of labor's
condition they hate and fight tooth and nail. They'll spend millions on
the kind of education and propaganda that serves the continuation of
their rule rather than on improving your conditions as a worker. They
will spare neither expense nor energy to stifle any thought or idea that
may reduce their profits or threaten their mastery over you.

It is for this reason that they try to crush every aspiration of labor
for better conditions. Consider, for instance, the movement for the
eight-hour day. It is comparatively recent history, and probably you
remember with what bitterness and determination the employers opposed
that effort of labor. In some industries in America and in most European
countries the struggle is still going on. In the United States it began
in 1886, and it was fought by the bosses with the greatest brutality in
order to drive their workers back to the factories under the old
conditions. They resorted to lockouts, throwing thousands out of work,
to violence by hired thugs and Pinkertons upon labor assemblies and
their active members, to the demolition of union headquarters and
meeting places.

Where was "law and order?" What side of the struggle was the government
on? What did the courts and the judges do? Where was justice?

The local, State, and Federal authorities used all the machinery and
power at their command to aid the employers. They did not even shrink
from murder. The most active and able leaders of the movement had to pay
with their lives for the attempt of the workers to reduce their hours of
toil.

Many books have been written on that struggle, so that it is unnecessary
for me to go into details. But a brief summary of those events will
refresh the reader's memory.

The movement for the eight-hour workday started in Chicago, on May 1,
1886, gradually spreading throughout the country. Its beginning was
marked by strikes declared in most of the large industrial centers.
Twenty-five thousand workers laid down their tools in Chicago on the
first day of the strike, and within two days their number was doubled.
By the 4th of May almost all unionized labor in the city was on strike.

The armed fist of the law immediately hastened to the aid of the
employers. The capitalist press raved against the strikers and called
for the use of lead against them. There followed immediately assaults by
police upon the strikers' meetings. The most vicious attack took place
at the McCormick works, where the conditions of employment were so
unbearable that the men were compelled to go on strike already in
February. At this place the police and Pinkertons deliberately shot a
volley into the assembled workers, killing four and wounding a score of
others.

To protest against the outrage a meeting was called at Haymarket Square
on the 4th of May, 1886.

It was an orderly gathering, such as were daily taking place in Chicago
at the time. The Mayor of the city, Carter Harrison, was present; he
listened to several speeches and then -- according to his own sworn
testimony later on in court -- he returned to police headquarters to
inform the Chief of Police that the meeting was all right. It was
growing late -- about ten in the evening, heavy clouds overcast the sky;
it looked like rain. The audience began to disperse till only about two
hundred were left. Then suddenly a detachment of a hundred policemen
rushed upon the scene, commanded by Police Inspector Bonfield. They
halted at the speakers' wagon, from which Samuel Fielden was addressing
the remnant of the audience. The Inspector ordered the meeting to
disperse. Fielden replied: "This is a peaceful assembly." Without
further warning the police threw themselves upon the people, mercilessly
clubbing and beating men and women. At that moment something whizzed
through the air. There was an explosion, as of a bomb. Seven policemen
were killed and about sixty wounded.

It was never ascertained who threw the bomb, and even to this day the
identity of the man has not been established.

There had been so much brutality by the police and Pinkertons against
the strikers that it was not surprising that some one should express his
protest by such an act. Who was he? The industrial masters of Chicago
were not interested in this detail. They were determined to crush
rebellious labor, to down the eight-hour movement, and to stifle the
voice of the spokesmen of the workers. They openly declared their
determination to "teach the men a lesson."

Among the most active and intelligent leaders of the labor movement at
the time was Albert Parsons, a man of old American stock, whose
forebears had fought in the American Revolution. Associated with him in
the agitation for the shorter workday were August Spies, Adolf Fischer,
George Engel, and Louis Lingg. The money interests of Chicago and of the
State of Illinois determined to "get" them. Their object was to punish
and terrorize labor by murdering their most devoted leaders. The trial
of those men was the most hellish conspiracy of capital against labor in
the history of America. Perjured evidence, bribed jurymen, and police
revenge combined to bring about their doom.

Parsons, Spies, Fischer, Engel, and Lingg were condemned to death, Lingg
committing suicide in jail; Samuel Fielden and Michael Schwab were
sentenced to prison for life, while Oscar Neebe received 15 years. No
greater travesty of justice was ever staged than the trial of these men
known as the Chicago Anarchists.

What a legal outrage the verdict was you can judge from the action of
John P. Altgeld, later Governor of Illinois, who carefully reviewed the
trial proceedings and declared that the executed and imprisoned men had
been victims of a plot of the manufacturers, the courts, and the police.
He could not undo the judicial murders, but most courageously he
liberated the still imprisoned Anarchists, stating that he was merely
making good, so far as was in his power, the terrible crime that had
been committed against them.

The vengeance of the exploiters went so far that they punished Altgeld
for his brave stand by eliminating him from the political life of
America.

The Haymarket tragedy, as the case is known, is a striking illustration
of the kind of "justice" labor may expect from the masters. It is a
demonstration of its class character and of the means to which capital
and government will resort to crush the workers.

The history of the American labor movement is replete with such
examples. It is not within the scope of this book to review the great
number of them. They are dealt with in numerous books and publications,
to which I refer the reader for a nearer acquaintance with the Golgotha
of the American proletariat. On a smaller scale the Chicago judicial
murders are repeated in every struggle of labor. It is sufficient to
mention the strikes of the miners in the State of Colorado, with its
fiendish Ludlow chapter, where the State militia deliberately shot into
the workers' tents, setting the latter afire and causing the death of a
number of men, women and children; the murder of strikers in the
hopfields of Wheatland, California, in the summer of 1913; in Everett,
Washington, in 1916; in Tulsa, Oklahoma; in Virginia and in Kansas; in
the copper mines of Montana, and in numerous other places throughout the
country.

Nothing so arouses the hatred and vengeance of the masters as the effort
to enlighten their victims. This is as true to-day as it was in the time
of slavery and serfdom. We have seen how the church persecuted and
martyred her critics and fought every advance of science as a threat to
her authority and influence. Similarly has every despot always sought to
stifle the voice of protest and rebellion. In the same spirit capital
and government to-day furiously fall upon and tear to pieces every one
who dares shake the foundations of their power and interests.

Take two recent cases as instances of this never-changing attitude of
authority and ownership: the Mooney-Billings case and that of Sacco and
Vanzetti. One took place in the East, the other in the West, the two
separated by a decade and the whole width of the continent. Yet they
were exactly alike, proving that there is neither East nor West, nor any
difference of time or place in the masters' treatment of their slaves.

Mooney and Billings are in prison in California for life. Why? If I were
to answer in just a few words, I should say, with perfect truth and
completeness: because they were intelligent union men who tried to
enlighten their fellow-employees and improve their condition.

It was just this, and no other reason, that doomed them. The Chamber of
Commerce of San Francisco, the money power of California, could not
tolerate the activities of two such energetic and militant men. Labor in
San Francisco was becoming restive, strikes were taking place, and
demands were being voiced by the toilers for a greater share of the
wealth they were producing.

The industrial magnates of the coast declared war upon organized labor.
They proclaimed the "open shop" and their determination to break the
unions. That was the preliminary step towards placing the workers in a
position of helplessness and then reducing wages. Their hatred and
persecution were directed first of all against the most active members
of labor.

Tom Mooney had organized the street-car men of San Francisco, a crime
for which the traction company could not forgive him. Mooney together
with Warren Billings and other workers had also been active in a number
of strikes. They were known and admired for their devotion to the union
cause. That was enough for the employers and the San Francisco Chamber
of Commerce to try to get them out of the way. On several occasions they
had been arrested on frame-up charges by agents of the traction and
other corporations. But the cases against them were of such flimsy
nature that they had to be dismissed. The Chamber of Commerce bided its
opportunity to "get" those two labor men, as their agents openly
threatened to do.

The opportunity came with the explosion during the Preparedness Parade
in San Francisco, July 22, 1916. The labor unions of the city had
decided not to participate in the parade, because the latter was merely
a show of strength by California capital as against unionized labor
which the Chamber of Commerce had set out to crush. The "open shop" was
its frankly proclaimed policy, and it made no secret of its determined
and bitter hostility to unions.

It has never been ascertained who placed the infernal machine which
exploded during the parade, but the San Francisco police never made any
serious effort to find the responsible party or parties. Immediately
following the tragic occurrence Thomas Mooney and his wife Rena were
arrested, as well as Warren Billings, Edward D. Nolan, member of the
machinists' union, and I. Weinberg, of the jitney drivers' union.

The trial of Billings and Mooney proved one of the worst scandals in the
history of American courts.

The State witnesses were self-confessed perjurers, bribed and threatened
by the police into giving false testimony. Evidence showing the entire
innocence of Mooney and Billings was ignored. Mooney was accused of
having placed the infernal machine at the very time when he was in the
company of friends upon the roof of a house about a mile and a half
distant from the scene of the explosion. A photograph taken of the
demonstration by a film company during the parade clearly shows Mooney
on the roof, and in the background a street clock indicating the time as
2.02 P.M. The explosion having taken place at 2.06 P.M., it would have
been a physical impossibility for Mooney to have been at both places at
almost the same time.

But it was not a question of evidence, of guilt or innocence. Tom Mooney
was bitterly hated by the vested interests of San Francisco. He had to
be gotten out of the way. Mooney and Billings were convicted, the former
being sentenced to death, the latter receiving a lifetime term.

The outrageous manner in which the trial was conducted, the evident
perjury of the State witnesses, and the clear hand of the manufacturers
back of the prosecution aroused the country. The matter ultimately was
brought up before Congress. The latter passed a resolution ordering the
Labor Department to investigate the case. The report of Commissioner
John B. Densmore, sent to San Francisco for this purpose, exposed the
conspiracy to hang Mooney as one of the methods of the Chamber of
Commerce to destroy organized labor in California.

Since then most of the State witnesses, having failed to receive the
reward promised them, confessed to having perjured themselves at the
instigation of Charles M. Fickert, then District Attorney of San
Francisco and known tool of the Chamber of Commerce. Draper Hand and R.
W. Smith, police officials of the city, have both declared in sworn
affidavits that the evidence against Mooney and Billings was
manufactured from beginning to end by the District Attorney and his
bribed witnesses from the lowest social dregs of the coast.

The Mooney-Billings case attracted national and even international
attention. President Wilson felt induced to wire to the Governor of
California twice, asking for a revision of the case. Mooney's death
sentence was commuted to life imprisonment, but no effort has succeeded
in securing him a new trial.

The money power of California was bent on keeping Mooney and Billings in
the penitentiary. The Supreme Court of the State, obedient to the
Chamber of Commerce, steadfastly refused, on technical grounds, to
review the trial testimony, the perjured character of which had become a
byword in California.

Since then all the surviving jurors have made statements to the effect
that if the true facts of the case had been known to them during the
trial, they would have never convicted Mooney. Even Judge Fraser, who
presided at the trial, has asked for Mooney's pardon, on similar
grounds.

Yet both Tom Mooney and Warren Billings still remain in the
penitentiary. The Chamber of Commerce of California is determined to
keep them there, and their power is supreme with the courts and the
government.

Can you still speak of justice? Do you think justice to labor possible
under the reign of capitalism?

The judicial murder of the Chicago Anarchists took place many years ago,
in 1887. Considerable time has also elapsed since the Mooney-Billings
case, in 1916-1917. The latter, moreover, happened far away, on the
Pacific Coast, at a time of war hysteria. Such rank injustice could take
place only in those days, you might say; it could hardly be repeated
to-day.

Let us then shift the scene to our own day, to the very heart of
America, the proud seat of culture -- to Boston, Massachusetts.

It is sufficient to mention Boston to call up the picture of two
proletarians, Nicola Sacco and Bartolemeo Vanzetti, one a poor
shoemaker, the other a fish peddler, whose names to-day are known and
honored in every civilized country the world over.

Martyrs to humanity, if ever there were any; two men who gave up their
lives because of their devotion to mankind, because of their loyalty to
the ideal of an emancipated and freed working class. Two innocent men
who bravely suffered torture during seven long years, and who died a
terrible death with a serenity of spirit rarely equaled by the greatest
martyrs of all time.

The story of that judicial murder of two of the noblest of men, the
crime of Massachusetts that will neither be forgotten nor forgiven as
long as the State exists, is too fresh in the memory of every one to
need recapitulation here.

But _why_ did Sacco and Vanzetti have to die? This question is of utmost
moment; it bears directly upon the matters at issue.

Do you think that if Sacco and Vanzetti had been just a pair of
criminals, as the prosecution tried to make you believe, there would
have been such ruthless determination to execute them in the face of the
appeals, pleadings, and protests of the entire world?

Or if they had been plutocrats actually guilty of murder, with no other
issue involved, would they have been executed? Would no appeal to the
higher courts of the State have been allowed, would the Federal Supreme
Court have refused to consider the case?

You have often heard of some rich fellow killing a man, or of the sons
of wealthy parents found guilty of murder in the first degree. But can
you name a single one of them ever executed in the United States? Will
you even discover many of them in prison? Does not the law always find
excuses of "mental excitation," of "brain storm," of "legal
irresponsibility in cases of rich men convicted of crime?

But even if Sacco and Vanzetti had been ordinary criminals sentenced to
die, would not appeals from prominent men in all walks of life, from
charitable societies, and hundreds of thousands of friends and
sympathizers have secured clemency for them? Would not doubt of their
guilt, expressed by the highest legal authorities, have resulted in a
new trial, a revision of the old testimony, and the consideration of new
evidence in their behalf?

Why was all this refused to Sacco and Vanzetti? Why did "law and order,"
beginning with the local police and Federal detectives, up to the
confessedly prejudiced trial judge, all through the Supreme Court of the
State, the Governor, and ending with the Federal Supreme Court show such
a determination to send them to the electric chair?

Because Sacco and Vanzetti _were dangerous_ to the interests of capital.
These men voiced the dissatisfaction of the workers with their condition
of servitude. They expressed consciously what the workers mostly feel
unconsciously. It is because they were _class-conscious_ men,
Anarchists, that they were a greater menace to the security of
capitalism than if they had been a whole army of strikers not conscious
of the real objects of the class struggle. The masters know that when
you strike you demand only higher pay or shorter hours of work. But the
class-conscious struggle of labor against capital is a far more serious
matter; it means the entire abolition of the wage system and the freeing
of labor from the domination of capital. You can readily understand then
why the masters saw a greater danger in such men as Sacco and Vanzetti
than in the biggest strike for the mere improvement of conditions with
in capitalism.

Sacco and Vanzetti threatened the whole structure of capitalism and
government. Not those two poor proletarians as individuals. No; rather
what those two men represented -- the spirit of conscious rebellion
against existing conditions of exploitation and oppression.

It is that _spirit_ which capital and government meant to kill in the
persons of those men. To kill that spirit and the movement for labor's
emancipation by striking terror into the hearts of all who might think
and feel like Sacco and Vanzetti; to make an example of those two men
that would intimidate the workers and keep them away from the
proletarian movement.

This is the reason why neither the courts not the government of
Massachusetts could be induced to give Sacco and Vanzetti a new trial.
There was danger of their being acquitted in the atmosphere of an
aroused public sense of justice; there was the fear that the plot to
murder them would be exposed. That is why the Justices of the Federal
Supreme Court declined to hear the case, just as the judges of the
Supreme Court of the State of Massachusetts refused a new trial in spite
of important new evidence. For that reason also the President of the
United States did not intercede in the matter, though it was no less his
moral than his legal duty to do so. His moral duty, in the interests of
justice; his legal obligation because as President he had sworn to
uphold the Constitution which guarantees every one a fair trial, which
Sacco and Vanzetti did not get.

President Coolidge had sufficient precedents for interceding in behalf
of justice, notably the example of Woodrow Wilson, in the case of
Mooney. But Coolidge had not the courage to do so, being entirely
subservient to the Big Interests. No doubt the case of Sacco and
Vanzetti was also considered of even greater importance and class
significance than that of Mooney. At any rate, both capital and
government agreed in their resolve to uphold the courts of Massachusetts
at all cost and to sacrifice Nicolo Sacco and Bartolemeo Vanzetti.

The masters were determined to uphold the legend of "justice in the
courts," because their whole power rests on the popular belief in such
justice. It is not that infallibility is claimed for judges. If that
were the attitude, there would be no appeal from the decision of a
judge, there would be neither superior nor supreme courts. The
fallibility of Justice is admitted, but the fact that the courts and all
government institutions serve only to support the rule of the masters
over their labor slaves -- that their justice is but class justice --
_that_ could not be admitted for even an instant. Because if the people
found that out, capitalism and government would be doomed. That is
exactly why no impartial review of the evidence in the Sacco and
Vanzetti case could be permitted, no new trial given them, for such a
proceeding would have exposed the motives and objects back of their
prosecution.

Therefore there was no appeal and no new trial -- only a star chamber
hearing behind closed doors in the Governor's mansion, by men whose
loyalty to the dominant class was above suspicion; men who by all their
training and education, by their tradition and interests were bound to
sustain the courts and clear the Sacco and Vanzetti verdict of any
imputation of class justice. Therefore Sacco and Vanzetti had to die.

Governor Fuller of Massachusetts pronounced the final word of their
doom. There were, even up to the last moment, thousands who had hoped
that the Governor would shrink from committing this cold-blooded murder.
But they did not know or had forgotten that years before, in 1919, the
same Fuller had stated in Congress that every "radical, socialist,
I.W.W., or anarchist should be exterminated"; that is, that those who
seek to free labor should be murdered. Could you reasonably expect such
a man to do justice to Sacco and Vanzetti, two avowed Anarchists?

Governor Fuller acted according to his sentiments, in keeping with his
attitude and interests as a member of the ruling class, in a manner
thoroughly class-conscious. Similarly have acted Judge Thayer and all
those involved in the prosecution, no less than the "respectable
gentlemen" of the Commission appointed by Fuller to "review" the case in
secret session. All of them class-conscious, they were interested only
in sustaining capitalistic "justice," so as to preserve the "law and
order" by which they live and profit.

Is there justice for labor within capitalism and government? Can there
be any as long as the present system exists? Decide for yourself.

The cases I have cited are but a few of the numerous struggles of
American labor against capital. The same can be duplicated in every
country. They clearly demonstrate the fact that

1. there is only _class_ justice in the war of capital against labor;
there can be no justice for labor under capitalism.

2. law and government, as well as all other capitalist institutions (the
press, the school, the church, the police, and courts) are always at the
service of capital against labor, whatever the merits of any given case.
Capital and government are twins with one common interest.

3. capital and government will use any and all means to keep the
proletariat in subjection: they will terrorize the working class and
ruthlessly murder its most intelligent and devoted members.

It cannot be otherwise, because there is a life-and-death struggle
between capital and labor.

Every time that capital and its servant, the law, hang such men as the
Chicago Anarchists or electrocute the Saccos and Vanzettis, they
proclaim that they have "freed society from a menace." They want _you_
to believe that the executed were your enemies, enemies of society. They
also want you to believe that their death has settled the matter, that
capitalistic justice has been vindicated, and that "law and order" has
triumphed. But the matter is not settled, and the masters' victory is
only temporary. The struggle goes on, as it has continued all through
the history of man, all through the march of labor and liberty. No
matter is ever settled unless it is settled right. You can't suppress
the natural yearning of the human heart for freedom and well-being,
however much terror and murder governments may resort to. You can't
stifle the demand of the toiler for better conditions. The struggle goes
on and will continue in spite of everything law, government, and capital
may do. But that the workers may not be wasting their energy and efforts
in the wrong direction, they must clearly understand that they can no
more hope for justice from the courts, from law and government, than
they can expect wage slavery to be abolished by their masters.

"What's to be done, then?" you ask. "How shall the workers get justice?"

### Chapter 9: Can The Church Help You?

What's to be done?

How abolish poverty, oppression, and tyranny? How eliminate evil and
injustice, weed out corruption, put an end to crime and murder?

How do away with wage slavery?

How secure liberty and well-being, joy and sunshine for every one?

"Turn to God," commands the church; "only a Christian life can save the
world."

"Let us pass a new law," says the reformer; "man must be compelled to be
good."

"Vote for me!" says the politician; "I'll look after your interests."

"The Trade Union," advises your labor friend; "that's your hope."

"Only Socialism can abolish capitalism and do away with wage slavery,"
insists the Socialist.

"I'm a Bolshevik," announces another; "only the dictatorship of the
proletariat will free the workers."

"We'll remain slaves as long as we have rulers and masters," says the
Anarchist; "only liberty can make us free."

The Protectionist and the Free Trader, the Single Taxer and the Fabian,
the Tolstoyan and the Mutualist, and a score of other social physicians
all prescribe their particular medicine to cure the ills of society, and
you wonder who is right and what the true solution might be.

You cannot make any greater mistake than to accept _blindly_ this or
that advice. You are sure to go wrong.

Only your own reason and experience can decide where the right road
lies. Examine the various proposals and determine with your own common
sense which is the most reasonable and practical. Only then will you
know what is best for yourself, for the worker, and for mankind.

So let us look into the different plans.

Can the church help you?

Maybe you are a Christian, or a member of some other religion -- Jew,
Mormon, Mohammedan, Buddhist, or what not.

It makes no difference. A man should be free to believe whatever he
pleases. The point is not what your religious faith is, but whether
religion can abolish the evils we suffer from.

As I said before, we have only one life to live on this earth, and we
want to make the best of it. What will happen to us after we are dead we
don't know. The chances are we'll never know, and so it's no use
bothering about it.

The question here is of life, not of death. It is the living we are
concerned with; with you and me and others like ourselves. Can the world
be made a better place for us to live in? That's what we want to know.
Can religion do it?

Christianity is about 2,000 years old. Has it abolished any evil? Has it
done away with crime and murder, has it delivered us from poverty and
misery, from despotism and tyranny?

You know that it has _not_. You know that the Christian Church, like all
other churches, has always been on the side of the masters, against the
people. More: the church has caused worse strife and bloodshed than all
the wars of kings and kaisers. Religion has divided mankind into
opposing beliefs, and the most bloody wars have been fought on account
of religious differences. The church has persecuted people for their
opinions, imprisoned and killed them. The Catholic Inquisition
terrorized the whole world, tortured so-called heretics, and burned them
alive. Other churches did the same when they had the power. They always
sought to enslave and exploit the people, to keep them in ignorance and
darkness. They condemned every effort of man to develop his mind, to
advance, to improve his condition. They damned science, and silenced the
men who thirsted for knowledge. Till this very day institutionalized
religion is the Judas of its alleged Savior. It approves of murder and
war, of wage slavery and capitalistic robbery, and always stands for the
"law and order" which crucified the Nazarene.

Consider: Jesus wanted all men to be brothers, to live in peace and good
will. The church upholds inequality, national strife, and war.

Jesus condemned the rich as vipers and oppressors of the poor. The
church bows before the rich and accumulates vast wealth.

The Nazarene was born in a manger and remained a pauper all his life.
His alleged representatives and spokesmen on earth live in palaces.

Jesus preached meekness. The Princes of the Church are haughty and
purse-proud.

"As you do unto the least of my children," Christ said, "you do unto
me." The church supports the capitalist system which enslaves little
children and brings them to an early grave.

"Thou shalt not kill," commanded the Nazarene. The church approves of
executions and war.

Christianity is the greatest hypocrisy on record. Neither Christian
nations nor individuals practice the precepts of Jesus. The early
Christians did -- and they were crucified, burned at the stake, or
thrown to the wild animals in the Roman arena. Later the Christian
Church compromised with those in power; she gained money and influence
by taking the side of the tyrants against the people. She sanctioned
everything which Christ condemned, and by that she won the good will and
support of kings and masters. To-day king, master, and priest are one
trinity. They crucify Jesus daily; they glorify him with lip service and
betray him for silver pieces; they praise his name and kill his spirit.

It is obvious that Christianity is the greatest sham and shame of
humanity, and a complete failure because the Christian appeal is a lie.
The churches do not practice what they preach. Moreover, they preach to
you a gospel which they know you cannot live up to; they call upon you
to become a "better man" without giving you a chance to do so. On the
contrary, the churches uphold the conditions that make you "bad," while
they command you to be "good." They benefit materially by the existing
r√©gime and are financially interested in keeping it up. The Catholic
Church, the Protestant, Anglican, Christian Science, Mormon, and other
denominations are among the wealthiest organizations in the world
to-day. Their possessions represent the workers' blood and flesh. Their
influence is proof of how the people are deluded. The prophets of
religion are dead and forgotten; there remain only the profits.

"But if we would lead a truly Christian life," you remark, "the world
would be different."

You are right, my friend. But can you live a Christian life under
present conditions? Does capitalism allow you to lead such a life? Will
the government permit you to do so? Will even the church give you a
chance to live a Christian life?

Just try it for a single day and see what happens to you.

As you leave your house in the morning, determine to be a Christian that
day and speak only the truth. As you pass the policeman on the corner,
remind him of Christ and His commandments. Tell him to "love his enemy
as himself," and persuade him to throw away his club and gun.

And when you meet the soldier on the street, impress it upon him that
Jesus had said, "Thou shalt not kill."

In your shop or office speak the whole truth to you employer. Tell him
of the Nazarene's warning. "What shall it profit you to gain the whole
earth and lose your soul and its salvation?" Mention that He commanded
us to share our last loaf with the poor; that He said that the rich man
has no more chance of getting into heaven than the camel can pass
through the eye of a needle.

And when you are brought to court for disturbing the peace of the good
Christians, remind the Judge: "Judge not that ye be not judged."

You will be declared a fool or a madman, and they will send you to a
lunatic asylum or to prison.

You can see, then, what rank hypocrisy it is for the sky pilot to preach
the Christian life to you. He knows as well as you that under capitalism
and government there is no more chance to lead a Christian life than for
a camel to "pass through the needle's eye." All those good folks who
pretend to be Christians are just hypocrites who preach what cannot be
practiced, for they don't give you any opportunity to lead a Christian
life. No, not even to lead an ordinarily decent and honest life, without
sham and deceit, without pretense and lying.

It is true that if we could follow the precepts of the Nazarene this
would be a different world to live in. There would then be no murder and
no war; no cheating and lying and profit-making. There would be neither
slave nor master, and we should all live like brothers, in peace and
harmony. There would be neither poor nor rich, neither crime nor prison,
but that would not be what the church wants. It would be what the
Anarchists want, and that we shall discuss further on.

So, my friend, you have nothing to expect from the Christian Church or
from _any_ church. All progress and improvement in the world has been
made _against_ the will and wishes of the church. You may believe in
whatever religion you please, but don't put any hope of social
improvement in the church.

Now let's see whether the reformer or politician can help us.

### Chapter 10: Reformer and Politician

Who is the reformer, and what does he propose?

The reformer wants to "reform and improve." He is not sure what it is
that he really wants to change: sometimes he says that "people are bad,"
and it is them that he wants to "reform"; at other times he means to
"improve" conditions. He does not believe in abolishing an evil
altogether. Doing away with something that is rotten is "too radical"
for him. "For Heaven's sake," he cautions you, "don't be too hasty." He
wants to change things gradually, little by little. Take war, for
example. War is bad, of course, the reformer admits; it is wholesale
murder, a blot upon our civilization. But -- abolish it? Oh, no! He
wants to "reform" it. He wants to "limit armaments," for instance. With
less armaments, he says, we'll kill fewer people. He wants to "humanize"
war, to make slaughter more decent, so to speak.

If you should carry out his ideas in your personal life, you would not
have a rotten tooth that aches pulled out all at once. You would have it
pulled out a little to-day, some more next week for several months or
years, and by then you would be ready to pull it out altogether, so it
should not hurt so much. That is the logic of the reformer. Don't be
"too hasty," don't pull a bad tooth out all at once.

The reformer thinks he can make people better by law. "Pass a new law,"
he says whenever anything goes wrong; "compel men to be good."

He forgets that for hundreds, even for thousands, of years laws have
been made to force people to "be good," yet human nature remains about
what it always was. We have so many laws that even the proverbial
Philadelphia lawyer is lost in their maze. The ordinary person can't
tell any more what is right or wrong according to statute, what is just,
what true or false. A special class of persons -- judges -- decide what
is honest or dishonest, when it is permitted to steal and in what
manner, when fraud is legal and when it is not, when murder is right and
when it is a crime, which uniform entitles you to kill and which does
not. It takes many laws to determine all this, and for centuries
legislators have been busy making laws (at a good salary), and yet
to-day we still need more laws, for all the other laws have failed to
make you "good."

Still the lawmaker continues to compel people to be good. If the
existing laws have not made you better, he says, then we need more laws
and stricter ones. Stiffer sentences will diminish and prevent crime, he
claims, while he appeals in behalf of his "reform" to the very men who
have stolen the earth from the people.

If some one has killed another in a business quarrel, for money or other
advantage, the reformer will not admit that money and money getting
rouse the worst passions and drive men to crime and murder. He will
argue that the willful taking of human life deserves capital punishment,
and he will straight away help the government send armed men to some
foreign country to do wholesale killing there.

The reformer cannot think straight. He does not understand that if men
act badly it is because they think it is to their advantage to do so.
The reformer says that a new law will change all that. He is a born
prohibitionist: he wants to prohibit men from being bad. If a man lost
his job, for instance, feels blue about it, and gets drunk to forget his
troubles, the reformer wouldn't think of helping the man to find work.
No; it is drinking that must be prohibited, he insists. He thinks he has
reformed you by driving you out of the saloon into the cellar where you
stealthily slush on vile moonshine instead of openly taking a drink. In
the same way he wants to reform you in what you eat and do, in what you
think and feel.

He refuses to see that his "reforms" create worse evils than those they
are supposed to suppress; that they cause more deceit, corruption, and
vice. He puts one set of men to spy upon another, and he thinks he has
"raised the standard of morality"; he pretends to have made you "better"
by compelling you to be a hypocrite.

I don't mean to detain you long with the reformer. We are going to meet
him again as the politician. Without wishing to be rough on him, I can
say frankly that when the reformer is honest he is a fool; when he is a
politician he is a knave. In either case, as we shall presently see, he
cannot solve our problem of how to make the world a better place to live
in.

The politician is first cousin to the reformer. "Pass a new law," says
the reformer, "and compel men to be good." "Let _me_ pass the law," says
the politician, "and things will be better."

You can tell the politician by his talk. In most cases he is a grafter
who wants to climb on your shoulders to power. Once there, he forgets
his solemn promises and thinks only of his own ambitions and interests.

When the politician is honest he misleads you no less than the grafter.
Perhaps worse, because you put confidence in him and are the more
disappointed when he fails to do you any good.

The reformer and the politician are both on the wrong track. To try to
change men by law is just like trying to change your face by getting a
new mirror. For men make laws, not laws men. The law merely _reflects_
men as they are, as the mirror reflects your features.

"But the law keeps people from becoming criminals," reformer and
politician assert.

If that is true, if the law really prevents crime, then the more laws
the better. By the time we have passed enough laws there will be no more
crime. Well, why do you smile? Because you know that it is nonsense, You
know that the best the law can do is to _punish_ crime; it cannot
prevent it.

Should the time ever come when the law could read a man's mind and
detect there his _intention_ to commit a crime, then it might prevent
it. But in that case the law would have no policemen to do the
preventing, because they'd be in prison themselves. And if the
administration of law would be honest and impartial, there would be
neither judges nor lawmakers, because they would be keeping the police
company.

But seriously speaking, as things stand, how can the law prevent crime?
It can do so only when the intention to commit a crime has been
announced or has somehow become known. But such cases are very rare. One
does not advertise his criminal plans. The claim then that the law
prevents crime is entirely baseless.

"But the fear of punishment," you object, "does it not prevent crime?"

If that were the case crime would have stopped long ago, for surely the
law has done enough punishing. The whole experience of mankind disproves
the idea that punishment prevents crime. On the contrary, it has been
found that even the most severe punishments do not frighten people away
from crime.

England, as well as other countries, used to punish not only murder but
scores of lesser crimes with death. Yet it did not deter others from
committing the same crimes. People were then executed publicly, by
hanging, by garroting, by the guillotine, in order to inspire greater
fear. Yet even the most fearful punishment failed to prevent or diminish
crime. It was found that public executions had a brutalizing effect upon
the people, and there are cases on record where persons who witnessed an
execution immediately committed the very crime the terrible punishment
of which they had just witnessed. That is why public execution was
abolished: it did more harm than good. Statistics show that there has
been no increase of crime in countries that have entirely done away with
capital punishment.

Of course, there may be some cases in which the fear of punishment
prevents a crime; but on the whole its only effect is to make the
criminal more circumspect, so that his detection is more difficult.

There are, generally speaking, two types of crime: some committed in the
heat of anger and passion, and in such cases one does not stop to
consider the consequences, and so the fear of punishment does not enter
as a factor. The other class of crime is committed with cold
deliberation, mostly professionally, and in such cases fear of
punishment only serves to make the criminal more careful to leave no
traces. It is a well-known trait of the professional criminal that he
thinks himself sufficiently clever to avoid detection, no matter how
often he happens to be caught. He will always blame some particular
circumstance, some accidental cause, or just "bad luck" for having been
arrested. "Next time I'll be more careful," he says; or, "I won't trust
my pal any more." But almost never will you find in him the faintest
thought of giving up crime on account of the punishment which may be
meted out to him. I have known thousands of criminals, yet hardly any of
them ever took possible punishment into consideration.

It is just because fear of punishment has no deterrent effect that crime
continues in spite of all laws and courts, prisons and executions.

But let us suppose that punishment does have a deterring effect. Must
there not be some powerful reasons that cause people to commit crime,
notwithstanding all the dire punishment inflicted?

What are those reasons?

Every prison warden will tell you that whenever there is much
unemployment, hard times, the prisons get filled. This fact is also born
out by investigation into the causes of crime. The greatest percentage
of it is due directly to conditions, to industrial and economic reasons.
That is why the vast majority of the prison population come from the
poor classes. It has been established that poverty and unemployment,
with their attendant misery and despair, are the chief sources of crime.
Is there any law to prevent poverty and unemployment?

Is there any law to abolish these main causes of crime? Are not all the
laws designed to keep up the conditions which produce poverty and
misery, and thus manufacture crime all the time?

Suppose a pipe burst in your house. You put a bucket under the break to
catch the escaping water. You can keep on putting buckets there, but as
long as you do not mend the broken pipe, the leakage will continue, no
matter how much you may swear about it.

Our filled prisons are the buckets. Pass as many laws as you want,
punish the criminals as you may, the leakage will continue until you
repair the broken social pipe.

Does the reformer or politician really want to mend that pipe?

I have said that most crime is of an economic nature. That is, it has to
do with money, with possession, with the desire to get something with
the least effort, to secure a living or wealth by hook or crook.

But that is just the ambition of our whole life, of our entire
civilization. As long as our existence is based on a spirit of this
sort, will it be possible to eradicate crime? As long as society is
built on the principle of grabbing all you can, we must continue to live
that way. Some will try to do it "within the law"; others, more
courageous, reckless, or desperate, will do it outside the law. But the
one and the other will really be doing the same thing, and it's the
thing that is the crime, not the manner in which it is done.

Those who can do it within the law call the others criminals. It's for
the "illegal" criminals -- and for those who might become such -- that
most of the laws are made.

The "illegal" criminals are often caught. Their conviction and
punishment depend mainly on how successful they have been in their
criminal career. The more successful, the less chance of their
conviction, the lighter their punishment. It is not the crime they
committed which will ultimately decide their fate, but their ability to
employ expensive lawyers, their political and social connections, their
money and influence. It will generally be the poor and friendless fellow
who will be made to feel the full weight of the law; he'll get speedy
"justice" and the heaviest penalty. He is not able to take advantage of
the various delays which the law affords to his richer fellow criminal,
for appeals to higher courts are expensive luxuries which the moneyless
criminal cannot indulge in. That is why you almost never see a rich man
behind prison bars; such are occasionally "found guilty," but mighty
seldom punished. Nor will you find many professional criminals in
prison. These know "the ropes"; they have friends and connections;
usually they also have "fall money," for just such occasions, with which
to "oil" their way out of the legal meshes. Those you find in our
prisons and penitentiaries are the poorest of society, accidental
criminals, mostly workingman and farm boys whom poverty and misfortune,
striking and picketing, unemployment and general helplessness have
brought behind the bars.

Are these at least reformed by the law and the penalties they undergo?
Hardly. They come out of prison weakened in body and mind, hardened by
the mistreatment and cruelty they suffered from or witnessed there,
embittered by their fate. They have to go back to the same conditions
which had made them law-breakers in the first place, but now they are
labeled "criminals," are looked down upon, scorned even by former
friends, and persecuted and hounded by the police as men "with a
criminal record." It is not long before most of them are again behind
the bars.

So our social merry-go-round revolves. And all the time the conditions
that had made those unfortunates into criminals continue manufacturing
new crops of them, and "law and order" goes on as before, and the
reformer and the politician keep busy making more laws.

It is a profitable business, this law-making. Have you ever stopped to
consider whether our courts, police, and the whole machinery of
so-called justice really want to abolish crime? Is it to the interest of
the policeman, the detective, the sheriff, the judge, the lawyer, the
prison contractors, wardens, deputies, keepers, and the thousands of
others who live by the "administration of justice" to do away with
crime? Supposing there were no criminals, could those "administrators"
hold their jobs? Could you be taxed for their support? Would they not
have to do some honest work?

Think it over and see if crime is not a more lucrative source of income
to the "dispensers of justice" than to the criminals themselves. Can you
reasonably believe that they really want to abolish crime?

Their "business" is to apprehend and punish the criminal; but it is not
to their interest to do away with crime, for that's their bread and
butter. That is the reason why they will not look into the _causes_ of
crime. They are quite satisfied with things as they are. They are the
staunchest defenders of the existing system, of "justice" and
punishment, the champions of "law and order." They catch and punish
"criminals," but they leave crime and its causes severely alone.

"But what is the law for that?" you demand.

The law is to keep up existing conditions, to preserve "law and order."
More laws are constantly made, all for the same purpose of defending and
sustaining the present order of things. "To reform men," as the reformer
says; "to improve conditions," as the politician assures you.

But the new laws leave men as they are, and conditions remain, on the
whole, the same. Since capitalism and wage slavery began, millions of
laws have been passed, but capitalism and wage slavery still remain. The
truth is, all the laws serve only to make capitalism stronger and
perpetuate the workers' subjection. It is the business of the
politician, the "science of politics," to make you believe that the law
protects you and your interests, while it merely serves to keep up the
system which robs, dupes, and enslaves you in body and mind. All the
institutions of society have this one object in view: to instil in you
respect for law and government, to awe you with its authority and
sanctity, and thus support the social framework which rests upon your
ignorance and your obedience. The whole secret of the thing is that the
masters want to keep their stolen possessions. Law and government are
the _means_ by which they do it.

There is no great mystery about this matter of government and laws. Nor
is there anything sacred or holy about them. Laws are made and unmade;
old laws are abolished, and new laws are passed. It is all the work of
men, human, and therefore fallible and temporary. There is nothing
eternal or unchangeable about them. But whatever laws you make and
however you change them, they always serve _one_ purpose: to compel
people to do certain things, to restrain them from or punish them for
doing other things. That is to say, the only purpose of laws and
government is to rule the people, to keep them from doing what they want
and prescribe to them what certain other people want them to do.

But why must people be kept from doing what they want? And what is it
that they want to do?

If you look into this you will find that people want to live, to satisfy
their needs, to enjoy life. And in this all people are alike, as I have
already pointed out before. But if people are to be prevented from
living and enjoying their lives, then there must be some amongst us who
have an interest in doing that.

So it is in fact: there are indeed people who don't want us to live and
enjoy life, because they have taken the joy out of our lives, and they
don't want to give it back to us. Capitalism has done it, and government
which serves capitalism. To let the people enjoy life would mean to stop
robbing and oppressing them. That is why capitalism needs government,
that's why we are taught to respect the "sanctity of the law." We have
been made to believe that breaking the law is criminal, though
law-breaking and crime are often entirely different things. We have been
made to believe that any act against the law is bad for society, though
it may be bad only for the masters and exploiters. We have been made to
believe that everything which threatens the possessions of the rich is
"evil" and "wrong," and that everything which weakens our chains and
destroys our slavery is "criminal."

In short, there has been developed in the course of time a kind of
"morality" that is useful for the rulers and masters only -- a class
morality; really a slave morality, because it helps to keep us in
slavery. And whoever goes against this slave morality is called "bad,"
"immoral," a criminal, an anarchist.

If I should rob you of all you have and then persuade you that what I
did is good for you and that you should guard my booty against others,
it would be a very clever trick on my part, wouldn't it? It would secure
me in my stolen possessions. Suppose further that I should also manage
to convince you that we must make a rule that no one may touch my stolen
wealth and that I may continue to accumulate more in the same manner,
and that the arrangement is just and to your own best interests. If such
a crazy scheme should be actually carried out, then we'd have the "law
and order" of government and capitalism which we have to-day.

It is clear, of course, that laws would have no force if the people did
not believe in them and did not obey them. So the first thing to do is
to make them believe that laws are necessary and that they are good for
them. And it is still better if you can lead them to think that it is
they themselves who make the laws. Then they will be willing and anxious
to obey them. That's what is called democracy: to get the people to
believe that they are their own rulers and that they themselves pass the
laws of their country. That's the great advantage that a democracy or a
republic has over a monarchy. In olden times the business of ruling and
robbing the people was much harder and more dangerous. The king or
feudal lord had to compel people by force to serve him. He would hire
armed bands to make his subjects submit and pay tribute to him. But that
was expensive and troublesome. A better way was found by "educating" the
populace to believe that they "owe" the king loyalty and faithful
service. Governing then became much easier, but still the people knew
that the king was their lord and commander. A republic, however, is much
safer and more comfortable for the rulers, for there the people imagine
that they themselves are the masters. And no matter how exploited and
oppressed they are, in a "democracy" they think themselves free and
independent.

That is why the average workingman in the United States, for instance,
considers himself a sovereign citizen, though he has no more to say
about the running of his country than the starved peasant in Russia had
under the Tsar. He thinks he is free, while in fact he is only a wage
slave. He believes he enjoys "liberty for the pursuit of happiness,"
while his days, weeks and years, and his whole life, are mortgaged to
the boss in the mine or factory.

The people under a tyranny know they are enslaved and sometimes they
revolt. The people of America are in bondage and don't know it. That is
why there are no revolutions in America.

Modern capitalism is wise. It knows that it prospers best under
"democratic" institutions, with the people electing their own
representatives to the lawmaking bodies, and indirectly casting a vote
even for the president. The capitalist masters do not care how or for
whom you vote, whether it be the Republican or the Democratic ticket.
What difference is it to them? Whoever you elect, he will legislate in
favor of "law and order," to protect things as they are. The main
concern of the powers that be is that the people should continue to
believe in and uphold the existing system. That is why they spend
millions for the schools, colleges, and universities which "educate" you
to believe in capitalism and government. Politics and politicians,
governors and law-makers are only their puppets. They will see to it
that no legislation is passed against their interests. Now and then they
will make a show of fighting certain laws and favoring others, else the
game would lose its interest for you. But whatever laws there be, the
masters will take care that they shouldn't hurt their business, and
their well-paid lawyers know how to turn every law to the benefit of the
Big Interests, as daily experience proves.

A very striking illustration of it is the famous Sherman Anti-Trust Law.
Organized labor spent thousands of dollars and years of energy to pass
that legislation. It was directed against growing capitalist monopoly,
against the powerful combinations of money which ruled legislatures and
courts and lorded it over the workers with an iron hand. After long and
expensive effort the Sherman Law was at last passed, and labor leaders
and politicians were jubilant over the "new epoch" created by that law,
as they enthusiastically assured the toilers.

What has that law accomplished? The trusts have not been hurt by it;
they have remained safe and sound, in fact, they have grown and
multiplied. They dominate the country and treat the workers as abject
slaves. They are more powerful and prosperous than ever before.

But one important thing the Sherman Law did accomplish. Passed
especially in the "interests of labor," it has been turned against the
workers and their unions. It is now used to break up organizations of
labor as being in "prevention of free competition." The labor unions are
now constantly menaced by that anti-trust law, while the capitalistic
trusts go on their way undisturbed.

My friend, do I need to tell you about the bribery and debauchery of
politics, about the corruption of the courts, and the vile
administration of "justice?" Do I need to remind you of the big
Teapot-Dome and oil lease scandals, and the thousand and one lesser ones
of every-day occurence \[sic\]? It would be to insult your intelligence
to dwell upon these universally known things, for they are part and
parcel of all politics, in every country.

The great evil is not that politicians are corrupt and the
administration of law unjust. If that were the only trouble then we
might try, like the reformer, to "purify" politics and to work for a
more "just administration." But it is not that which is the real
trouble. The trouble is not with impure politics, but that the whole
game of politics is rotten. The trouble is not with defects in the
administration of the law, but that law itself is an instrument to
subject and oppress the people.

The whole system of law and government is a machine to keep the workers
enslaved and to rob them of their toil. Every social "reform" whose
realization depends on law and government is already _thereby_ doomed to
failure.

"But the union!" exclaims your friend; "the labor union is the best
defense of the worker."

### Chapter 11: The Trade Union

"Yes, the union is our only hope," you agree; "it makes us strong."

Indeed, there never was a truer word spoken: in union there is strength.
It has taken labor a long time to realize this, and even to-day many
proletarians don't understand it thoroughly.

There was a time when the workers did not know anything about
organization. Later, when they did begin to get together to improve
their condition, laws were passed against it and labor associations were
forbidden.

The masters always opposed the organization of their employees, and the
governments helped them to prevent and suppress unions. It is not so
long ago that England and other countries had very severe laws against
workers' getting organized. The attempt to better their situation by
joint effort was condemned as "conspiracy" and was prohibited. It took
the wage earners a long time to fight out their right of association;
and, mind you, they had to _fight_ for it. Which shows you that the
bosses have never granted anything to the workers except when the latter
fought for it and compelled them to yield. Even to-day many employers
oppose the organization of their employees; they prevent it wherever
they can: they get labor organizers arrested and driven out of the city,
and the law is always on their side and helps them do it. Or they resort
to the trick of forming fake labor bodies, yellow company unions, which
can be relied on to do the bosses' bidding.

It is easy to understand why the masters don't want you to be organized,
why they are afraid of a real labor union. They know very well that a
strong, fighting union can compel higher wages and better conditions,
which means less profit for the plutocrats. That is why they do
everything in their power to stop labor from organizing. When they can't
stop it, they try their best to weaken the union or to corrupt its
leaders, so that the union should not be dangerous to the bosses'
interests.

The masters have found a very effective way to paralyze the strength of
organized labor. They have persuaded the workers that they have the same
interests as the employers; they have made them believe that capital and
labor have "identical interests," and that what is good for the employer
is also good for his employees. They have given it the fine sounding
name of "Harmony between capital and labor." If your interests are the
same as those of your boss, then why should you fight him? That is what
they tell you. The capitalist press, the government, the school, and the
church all preach the same thing: that you live in peace and amity with
your employer. It is good for the industrial magnates to have their
workers believe that they are "partners" in a common business: they will
then work hard and faithfully because it is "to their own interests";
the workers will not think of fighting their masters for better
conditions, but they will be patient and wait until the employer can
"share his prosperity" with them. They will also consider the interests
and well-being of "their" country and they will not "disturb industry"
and the "orderly life of the community" by strikes and stoppage of work.
If you listen to your exploiters and their mouthpieces you will be
"good" and consider only the interests of your masters, of your city and
country -- but no one cares about your interests and those of your
family, the interests of your union and of your fellow workers of the
laboring class. "Don't be selfish," they admonish you, while the boss is
getting rich by your being good and unselfish. And they laugh in their
sleeves and thank the Lord that you are such an idiot.

But if you have followed me till now, then you know that the interests
of capital and labor are not the same. No greater lie was ever invented
than the so-called "identity of interests." You know that labor produces
all the wealth of the world, and capital itself is only the accumulated
products of labor. You know that there can be no capital, no wealth of
any kind, except as the result of labor. So that by right all the wealth
belongs to labor, to the men and women who have created it and keep on
creating it by their brain and brawn; that is, to the industrial,
agrarian, and mental workers of the world; to the whole working class,
in short.

You know also that the capital owned by the masters is stolen property,
stolen products of labor. Capitalist industry is the process of
continuing to appropriate the products of labor for the benefit of the
master class. The masters, in other words, exist and grow rich by
keeping for themselves the products of your toil. Yet you are asked to
believe that you, the workers, have the same interests as your
exploiters and robbers! Can any one but a downright fool be taken in by
such a plain fraud?

It is clear that your interests as a worker are _different_ from the
interests of your capitalistic masters. More than different: they are
entirely opposite; in fact, contrary, antagonistic to each other. The
better wages the boss pays you, the less profit he makes out of you. It
does not require great philosophy to understand that. You can't get away
from it, and no twisting and quibbling can change this solid truth.

The very existence of labor unions is itself proof of this, though most
of the unions and their members don't understand it. If the interests of
labor and capital are the same, why the union? If the boss really
believes that what is good for him, as a boss, is also good for you, his
employee, then he will certainly treat you right; he will pay you the
highest wages possible, so what's the use of having your union? But you
know that you do need the union: you need it to help you _fight_ for
better wages and better conditions of work. To fight whom? Your boss, of
course, your employer, the manufacturer, the capitalist. But if you have
to fight him, then it does not look as if your interests and his are the
same, does it? What becomes of the precious "identity of interests"
then? Or maybe you are fighting your boss for better wages because he is
so foolish that he does not understand his own interests? Maybe he does
not understand that it is good for him to pay you more?

Well, you can see to what nonsense the idea of the "identity of
interests" leads. And still, the average labor union is built on this
"identity of interests." There are some exceptions, of course, such as
the Industrial Workers of the World (I.W.W.), the revolutionary
syndicalist unions, and other class-conscious labor organizations. They
know better. But the ordinary unions, such as those belonging to the
American Federation of Labor in the United States, or the conservative
unions of England, France, Germany, and other countries, all proclaim
the identity of interests between labor and capital. Yet as we have just
seen, their very existence, their strikes and struggles all prove that
the "identity" is a fake and a lie. How does it happen then that the
unions pretend to believe in the identity of interests, while their very
existence and activity deny it?

It is because the average worker does not stop to think for himself. He
relies upon his union leaders and the newspapers to do it for him, and
they see to it that he should not do any straight thinking. For if the
workers should begin to think for themselves, they would soon see
through the whole scheme of graft, deceit, and robbery which is called
government and capitalism, and they would not stand for it. They would
do as the people had done before at various times. As soon as they
understood that they were slaves, they destroyed slavery. Later on, when
they realized that they were serfs, they did away with serfdom. And as
soon as they will realize that they are wage slaves, they will also
abolish wage slavery.

You see, then, that it is to the interests of capital to keep the
workers from understanding that they are wage slaves. The "identity of
interests" swindle is one of the means of doing it.

But it is not only the capitalist who is interested in thus duping the
workers. All those who profit by wage slavery are interested in keeping
up the system, and all of them naturally try to prevent the workers from
understanding the situation.

We have seen before to whose advantage it is to keep things as they are:
to rulers and governments, to the churches, to the middle-classes in
short, to all who live on the toil of the masses. But even the labor
leaders themselves are interested in keeping up wage slavery. Most of
them are too ignorant to see through the fraud, and so they really
believe that capitalism is all right and that we can't do without it.
Yet others, the more intelligent ones, know the truth very well, but as
highly paid and influential union officials they benefit by the
continuation of the capitalist system. They know that if the workers
should see through the whole thing, they would call their leaders to
account for having misled and deceived them. They would revolt against
their slavery and their misleaders -- it might come to a revolution, as
has happened often before in history. But labor leaders don't care for
revolution; they prefer to let well enough alone, for things are well
enough _for them_.

Indeed, the labor misleaders don't favor revolution; they are even
opposed to strikes and try to prevent them whenever they can.

When a strike does break out they will see to it that the men "don't go
too far," and they will do their best to settle the differences with the
employer by "arbitration," in which the workers usually get the worst of
it. They will hold conferences with the bosses and beg for some minor
concessions, and only too often they will compromise the strike to the
disadvantage of the union -- but in any and all cases they will exhort
the workers to "preserve law and order," to keep quiet, and be patient.
They will sit at the same table with the exploiters, be wined and dined
by them, and appeal to the government to "intercede" and settle the
"trouble," but they will be mighty careful never to mention the source
of all the labor troubles, never to touch upon wage slavery itself.

Have you ever seen a single labor leader, of the American Federation of
Labor, for instance, stand up and declare that the whole wage system is
pure robbery and swindle, and demand for the workers the full product of
his toil? Have you ever heard of any "regular" labor leader in any
country do that? I never did, nor has any one else. On the contrary,
when some decent man dares do so, it is the labor leaders who are the
first to declare him a disturber, an "enemy of the workers," a socialist
or an anarchist. They are the first to cry "Crucify him!" and the
unthinking workers unfortunately echo them.

Such men are crucified, because capital and government feel safe in
doing it as long as the people approve of it.

Do you see the point, my friend? Does it look as if your labor leaders
want you to get _next_ to things, to understand that you are a wage
slave? Do they not really serve the interests of the masters?

The union leaders and politicians -- the more intelligent ones -- know
full well what great power labor could wield as the sole producer of the
wealth of the world. But they don't want you to know it. They don't want
you to know that the workers, properly organized and enlightened, could
do away with their slavery and subjection. They tell you instead that
your union is there only to help you get better wages, though they are
aware that you won't improve your condition very much within capitalism;
and that you must always remain a wage slave whatever pay the boss may
give you. They know very well that even when you do succeed, by means of
a strike, in getting a raise, you lose it again in the increased cost of
living, not to speak of the wages you lose while you are out on strike.

Statistics show that most of the important strikes are lost. But let us
suppose that you won your strike and that you were out only a few weeks.
In that time you have lost more in wages than you can gain back working
months at the higher pay.

Take a simple example. Suppose you were earning 40 dollars a week when
you went on strike. Let us assume the best possible result: we'll say
that the strike lasted only 3 weeks and that you gained a five dollar
increase. During your 3 weeks' strike you lost 120 dollars in wages. Now
you get five dollars a week more, and it will take you 24 weeks to get
that lost 120 dollars back again. So, after six months work at the
higher pay you will just stand even. But how about the increased cost of
living in the meantime? Because you are not only a producer, you are
also a consumer. And when you go to buy things you will find that they
are more expensive than before. Higher wages mean increased cost of
living. Because what the employer loses by paying you a greater wage he
gets back again by raising the price of his product.

You can see, then, that the whole idea of higher wages is in reality
very misleading. It makes the worker think that he is actually better
off when he gets more pay, but the fact is -- so far as the whole
working class is concerned -- that whatever the worker gains by higher
wages he loses as a consumer, and in the long run the situation remains
the same. At the end of a year of "higher wages" the worker has no more
than after a year of "lower wages." Sometimes he is even worse off,
because the cost of living increases much faster than wages.

That is the general rule. Of course there are particular factors that
affect wages as well as the cost of living, such as scarcity of
materials or of labor. But we need not go into special situations, into
cases of industrial or financial crisis, or times of unusual prosperity.
What concerns us is the regular situation, the _normal_ condition of the
workingman. And the normal condition is that he always remains a
workingman, a wage slave, earning just enough to enable him to live and
to continue to work for his boss. You will find exceptions now and then,
as of a worker inheriting or otherwise getting hold of some money, which
enables him to go into business, or inventing something that may bring
him wealth. But such cases are exceptions and they do not alter _your_
condition; that is, the condition of the average toiler, of the millions
of workingman all over the world.

So far as those millions are concerned, and so far as you, as one of
them, are concerned, you remain a wage slave, whatever your work or your
pay, and there is no chance for you to be anything else under the system
of capitalism.

Now, then, you might justly ask, "What is the use of the union? What are
the union leaders doing about it?"

The truth is that your union leaders do nothing about it. On the
contrary, they do everything they can to keep you a wage slave. They do
it by making you believe that capitalism is all right and by having you
support the existing system with its government and "law and order."
They fool you by telling you that it can't be otherwise, just as the
boss the school, the church, and the government do. In fact, your labor
leader is doing the same work for capitalism that your political leader
is doing for the government: both support and get you to support the
present system of injustice and exploitation.

"But the union," you say, "why doesn't the union change things?"

The union _could_ change things. But what is the union? The union is
just you and the other fellow and more of them -- the membership and the
officials. You realize now that the officials, the labor leaders, are
not interested in changing things. Then it is up to the membership to do
it, isn't it?

That's it. But if the membership -- the workers in general -- don't see
what it is all about, then the union can't do anything. It means,
therefore, that it is necessary to get the membership to understand the
real situation.

This should be the true purpose of the labor union. It should be the
union's business to enlighten its members about their condition, to show
them why and how they are robbed and exploited, and find ways and means
of doing away with it.

That would be fulfilling the union's true purpose of protecting the
interests of the worker. The abolition of the capitalistic order of
things with its government and law would be the only real defense of
labor's interests. And while the union would be preparing for that, it
would also be looking after the immediate needs of labor, the
improvement of present conditions, so far as that is possible within
capitalism.

But the ordinary, conservative union stands, as we have seen, for
capitalism and for everything connected with it. It takes it for granted
that you are a worker and that you are going to stay one, and that
things must remain as they are. It asserts that all the union can do is
to help you get a little better wages, cut down your hours of work, and
improve the conditions under which you toil. It considers the employer a
business partner, as it were, and it makes contracts with him. But it
never questions why one of the partners -- the boss -- gets rich from
that kind of contract, while the other partner, the worker, always
remains poor, labors hard, and dies a wage slave. It doesn't seem to be
an equal partnership, somehow. It looks more like a confidence game,
doesn't it?

Well, it is. It is a game in which one side does all the pulling of the
chestnuts out of the fire, while the other side takes possession of
them. A very unequal partnership, and all the striking of the workers is
merely to beg or compel the capitalistic partner to give up a few
chestnuts out of his big heap. A skin game, for all that, even when the
worker succeeds in getting a few extra nuts.

Yet they speak to you of your dignity, of the "dignity of labor." Can
you think of any greater insult? You slave for the masters all your
life, you serve them and keep them in comfort and luxury, you let them
lord it over you, and in their hearts they laugh at you and despise you
for your stupidity -- and then they talk to you of your "dignity!"

From pulpit and platform, in the school and lecture room, every labor
leader and politician, every exploiter and grafter extols the "dignity
of labor," while himself all the time sitting comfortably on your back.
Don't you see how they are playing you for a sucker?

What is the union doing about it? What are your labor leaders doing for
the fat salary they make you pay them? They are busy "organizing" you,
they are busy telling you what a fine fellow you are; how big and strong
your union is, and how much your officials are doing for you. But what
are they doing? Their time is taken up with petty matters of procedure,
with factional fights, with questions of jurisdiction, with elections of
officers, with conferences and conventions. You pay for it all, of
course, and that is why your officials are always in favor of a big
union treasury, but what have _you_ got from it? You keep on working in
the factory or mill and paying your dues, and your labor leader cares
blessed little how hard you toil or how you live, and you have to make a
big racket at your union meeting to compel attention to _your_ needs and
_your_ complaints.

When the question of a strike is taken up you will notice, as I have
mentioned before, that the leaders generally oppose it -- for they also
like the boss and the ruler, want "peace and quiet" instead of the
discomforts involved in a fight. Whenever they can, the union leaders
will dissuade you from striking, and sometimes even directly prevent and
forbid it. They will outlaw your organization if you go on strike
without their consent. But if the pressure is too strong for them to
resist they will graciously "authorize" the strike. Just imagine -- you
work hard and from your scanty earnings you support the union officials,
who should serve you, yet you have to get _their_ permission to improve
your condition! It's because you have made them the bosses of your
organization, just as you have made the government your master instead
of your servant -- or as you permit the policeman, whom you pay with
your taxes, to order you about instead of you giving him orders.

Did you ever ask yourself how it happens that when you are out on strike
(and at all other times as well) the law and the whole machinery of
government is always on the side of the boss? Why, the strikers number
thousands while the boss is only one, and they and he are supposed to be
citizens of equal rights -- yet, strange to say, it's the boss who
always has the government at his service. He can get the courts to issue
an injunction against your "interfering" with "his" business, he can
have the police club you off the picket line, he can have you arrested
and jailed. Did you ever hear of a mayor, chief of police, or governor
order out the police or militia to protect _your_ interests in a strike?
Queer, isn't it? Again, the boss can get plenty of scabs and blacklegs,
under police protection, to help break your strike, because you have
been working so many hours that there is always an army of unemployed on
hand ready to take your place. Generally you lose your strike because
your labor leaders did not permit you to organize in the right way.

I have seen, for instance, bricklayers on a New York skyscraper lay down
their tools, while the carpenters and iron workers on the same job
remained at work. The strike did not concern them, their unions said,
because they belonged to another trade; or they could not join the
strikers because that would be breaking the contract their organizations
had made with the boss. So they kept at work on the building where their
brother union men had struck. That is, they were actually scabbing and
helping to break the strike of the bricklayers. Because, forsooth, they
belonged to another craft, to a different trade! As if the struggle of
labor against capital were a matter of craft and not the common cause of
the whole working class!

Another example: the coal miners of Pennsylvania are on strike, and the
coal miners of Virginia are taxed to help the strikers with money. The
Virginia miners remain at work because they are "bound by contract."
They keep on mining coal, so that the coal magnates can supply the
market and lose nothing by the strike of the Pennsylvania miners.
Sometimes they even gain by making the strike an excuse for raising the
price of coal. Can you wonder that the Pennsylvania miners lose the
strike, since their own fellow miners scab on them? But if the workers
understood their true interests if they would be organized not by craft
or trade but by industries, so that the whole industry -- and if
necessary the whole working class -- could strike as one man, would any
strike be lost?

We shall return to this subject. Just now I want to point out to you
that your union, as at present organized, and your union officials are
not built for effectively fighting capitalism. Not built even for
successfully conducting strikes. They cannot materially improve your
condition.

They serve only to keep the workers divided into different and often
opposing organizations; they train them to believe that capitalism is
all right; they paralyze their initiative and ability to think and act
in a class conscious manner. That is why the labor leaders and the
conservative unions are the strongest bulwark of existing institutions.
They are the backbone of capitalism and of government, the best support
of "law and order," and the reason why you remain in wage slavery.

"But we ourselves choose our union officials," you object; "if the
present ones are no good, we can elect others."

Of course, you can elect new leaders, but does it make any difference
whether this or that man is your leader, whether it is Gompers or Green,
Jouhaux in France, or Thomas in England, as long as your union sticks to
the same foolish ideas and false methods, believes in capitalism and
supports the "harmony of interests," divides the workers and reduces
their strength by craft organization, makes contracts with the boss
which bind the membership and keep them scabbing on their fellows, and
in many other ways upholds the r√©gime of your bondage?

"Then the union is no good?" you demand.

In union there is strength, but it has to be a real union, a true
organization of labor, because the workers everywhere have the _same_
interests no matter what work they do or to what particular craft they
belong. Such a union would be based on the mutual interests and
solidarity of labor throughout the world. It would be conscious of its
tremendous power as the creator of all wealth.

"Power!" you object. "You said we're slaves! What power can slaves
have?"

Let us see about it, then.

### Chapter 12: Whose Is The Power?

People talk about the greatness of their country, about the strength of
the government and the power of the capitalist class. Let us see what
that power really consists of, wherein it lies, and who actually has it.

What is the government of a country? It is the King with his ministers,
or the President with his cabinet, the Parliament or the Congress, and
the officials of the various State and Federal departments. Altogether a
small number of persons as compared with the entire population.

Now, when is that handful of men, called government, strong and in what
does its strength consist?

It is strong when the people are with it. Then they supply the
government with money, with an army and navy, obey it, and enable it to
function. In other words, the strength of a government depends entirely
on the support it receives.

But can any government exist if the people are actively opposed to it?
Could even the strongest government carry out any undertaking without
the aid of the populace, without the help of the masses, the workers of
the country?

But can any government exist if the people are actively opposed to it?
Could even the strongest government carry out any undertaking without
the aid of the populace, without the help of the masses, the workers of
the country?

It is clear, of course, that no government can accomplish anything
alone. It can do only what the people approve of or at least permit to
be done.

Take the great World War, for instance. The American financiers wanted
the United States to get into it, because they knew that they would rake
in tremendous profits, as they actually did. But labor had nothing to
gain from the war, for how can the toilers benefit by the slaughter of
their fellows in some other land? The masses of America were not in
favor of mixing in the European inbroglio \[sic\]. As previously
mentioned, they had elected Woodrow Wilson President on a "keep us out
of war" platform. Had the American people persisted in this
determination, could the government have gotten us into the carnage?

How was it managed, then, that the people of the United States were
induced to go to war when they had voted against it by electing Wilson?
I have already explained in a previous chapter. Those interested in
entering the war started a great propaganda in favor of it. It was
carried on in the press, in the schools and pulpit; by preparedness
parades, patriotic spellbinders, and shouting for "democracy" and "war
to end war." It was a heinous way of fooling the people into believing
that the war was for some "ideal" instead of being just a capitalist war
for profits, as all modern wars are. Millions of dollars were spent on
that propaganda, the money of the people, of course, for in the end the
people pay for everything. An artificial enthusiasm was worked up, with
all kinds of promises to the workers of the wonderful things that would
result for them from the war. It was the greatest fraud and humbug, but
the people of the United States fell for it, and they went to war,
though not voluntarily, but by conscription.

And the spokesmen of the workers, the labor leaders? As usual, they
proved the best "patriots," calling upon their union members to go and
get themselves killed, for the greater glory of Mammon. What did the
late Samuel Gompers, then President of the American Federation of Labor,
do? He became the right-hand man of President Wilson, his chief
recruiting lieutenant. He and his union officials turned sergeants of
capital in rounding up labor for the slaughter. The labor leaders of the
other countries did the same.

Every one knows that the "war to end war" really ended nothing. On the
contrary, it has caused more political complications than there have
ever been before in Europe, and has prepared the field for a new and
more terrible war than the last one. But that question does not belong
here. I have referred to the matter merely to show you that without
Gompers and the other labor leaders, without the consent and support of
the toiling masses, the government of the United States would have been
entirely unable to carry out the wishes of the lords of finance,
industry, and commerce.

Or consider the case of Sacco and Vanzetti. Could Massachusetts have
executed them if the organized workers of America had been against it,
if they had taken action to prevent it? Suppose that Massachusetts labor
had refused to support the State Government in its murderous intention:
suppose the workers had boycotted the Governor and his agents, stopped
supplying them with food, cut off their means of communication, and shut
off the electric current in Boston and Charleston prison. The government
would have been powerless to function.

If you look at this matter with clear, unprejudiced eyes, you will
realize that it is not the people who are dependent on the government,
as is generally believed, but just the other way about.

When the people withhold their aid from the government, when they refuse
obedience and pay no taxes, what happens? The government cannot support
its officials, cannot pay its police, cannot feed its army and navy. It
remains without funds, without means to carry out its orders. It is
paralyzed. The handful of persons calling themselves the government
become helpless -- they lose their power and authority. If they can
gather enough men to aid them, they may try to fight the people. If they
cannot, or lose the fight, they have to give it up. Their "governing" is
at an end.

That is to say, the power of even the strongest government rests
entirely in the people, in their willing support and obedience. It
follows that government _in itself_ has no power at all. The moment the
people refuse to bow to its authority, the government ceases to exist.

Now, what strength has capitalism? Does the power of the capitalists
rest in themselves, or where does it come from?

It is evident that their strength lies in their capital, in their
wealth. They own the industries, the shops, factories, and land. But
those possessions would do them no good but for the willingness of the
people to work for them and pay tribute to them. Suppose the workers
should say to the capitalists: "We are tired of making profits for you.
We won't slave for you any more. You didn't create the land, you didn't
build the factories, nor the mills or shops. _We_ built them and from
now on we will use them to work in, and what we produce will not be
yours but will belong to the people. You will get nothing, and we won't
even give you any food for your money. You'll be just like ourselves,
and you will work like the rest of us."

What would happen? Why, the capitalists would appeal to the government
for aid. They would demand protection for their interests and
possessions. But if the people refuse to recognize the authority of the
government, the latter itself would be helpless.

You might say that is revolution. Maybe it is. But whatever you call it,
it would amount to this: the government and the capitalists -- the
political and financial rulers -- would find out that all their boasted
power and strength disappear when the people refuse to acknowledge them
as masters, refuse to let them lord it over them.

Can this happen, you wonder. Well, it has happened many times before,
and not so very long ago again in Russia, in Germany, in Austria. In
Germany that mighty war lord, the Kaiser, had to flee for his life,
because the masses had decided they did not want him any more. In
Austria the monarchy was driven out because the people got tired of its
tyranny and corruption. In Russia the most powerful Tsar was glad to
give up his throne to save his head, and failed even in that. In his own
capital he could not find a single regiment to protect him, and all his
great authority went up in smoke when the populace refused to bow to it.
Just so the capitalists of Russia were made helpless when the people
stopped working for them and took the land, the factories, the mines and
mills for themselves. All the money and "power" of the bourgeoisie in
Russia could not get them a pound of bread when the masses declined to
supply it unless they did honest work.

What does it all prove?

It proves that so-called political, industrial, and financial power, all
the authority of government and capitalism is _really_ in the hands of
the people. It proves that _only_ the people, the masses, have power.

This power, the people's power, is _actual_: it cannot be taken away, as
the power of the ruler, of the politician, or of the capitalist can be.
It cannot be taken away because it does not consist in possessions but
in ability. It is the ability to create, to produce; the power that
feeds and clothes the world, that gives us life, health and comfort, joy
and pleasure.

How great this power is you will realize when you ask yourself:

Would life be possible at all if the workers did not toil? Would the
cities not starve if the farmers failed to supply them food?

Could the railroads run if the railroad men suspended work? Could any
factory, shop, or mill continue operations but for the coal miners?

Could trade or commerce go on if the transport workers went on strike?

Would the theaters and movies, your office and house have light if the
electricians would not supply the current?

Truly has the poet spoken:

"All the wheels stand still  
When your strong arms so will."

That is the productive, industrial power of labor.

It does not depend on any politics, nor on king, president, parliament,
or congress. It depends neither on the police, nor on the army and navy
-- for these only consume and destroy, they create nothing. Nor does it
depend on laws and rules, on legislators or courts, on politician or
plutocrat. It resides entirely and exclusively in the ability of the
workers in factory and field, in the brain and brawn of the industrial
and agricultural proletariat to labor, to create, to produce.

It is the _productive_ power of the workers -- of the man with the plow
and with the hammer, of the man of mind and muscle, of the masses, of
the entire _working class_.

It follows, therefore, that the working class, in every country, is the
most important part of the population. In fact, it is the only vital
part. The rest of the people help in the social life, but if need be we
could do without them, while we could not live even a single day without
the man of labor. His is the all-important _economic power_.

The strength of government and capital is external, _outside_ of
themselves.

The strength of labor is _not_ external. It lies _in_ itself, in its
ability to work and create. It is the only _real_ power.

Yet labor is held lowest in the social scale.

Is it not a topsy-turvy world, this world of capitalism and government?
The workers, who as a class are the most essential part of society, who
alone have real power, are powerless under present conditions. They are
the poorest class, the least influential and least respected. They are
looked down upon, the victims of every kind of oppression and
exploitation, the least appreciated and least honored. They live
wretchedly in ugly and unhealthy tenements, the death rate is greatest
among them, the prisons are filled with them, the gallows and electric
chair are for them.

This is the reward of labor in our society of government and capitalism;
that is what you get from the "law and order" system.

Does such law and order deserve to live? Should such a social system be
permitted to continue? Should it not be changed for something else,
something better, and is not the worker interested more than any one
else in seeing to it? Should not his own organization, built especially
for his interests -- _the union_ -- help him do it?

How?

### Chapter 13: Socialism

When you ask this question, the Socialist tells you:

"Vote the Socialist ticket. Elect our party. We'll abolish capitalism
and establish Socialism."

What does the Socialist want, and how does he propose to get it?

There are many varieties of Socialists. There are Social Democrats,
Fabian Socialists, National Socialists, Christian Socialists, and other
labels. Generally speaking, they all believe in the abolition of poverty
and unjust social conditions. But they disagree very much as to what
would be "just" conditions and, still more, how to bring them about.

These days even mere attempts to improve capitalism are often called
"Socialism," while in reality they are only reforms. But such reforms
cannot be considered socialistic because true Socialism does not mean to
"improve" capitalism but to abolish it altogether. Socialism teaches
that the conditions of labor cannot be essentially bettered under
capitalism; on the contrary, it shows that the lot of the worker must
steadily get worse with the advancing development of industrialism, so
that efforts to "reform" and "improve" capitalism are directly opposed
to Socialism and only delay its realization.

We have seen in preceding chapters that the enslavement of the workers,
inequality, injustice, and other social evils are the result of monopoly
and exploitation, and that the system is upheld by the political machine
called government. It would therefore serve no purpose to discuss those
schools of Socialism (improperly so called) that do not stand for the
abolition of capitalism and wage slavery. Just as useless it would be
for us to go into allegedly socialistic proposals such as "juster
distribution of wealth," "equalization of income," "single tax," or
other similar plans. These are not Socialism; they are only reforms.
Mere parlor Socialism, such as Fabianism, for example, is also of no
vital interest to the masses.

Let us therefore examine that school of Socialism which treats of
capitalism and the wage system fundamentally, which deals with the
worker, with the disinherited, and which is known as the Social
Democratic movement.[^02] It considers all other forms of Socialism
impractical and utopian; it calls itself the only sound and scientific
theory of true Socialism as formulated by Karl Marx, the author of
_Capital_, which is the gospel and guide of all Social Democrats.

Now, then, what do the Socialist followers of Karl Marx -- known as
Marxian Socialists, and whom, for the sake of brevity, we'll call simply
Socialists -- propose?

They say that the workers can never become free and secure well-being
unless they abolish capitalism. The sources of production and the means
of distribution must be taken out of private hands, they teach. That is
to say, the land, machinery, mills, factories, mines, railroads and
other public utilities should not be owned privately, because such
ownership enslaves the workers as well as mankind in general. Private
possession of the things without which humanity cannot exist must
therefore cease. The means of production and distribution should become
public property. Opportunity for free use would do away with monopoly,
with interest and profit, with exploitation and wage slavery. Social
inequality and injustice would be eliminated, the classes would be
abolished, and all men would become free and equal.

These views of Socialism are also in full accord with the ideas of most
Anarchists.

The present owners -- Socialism further teaches -- will not give up
their possessions without a struggle. All history and past experience
prove that. The privileged classes have always held onto their
advantages, always opposed every attempt to weaken their power over the
masses. Even to-day they fight ruthlessly every effort of labor for
betterment. It is therefore certain that in the future, as in the past,
the plutocracy will resist if you try to deprive them of their
monopolies, special rights, and privileges. That resistance will bring
about a bitter struggle, a revolution.

True socialism is therefore _radical_ and _revolutionary_. Radical,
because it goes to the very root of the social trouble (_radix_ meaning
root in Latin); it does not believe in reforms and makeshifts; it wants
to change things from the very bottom. Revolutionary, not because it
wants bloodshed, but because it clearly foresees that revolution is
inevitable; it knows that capitalism cannot be changed to Socialism
without a violent struggle between the possessing classes and the
dispossessed masses.

"But if a revolution," you ask, "then why do the Socialists want me to
vote them into office? Is the revolution to be fought there?"

Your question is to the point. If capitalism is to abolished by
revolution, what do the Socialists seek office for, why do they try to
get into the government?

Here is just where the great contradiction of Marxian Socialism comes
in, a fundamental contradiction that has been fatal to the Socialist
movement in every country, and that has made it ineffectual and
powerless to be of any use to the working class.

It is very necessary to realize that contradiction clearly in order to
understand why Socialism has failed, why the Socialists have gotten into
a blind alley and can't lead the workers to emancipation.

What is that contradiction? It is this: Marx taught that "revolution is
the midwife of capitalism pregnant with a new society"; that is, that
capitalism will not be changed to Socialism except by revolution. But in
his _Communist Manifesto_, on the other hand, Marx insists that the
proletariat must get hold of the political machinery, of the government,
in order to conquer the bourgeoisie. The working class -- he teaches --
must grasp the reins of the State, by means of the Socialist parties,
and use the political power to usher in Socialism.

This contradiction has caused the greatest confusion among Socialists
and has split the movement into many factions. The majority of them, the
regular Socialist parties in every country, now stand for the conquest
of political power, for the establishment of a Socialist government
whose business it will be to abolish capitalism and bring about
Socialism.

Judge for yourself if such a thing is possible. In the first place,
Socialists themselves admit that the possessing classes will not give up
their wealth and privileges without a bitter fight and that it will
result in revolution.

Again, is the thing at all practical? Take the United States, for
instance. For over fifty years the Socialists have been trying to elect
party members to Congress with the result that after half a century of
political work they have now just one member in the House of
Representatives in Washington. How many centuries will it take at that
rate (and the rate is declining rather than growing) to get a Socialist
majority in Congress?

But even suppose that the Socialists could some day secure that
majority. Will they then be able to change capitalism to Socialism? It
would require amending and altering the Constitution of the United
States, as well as in the individual States, for which a two-thirds vote
would be necessary. Just stop and consider: the American plutocrats, the
trusts, the bourgeoisie, and all the other forces that benefit by
capitalism; would they just sit quietly and permit the changing of the
Constitution in such a manner as to deprive them of their wealth and
privileges? Can you believe that? Do you remember what Jay Gould said
when he was accused of getting his millions illegally and in defiance of
the Constitution? "To hell with the Constitution!" he replied. And so
every plutocrat feels, even if he is not as frank as Gould. Constitution
or no constitution, the capitalists would fight to the death for their
wealth and privileges. And that is just what is meant by revolution. You
can judge for yourself whether capitalism can be abolished by electing
Socialists to office or whether Socialism can be voted in by the ballot.
It is not hard to guess who'll win a fight between ballots and bullets.

In former days the Socialists realized this very well. Then they claimed
that they meant to use politics only for the purpose of propaganda. It
was in the days when Socialist agitation was forbidden, particularly in
Germany. "If you elect us to the Reichstag" (the German parliament), the
Socialists told the workers then, "we'll be able to preach Socialism
there and educate the people to it." There was some reason in that,
because the laws which prohibited Socialist speeches did not apply to
the Reichstag. So the Socialists favored political activity and took
part in elections in order to have an opportunity to advocate Socialism.

It may seem a harmless thing, but it proved the undoing of Socialism.
Because nothing is truer than that the means you use to attain your
object soon themselves become your object. So money, for example, which
is only a means to existence, has itself become the aim of our lives.
Similarly with government. The "elder" chosen by the primitive community
to attend to some village business becomes the master, the ruler. Just
so it happened with the Socialists.

Little by little they changed their attitude. Instead of electioneering
being merely an educational method, it gradually became their only aim
to secure political office, to get elected to legislative bodies and
other government positions. The change naturally led the Socialists to
tone down their revolutionary ardor; it compelled them to soften their
criticism of capitalism and government in order to avoid persecution and
secure more votes. To-day the main stress of Socialist propaganda is not
laid any more on the educational value of politics but on the actual
election of Socialists to office.

The Socialist parties do not speak of revolution any more. They claim
now that when they get a majority in Congress or Parliament they will
legislate Socialism into being: they will legally and peacefully abolish
capitalism. In other words, they have ceased to be revolutionists; they
have become reformers who want to change things by law.

Let us see, then, how they have been doing it during the past several
decades.

In almost every European country the Socialists have secured great
political power. Some countries now have Socialist governments, in
others the Socialist parties have a majority; in others again Socialists
occupy the highest positions in the State, such as cabinet offices, even
those of Prime Ministers. Let us examine what they have accomplished for
Socialism and what they are doing for the workers.

In Germany, the mother of the Socialist movement, the Social Democratic
Party holds numerous government offices; its members are in the
municipal and national legislative bodies, in the judiciary, and in the
Cabinet. Two German Presidents, Haase and Ebert, were Socialists. The
present Reichskanzler (Chancellor), Dr. Herman M√ºller, is a Socialist.
Herr Loebe, President of the Reichstag, is also a member of the
Socialist Party. Scheidemann, Noske, and scores of others in the highest
positions in the government, in the army and navy, are all leaders of
the powerful German Social Democratic Party. What have they done for the
proletariat whose cause the Party is supposed to champion? Have they
brought about Socialism? Have they abolished wage slavery? Have they
made the least attempt toward those objects?

The uprising of the workers in Germany, in 1918, forced the Kaiser to
flee the country, and the reign of the Hohenzollern was at an end. The
people put their trust in the Social Democrats and voted them into
power. But once secure in the government, the Socialists turned against
the masses. They combined with the German bourgeoisie and the military
clique, and themselves became the bulwark of capitalism and militarism.
They not only disarmed the people and suppressed the toilers but they
even shot and imprisoned every Socialist who dared protest against their
treachery. Noske, as Socialist chief of the army during the Revolution,
ordered his soldiers out against the workers and massacred them
wholesale -- the very proletarians who had voted him into power, his own
brother Socialists. At his hands perished Karl Liebknecht and Rosa
Luxemburg, two of the most devoted and loyal revolutionists,
cold-bloodedly murdered in Berlin on January 16, 1919, by army officers,
with the secret connivance of the Socialist government. The Anarchist
poet and thinker, Gustav Landauer, and scores of the best friends of
labor shared the same fate all over Germany.

Haase, Ebert, Scheidemann, Noske, and their Socialist lieutenants did
not permit the Revolution to accomplish anything vital. The moment they
got into power they used it to crush rebellious labor. The open and
stealthy murder of the truly revolutionary elements was but one of the
means used by the Socialist government to subdue the Revolution. Far
from introducing any changes for the benefit of the workers, the
Socialist Party became the most zealous defender of capitalism,
preserving all the prerogatives and benefits of the aristocracy and
master class. That is why the German Revolution accomplished nothing
except to drive out the Kaiser. The nobility remained in possession of
all its titles, holdings, special rights, and privileges; the military
caste retained the power it had under the monarchy; the bourgeoisie has
been strengthened, and the financial kings and industrial magnates lord
it over the German toiler to-day with even greater arbitrariness than
before. The Socialist Party of Germany, with many million votes behind
it, has _succeeded_ -- in getting into office. The workers slave and
suffer as before.

The same picture you find in the other countries. In France the
Socialist Party is strongly represented in the government. The Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Aristide Briand, who had also held the post of Prime
Minister, was formerly one of the greatest lights of the Party in
France. To-day he is the strongest champion of capitalism and
militarism. Many of his former fellow-Socialists are his colleagues in
the government, and many more present-day Socialists are in the French
Parliament and other important offices. What are they doing for
Socialism? What are they doing for the workers?

They are helping to defend and "stabilize" the capitalistic r√©gime of
France; they are busy passing laws increasing the taxes so that the high
government officials may get better salaries; they are engaged in
collecting the war indemnity from Germany, whose workers, just as their
French brothers, have to bleed for it. They are working hard to help
"educate" France, and particularly her school children, to hate the
German people; they are aiding to build more warships and military
airplanes for the next war which they are themselves preparing by
cultivating the spirit of jingoism and vengeance against their neighbor
countries. The new law mobilizing every adult man and woman of France in
case of war was introduced by the prominent Socialist, Paul Boncour, and
passed with the aid of the Socialist members of the Chamber of Deputies.

In Austria and Belgium, in Sweden and Norway, in Holland and Denmark, in
Czecho-Slovakia, and in most other European lands the Socialists have
risen to power. In some countries entirely so, in others partly. And
everywhere, without a single exception, they have followed the same
course, everywhere they have forsworn their ideals, have duped the
masses, and turned their political elevation to their own profit and
glory.

"These men who rose to power on the backs of labor and then betrayed the
workers are scoundrels," I hear you say in just indignation. True, but
that is not all. There is a deeper reason for this constant and regular
betrayal, a greater and more significant cause for this almost universal
phenomenon. Socialists are not essentially different from other men.
They are human, just as you and I. And no man turns scoundrel or traitor
over night.

It is _power_ which corrupts. The consciousness that you possess power
is itself the worst poison that corrodes the finest metal of man. The
filth and contamination of politics everywhere sufficiently prove that.
Moreover, even with the best intentions Socialists in legislative bodies
or in government positions find themselves entirely powerless to
accomplish anything of a socialistic nature, anything of benefit to the
workers. For politics is not a means to better the conditions of labor.
It never was and never can be.

The demoralization and vitiation take place little by little, so
gradually that one hardly notices it himself. Just visualize for a
moment the condition of a Socialist elected to Congress, for instance.
He is all alone, as against several hundred men of other political
parties. He senses their opposition to his radical ideas, and he finds
himself in a strange and unfriendly atmosphere. But he is there and he
must participate in the business that is being transacted. Most of that
business -- the bills brought in, the laws proposed -- is entirely
foreign to him. It has no bearing whatever on the things the Socialist
believes in, no connection with the interests of the working class
voters who elected him. It is just the routine of legislation. It is
only when a bill of some bearing upon labor or on the industrial and
economic situation comes up, that our Socialist can take part in the
proceedings. He does, and he is ignored or laughed at for his
impractical ideas on the matter. For they are indeed impractical. Even
at best, when the proposed law is not specially designed to grant new
privileges to monopoly, it deals with matters involved in capitalist
business, with some commercial treaty or agreement between one
government and another. But he, the Socialist, was elected on a
Socialist ticket, and it is his business to abolish the capitalistic
government, to do away with the system of commerce and profit
altogether, so how can he speak "practically" on the submitted bills? Of
course he becomes a butt of ridicule to his colleagues, and soon he
begins to see how stupid and useless his presence is in the halls of
legislation. That is why some of the best men of the Socialist Party in
Germany turned against political action, as did John Most, for instance.
But there are few persons of such honesty and courage. As a rule the
Socialist remains in his position, and every day he is compelled to
realize more and more what a senseless r√¥le he is playing. He comes to
feel that he must find some way to take a serious part in the work,
express sound opinions in the discussions and become a real factor in
the proceedings. This is imperative in order to preserve his own
dignity, to compel the respect of his colleagues, and also to show to
his constituents that they did not elect a mere dummy.

So he begins to acquaint himself with the routine. He studies river
dredging and coast improvement, reads up on appropriations, examines the
hundred and one bills which come up for consideration, and when he
occasionally gets the floor -- which is not very often -- he tries to
explain the proposed legislation from the Socialist standpoint, as he is
in duty bound to do. He "makes a Socialist speech." He dwells on the
suffering of the workers and the crimes of wage slavery; he informs his
colleagues that capitalism is an evil, that the rich must be abolished
and the whole system done away with. He finishes his peroration and sits
down. The politicians exchange glances, smile and joke, and the assembly
goes over to the business in hand.

Our Socialist perceives that he is regarded as a laughing stock. His
colleagues are getting tired of his "hot air," and he finds more and
more difficulty in securing the floor. He is often called to order and
told he must speak to the point, but he knows that neither by his talk
nor by his vote can he influence the proceedings in the slightest
degree. His speeches don't even reach the public; they are buried in the
_Congressional Record_ which no one reads, and he is painfully aware of
being a solitary and unheeded voice in the wilderness of political
machinations.

He appeals to the voters to elect more comrades to the legislative
bodies. A lone Socialist cannot accomplish anything, he tells them.
Years pass, and at last the Socialist Party succeeds in having a number
of its members elected. Each of them goes through the same experience as
their first colleague, but now they quickly come to the conclusion that
preaching Socialist doctrines to the politicians is worse than useless.
They decide to participate in the legislation. They must show that they
are not just "spouting revolution" but that they are practical men,
statesmen, that they are doing something for their constituency, looking
after its interests.

In this manner the situation compels them to take a "practical" part in
the proceedings, to "talk business," to fall in line with the matters
actually dealt with in the legislative body. Full well they know that
these things have no relation to Socialism or to the abolition of
capitalism. On the contrary, all this law-making and political mummery
only strengthens the hold of the masters upon the people; worse, it
misleads the workers into believing that the legislatures may do
something for them and deludes them with the false hope that they may
get results by politics. In this way it keeps them looking to the law
and government to "change things," to "improve" their condition.

So the machinery of government carries on its work, the masters remain
secure in their position, and the workers are held off with promises of
"action" by their representatives in the legislative bodies, by new laws
that are to give them "relief."

For years this process has been going on in all the countries of Europe.
The Socialist parties have succeeded in electing many of their members
to various legislative and government positions. Spending years in that
atmosphere, enjoying good jobs and pay, the elected Socialists have
themselves become part and parcel of the political machinery. They have
come to feel that it is no use waiting for the Socialist revolution to
abolish capitalism. It is more practical to work for some "betterment,"
to try to get a Socialist majority in the government. For when they have
a majority they will need no revolution, they now say.

Slowly, by degrees, the Socialist change has taken place. With growing
success in elections and securing political power they turn more
conservative and content with existing conditions. Removed from the life
and suffering of the working class, living in the atmosphere of the
bourgeoisie, of affluence and influence, they have become what they call
"practical." Seeing at first hand the political machinery at work,
knowing its debauchery and corruption, they have realized that there is
no hope for Socialism in that swamp of deceit, bribery, and corruption.
But few, very few Socialists find the courage to enlighten the workers
about the hopelessness of politics to aid the cause of labor. Such a
confession would mean the end of their political career, with its
emoluments and advantages. So the great majority of them are content to
keep their own counsel and let well enough alone. Power and position
have gradually stifled their conscience, and they have not the strength
and honesty to swim against the current.

That is what has become of Socialism, which had once been the hope of
the oppressed of the world. The Socialist parties have joined hands with
the bourgeoisie and the enemies of labor. They have become the strongest
bulwark of capitalism, pretending to the masses that they are fighting
for their interests, while in reality they have made common cause with
the exploiters. They have so far forgotten and gone back on their
original Socialism that in the great World War the Socialist parties in
even country in Europe helped their governments to lead the workers to
slaughter.

The war has clearly demonstrated the bankruptcy of Socialism. The
Socialist parties, whose motto was "Workers of the world, unite!" sent
the toilers to murder each other. From having been bitter enemies of
militarism and war they became defenders of "their" land, urging the
workers to don the soldiers' uniform and kill their fellow workers in
other countries.

Strange indeed! For years they had been telling the proletarians that
they have no country that their interests are opposed to those of their
masters, that labor has "nothing to lose but its chains," but at the
first sign of war they called upon the toilers to join the army and
voted support and money for the government to do the work of carnage.
This happened in every country in Europe. True, there were Socialist
minorities that protested against the war, but the dominant majority in
the Socialist parties condemned and ignored them, and lined up for the
slaughter.

It was a most terrible betrayal not only of Socialism but of the whole
working class, of humanity itself. Socialism, whose purpose it was to
educate the world to the evils of capitalism, to the murderous character
of patriotism, to the brutality and uselessness of war; Socialism, which
was the champion of man's rights, of liberty and justice, the hope and
promise of a better day, miserably turned into a defender of the
government and the masters, became the handmaiden of the militarists and
jingo nationalists. The former Social Democrats became "social
patriots."

This did not happen because of mere treachery, however. To take that
view would be to miss the main point and misunderstand its warning
lesson. Treachery it was indeed, both in its nature and effect, and the
results of that treachery have bankrupted Socialism, disillusioned the
millions that earnestly believed in it, and filled the world with black
reaction. But it was not only treachery, not treachery of the ordinary
kind. The real cause lies much deeper.

We are what we eat, a great thinker said. That is, the life we lead, the
environment we live in, the thoughts we think, and the deeds we do --
all subtly fashion our character and make us what we are.

The Socialists' long political activity and co√∂peration with bourgeois
parties gradually turned their thoughts and mental habits from Socialist
ways of thinking. Little by little they forgot that the purpose of
Socialism was to educate the masses, to make them see through the game
of capitalism, to teach them that government is their enemy, that the
church keeps them in ignorance, that they are duped by ideas designed to
perpetuate the superstitions and wrongs on which present-day society is
built. In short, they forgot that Socialism was to be the Messiah who
would drive darkness out of the minds and lives of men, lift them from
the slough of ignorance and materialism, and rouse their natural
idealism, the striving for justice and brotherhood, toward liberty and
light.

They forgot it. They had to forget in order to be "practical," to
"accomplish" something, to become successful politicians. You cannot
dive into a swamp and remain clean. They had to forget it, because their
object had become to "get results," to win elections, to secure power.
They knew that they could not have success in politics by telling the
people the whole truth about conditions -- for the truth not only
antagonizes the government, the church, and the school; it also offends
the prejudices of the masses. These it is necessary to educate, and that
is a slow and difficult process. But the political game demands success,
quick results. The Socialists had to be careful not to come in too great
conflict with the powers that be; they could not afford to lose time in
educating the people.

It therefore became their main object to win votes. To achieve that they
had to trim their sails. They had to lop off, little by little, those
parts of Socialism which might result in persecution by the authorities,
in disfavor from the church, or which would keep bigoted elements from
joining their ranks. They had to compromise.

They did. First of all they stopped talking revolution. They knew that
capitalism cannot be abolished without a bitter struggle, but they
decided to tell the people that they could bring about Socialism by
legislation, by law, and that all that is necessary is to put enough
Socialists in the government.

They ceased denouncing government as an evil; they quit enlightening the
workers about its real character as an agency for enslavement. Instead
they began asserting that _they_, the Socialists, are the staunchest
upholders of "the State" and its best defenders; that far from being
opposed to "law and order," they are its truest friends; that they are,
indeed, the only ones who sincerely believe in government, except that
the government must be socialistic; that is, that they, the Socialists,
are to make the laws and run the government.

Thus, instead of weakening the false and enslaving belief in law and
government, to weaken it so that those institutions could be abolished
as a means of oppression, the Socialists actually worked to _strengthen_
the people's faith in forcible authority and government, so that to-day
the members of the Socialist parties the world over are the strongest
believers in the State and are therefore called Statists. Yet their
great teachers, Marx and Engels, clearly taught that the State serves
only to suppress, and that when the people will achieve real liberty the
State will be abolished, will "disappear."

Socialist compromise for political success did not stop there. It went
further. To gain votes, the Socialist parties decided not to educate the
people about the falsity, hypocrisy, and menace of organized religion.
We know what a bulwark of capitalism and slavery the church, as an
institution, is and always has been. It is obvious that people who
believe in the church, swear by the priest and bow to his authority,
will naturally be obedient to him and his commands. Such people, steeped
in ignorance and superstition, are the easiest victims of the masters.
But in order to achieve greater success in their election campaigns, the
Socialists decided to eliminate educational anti-religious propaganda so
as not to offend popular prejudices. They declared religion a "private
matter," and excluded all criticism of the church from their agitation.

What you personally believe in is indeed your private affair; but when
you get together with other people and organize them into a body to
impose your belief on others, to force them to think as you do, and to
punish them (to the extent of your power) if they entertain other
beliefs, then it is no more your "private matter." You might as well say
that the Inquisition, which tortured and burned people alive as
heretics, was a "private affair."

It was one of the worst betrayals of the cause of liberty by the
Socialists, this declaration that religion is a "private matter."
Mankind has slowly grown out of the fearful ignorance, superstition,
bigotry, and intolerance which made religious persecution and
inquisitions possible. The advance of science and invention, the printed
word and means of communication have brought enlightenment, and it is
that _enlightenment_ which has to some extent freed the human mind from
the clutches of the church. Not that she has entirely ceased to damn
those who do not accept her dogmas. There is still enough of that
persecution, but the advance of knowledge has robbed the church of her
former absolute sway over the mind, the life, and liberty of man; just
as progress has in the same way deprived government of the power to
treat the people as absolute slaves and serfs.

You can easily see then how important it is to continue the work of
enlightenment which has proven such a liberating blessing for the people
in the past; to continue it, so that it may some day help us do away
entirely with all the forces of superstition and tyranny.

But the Socialists determined to give up this most necessary work,
declaring religion to be a "private matter."

Those compromises and the repudiation of the real aims of Socialism paid
rather well. The Socialists gained political strength at the sacrifice
of ideals. But that "strength" has in the long run spelled weakness and
ruin.

There is nothing more corrupting than compromise. One step in that
direction calls for another, makes it necessary and compelling, and soon
it swamps you with the force of a rolling snowball become a landslide.

One by one those features of Socialism which were really significant,
educational, and liberating were sacrificed in behalf of politics, to
secure more favorable public opinion, lessen persecution, and accomplish
"something practical"; that is, to get more Socialists elected to
office. In this process, which has been going on for years in every
country, the Socialist parties in Europe acquired a membership that
numbered millions. But these millions were not socialistic at all; they
were party followers who had no conception of the real spirit and
meaning of Socialism; men and women steeped in old prejudices and
capitalistic views; bourgeois-minded people, narrow nationalists, church
members, believers in divine authority and consequently also in human
government, in the domination of man by man, in the State and its
institutions of oppression and exploitation, in the necessity of
defending "their" government and country, in patriotism and militarism.

Is it any wonder, then, that when the Great War broke out Socialists in
every country, with few exceptions, took up arms to "defend the
fatherland," the fatherland of their rulers and masters? The German
Socialist fought for his autocratic Kaiser, the Austrian for the
Hapsburg monarchy, the Russian for the Tsar, the Italian for his King,
the Frenchman for the "republic," and so the "Socialists" of every
country and their followers went on slaughtering each other until ten
millions of them lay dead, and twenty millions were blinded, maimed, and
crippled.

It was inevitable that the policy of political, parliamentary activity
should lead to such results. For in truth so-called political "action"
is, so far as the cause of the workers and of true progress is
concerned, worse than inaction. The very essence of politics is
corruption, sail-trimming, the sacrifice of your ideals and integrity
for success. Bitter are the fruits of that "success" for the masses and
for every decent man and woman the world over.

As a direct consequence of it millions of workers in every country are
discouraged and disheartened. Socialism -- they justly feel -- has
deluded and betrayed them. Fifty, nay, almost a hundred years of
Socialist "work" have resulted in the entire bankruptcy of the Socialist
parties, in the disillusionment of the masses, and have brought about a
reaction which now dominates the entire world and holds labor by the
throat with an iron grip.

Do you still think that the Socialist parties with their elections and
politics can help the proletariat out of wage slavery?

By their fruits you shall know them.

"But the Bolsheviks," you protest, "they did not betray the workers.
They have Socialism in Russia to-day!"

Let us take a look at Russia, then.

### Chapter 14: The February Revolution

In Russia the Bolsheviki, known as the Communist Party, are in control
of the government. The Revolution of October, 1917, put them in
power.[^03]

That Revolution was the most important event in the world since the
French Revolution in 1789-1793. It was even greater than the latter,
because it went much deeper to the rock bottom of society. The French
Revolution sought to establish political freedom and equality, believing
that it would thereby also secure brotherhood and welfare for all. It
was a mighty step in advance on the road of progress and it ultimately
changed the entire political face of Europe. It abolished the monarchy
in France, established a republic, and gave the death blow to feudalism,
to the absolute rule of the church and the nobility. It influenced every
country on the Continent along progressive lines, and helped to further
democratic sentiment throughout Europe.

But fundamentally it altered nothing. It was a _political_ revolution,
to secure political rights and liberties. It did secure them. France is
a "democracy" to-day and the motto, "Liberty, Brotherhood, Equality," is
written even on every prison building. But it did not free man from
exploitation and oppression; and that is, after all, the thing which is
needed most.

The French Revolution put the middle classes, the bourgeoisie, into the
government, in place of the aristocracy and nobility. It gave certain
constitutional rights to the farmer and worker, who until then were mere
serfs. But the power of the bourgeoisie, its industrial mastery, made
the farmer its abject dependent and turned the city worker into a wage
slave.

It could not be otherwise, because liberty is an empty sound as long as
you are kept in bondage economically. As I have pointed out before,
freedom means that you have the _right_ to do a certain thing; but if
you have no _opportunity_ to do it, that right is sheer mockery. The
opportunity lies in your economic condition, whatever the political
situation may be. No political rights can be of the least use to the man
who is compelled to slave all his life to keep himself and family from
starvation.

Great as the French Revolution was as a step toward emancipation from
the despotism of king and noble, it could accomplish nothing for the
_real_ freedom of man because it did not secure for him economic
opportunity and independence.

It is for that reason that the Russian Revolution was a far more
significant event than all the previous upheavals. It not only abolished
the Tsar and his absolute sway; it did something more important: it
destroyed the _economic_ power of the possessing classes, of the land
barons and industrial kings. For that reason it is the greatest
happening in all history, the first and only time that such a thing has
been tried.

This could not have been done by the French Revolution, because the
people then still believed that political emancipation would be enough
to make men free and equal. They did not realize that the basis of all
liberty is economic. But that is by no means to the discredit of the
French Revolution; the times were not ripe for a fundamental economic
change.

Coming a hundred and twenty-eight years later, the Russian Revolution
was more enlightened. It went to the root of the trouble. It knew that
no political freedom would do any good unless the peasants got the soil
and the workers the factories in their possession, so that they should
not remain at the mercy of the land monopolists and the capitalistic
owners of the industries.

Of course, the Russian Revolution did not accomplish this great work
over night. Revolutions, like everything else, grow: they begin small,
accumulate strength develop, and broaden.

It was during the war that the Russian Revolution started, because of
the dissatisfaction of the people at home and the army at the front. The
country was tired of fighting; it was worn out by hunger and misery. The
soldiers had had enough of slaughter; they began to ask why they must
kill or be killed -- and when soldiers begin asking questions, no war
can continue much longer.

The despotism and corruption of the Tsarist government added oil to the
fire. The court had become a public scandal, with the priest Rasputin
debauching the Empress and through his influence over her and the Tsar
controlling the affairs of State. Intrigues, bribery, and every form of
venality were rampant. The army funds were stolen by high officials, and
the soldiers were often forced to go into battle without enough
ammunition and supplies. Their boots were paper-soled, and many had no
footgear at all. Some regiments revolted; others refused to fight. More
and more frequently the soldiers fraternized with the "enemy" -- young
men like themselves, who had the misfortune of being born in a different
country; and who, like the Russians, had been ordered to war without
knowing why they must shoot or be shot. Great numbers dropped their guns
and returned home. There they told the folks about the fearful
conditions at the front, the useless carnage, the wretchedness, and
disaster. That helped to increase the discontent of the masses, and
presently voices began to be heard against the Tsar and his r√©gime.

Day by day this sentiment grew; it was fanned into flame by increased
taxes and great want, by the shortage of food and provisions.

In February, 1917, the Revolution broke out. As usual in such cases, the
powers that be were stricken with blindness. The autocrat and his
ministers, the aristocrats and their advisers all believed that it was
just a matter of some street disorders, of strikes, and bread riots.
They imagined themselves safe in the saddle. But the "disorder"
continued spreading over the entire country, and presently the Tsar saw
himself forced to quit the throne. Before long the once mighty monarch
was arrested and exiled to Siberia, where he himself had formerly sent
thousands to their death, and where he and his whole family later met
their doom.[^04] The Russian autocracy was abolished. The February
Revolution against the most powerful government in Europe was
accomplished almost without firing a gun.

"How could it be done so easily?" you wonder.

The Romanov r√©gime was an absolutism; Russia under the Tsars was the
most enslaved country in Europe. The people practically had no rights.
The whim of the autocrat was supreme, the order of the police the
highest law. The masses lived in poverty and suffered the greatest
oppression. They longed for freedom.

For over a hundred years libertarians and revolutionists in Russia
worked to undermine the r√©gime of tyranny, to enlighten the people and
rouse them to rebellion against their subjection. The history of that
movement is replete with the consecration and devotion of the finest men
and women. Thousands, even hundreds of thousands of them, lined the road
of Golgotha, filling the prisons, tortured and done to death in the
frozen wilds of Siberia. Beginning with the Decembrist attempt to secure
a constitution, over a hundred years ago, all through the century, the
fires of liberty were kept burning by the heroic self-sacrifice of the
nihilists and revolutionists. The story of that great martyrdom has no
equal in the annals of man.

Apparently it was a losing struggle, for the complete denial of freedom
made it practically impossible for the pioneers of liberty to reach the
people, to enlighten the masses. Tsardom was well protected by its
numerous police and secret service, as well as by the official church,
press, and school which trained the people in abject servility to the
Tsar and unquestioning obedience to "law and order." Dire punishment was
visited upon anyone daring to voice a liberal sentiment; the most severe
laws punished even the attempt to teach the peasants to read and write.
The government, the nobility, the clergy, and the bourgeoisie all
combined, as usual, to stamp out and crush the least effort to enlighten
the masses. Deprived of every means of spreading their ideas, the
liberal elements in Russia were driven to the necessity of employing
violence against the barbarous tyranny, of resorting to acts of terror
in order by such means to mitigate, even to a small extent, the rule of
despotism, and at the same time to compel the attention of their country
and of the world at large to the unbearable conditions. It was this
tragic necessity that gave rise in Russia to terroristic activities,
turning idealists, to whom human life was sacred, into executioners of
tyrants. Nature's noblemen they were, those men and women who willingly,
even eagerly, gave their lives to lift the fearful yoke from the people.
Like bright stars on the firmament of the age-long warfare between
oppression and liberty stand out the names of Sophie Perovskaya,
Kibaltchitch, Grinevitsky, Sasonov, and countless other martyrs, known
and unknown, of darkest Russia.

It was a most uneven struggle, apparently a hopeless fight. For the
revolutionists were but a handful as against the almost limitless power
of Tsardom with its large armies, numerous police, special bureaus of
political spies, its notorious Third Department, the secret _Okhrana_,
its universal system of house janitors as police aids, and with all the
other great resources of a vast country of over a hundred million
population.

A losing fight. And yet, the splendid idealism of the Russian youth --
particularly of the student element -- their unquenchable enthusiasm and
devotion to liberty were not in vain. The people came out the victor, as
they ultimately always do in the struggle of light against darkness.
What a lesson to the world, what encouragement to the weak in spirit,
what hope it holds for the further never-ceasing advance of mankind in
spite of all tyranny and persecution!

In 1905 broke out the first revolution in Russia. Still strong was the
autocracy, and the uprising of the masses was crushed, though not
without its having compelled the Tsar to grant certain constitutional
rights. But fearfully did the government avenge even those small
concessions. Hundreds of revolutionists paid for them with their lives,
thousands were imprisoned, and many other thousands doomed to Siberia.

Again despotism drew a fresh breath and felt itself secure against the
people. But not for long. The hunger for liberty may he suppressed for a
time; yet never exterminated. Man's natural instinct is for freedom, and
no power on earth can succeed in crushing it for very long.

Twelve years later -- a very short time in the life of a people -- came
another revolution, that of February, 1917. It proved that the spirit of
1905 was not dead, that the price paid for it in human lives had not
been in vain. Truly has it been said that the blood of the martyrs
nourishes the tree of liberty. The work and self-sacrifice of the
revolutionists had borne fruit. Russia had learned much from past
experience, as succeeding events proved.

The people had learned. In 1905 they had demanded only some mitigation
of the despotism, some small political liberties; now they demanded the
complete abolition of the tyrannical rule.

The February Revolution sounded the death-knell of Tsardom. It was the
least bloody revolution in all history. As I have explained before, the
power of even the strongest government evaporates like smoke the moment
the people refuse to acknowledge its authority, to bow to it, and
withhold their support. The Romanov r√©gime was conquered almost without
a fight, -- naturally enough, since the entire people had become tired
of its rule and had decided that it was harmful and unnecessary, and
that the country would be better off without it. The ceaseless agitation
and educational work carried on by the revolutionary elements (the
Socialists of various groups, including the Anarchists) had taught the
masses to understand that Tsardom must be done away with. So widespread
had this sentiment become that even the army -- the most unenlightened
group in Russia, as in every land -- had lost faith in the existing
conditions. The people had _outgrown_ the despotism, had freed
themselves in mind and spirit from it, and thereby gained the strength
and possibility of freeing themselves actually, physically.

That is why the all-powerful autocrat could find no more support in
Russia; no, not even a single regiment to protect him. The mightiest
government in Europe broke down like a house of cards.

A temporary, Provisional Government, took the place of the Tsar. Russia
was free.

### Chapter 15: Between February and October

I remember attending a very large mass-meeting in Madison Square Garden,
New York, called to celebrate the dethronement of the Tsar. The huge
hall was crowded with twenty thousand people wrought up to the highest
pitch of enthusiasm. "Russia is free!" the leading speaker began. A
veritable hurricane of applause, shouts, and hurrahs greeted the
declaration. It continued for many minutes, breaking out again and
again. But when the audience became quiet and the orator was about to
proceed, there came a voice from the crowd:

"Free for what?"

There was no reply. The speaker continued his harangue.

The Russians are a simple and na√Øve people. Never having had any
constitutional rights, they had no interest in politics and were not
corrupted by it. They knew little of congresses and parliaments, and
cared less about them.

"Free for what?" they wondered.

"You are free from the Tsar and his tyranny," they were told.

That was very fine, they thought. "But how about the war?" the soldier
asked. "How about the land?" the peasant demanded. "How about a decent
existence?" the proletarian urged. You see, my friend, those Russians
were so "uneducated" they were not satisfied just to be free _from_
something; they wanted to be free _for_ something, free _to do_ what
they wanted. And what they wanted was a chance to live, to work and
enjoy the fruits of their labor. That is, they wanted access to the
land, so they could raise food for themselves; access to the mines,
shops, and factories, so as to produce what they needed. But under the
Provisional Government, just as under the Romanovs, those things
belonged to the wealthy; they remained "private property."

As I say, the simple Russian knew nothing about politics, but he knew
exactly what he wanted. He lost no time in making his wants known, and
he was determined to get them. The soldiers and sailors chose spokesmen
from their own midst to present to the Provisional Government their
demand to terminate the war. Their representatives organized themselves
as soldiers' councils, called _soviets_ in Russia. The peasants and the
city workers did the same. In this manner every branch of the army and
navy, every agricultural and industrial district, every factory even,
established its own soviets. In the course of time the various soviets
formed the All-Russian Soviet of Workers', Soldiers', and Peasants'
Deputies, which held its sessions in Petrograd.

Through the Soviets the people presently began to voice their demands.

The Provisional Government, the new "liberal" r√©gime under the
leadership of Miliukov, paid no attention. It is characteristic of all
political parties alike that, once in power, they turn a deaf ear to the
needs and wants of the masses. The Provisional Government was no
different in this than the Tsarist autocracy. It failed to understand
the spirit of the time, and it stupidly believed that a few minor
reforms would satisfy the country. It kept busy talking and discussing,
proposing new bills and enacting more legislation. But it was not laws
the people wanted. They wanted peace, while the government insisted on
continuing the war. They cried for land and bread, but what they got was
more laws.

If history teaches anything at all its clearest lesson is that you can't
defy or resist the will of a whole people. You can suppress it for a
while, stem the tide of popular protest, but the more violently will the
storm rage when it comes. Then it will break down every obstacle, sweep
away all opposition, and its momentum will carry it even further than
its original intention.

That has been the story of every great conflict, of every revolution.

Recall the American War for Independence, for instance. The rebellion of
the colonies against Great Britain began with the refusal to pay the tea
tax exacted by the Government of George III. The comparatively
unimportant objection to "taxation without representation," meeting with
the King's opposition, resulted in war and ended in completely freeing
the American colonies from English rule. Thus was born the Republic of
the United States.

The French Revolution similarly began with the demand for small
improvements and reforms. The refusal of Louis XVI to lend ear to the
popular voice cost him not only his throne but also his head, and
brought about the destruction of the entire feudal system in France.

Just so did Tsar Nicholas II believe that a few insignificant
concessions would stop the revolution. He also paid for his stupidity
with his crown and life. The same fate overtook the Provisional
Government. That is why a wise man said that "history repeats itself."
It always does with government.

The Provisional Government consisted mostly of conservative men who did
not understand the people and who were far removed from their needs. The
masses demanded peace first of all. The Provisional Government, under
the leadership of Miliukov and later under Kerensky, was determined to
continue the war even in the face of the general dissatisfaction and the
serious breakdown of the industrial and economic life of the country.
The rising waves of the Revolution were soon to sweep it away: the
Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies was preparing to take matters
into its own hands.

Meanwhile the people did not wait. The soldiers at the front had already
themselves decided to quit the war as unnecessary and useless slaughter.
By the hundred thousands they were leaving the fields of battle and
returning home to their farms and factories. There they began carrying
into effect the real objects of the Revolution. For to them the
Revolution did not mean printed constitutions and paper rights, but the
land and the workshop. Between June and October, 1917, while the
Provisional Government kept on endlessly discussing "reforms," the
peasants started confiscating the estates of the large landholders and
the workers took possession of the industries.

This was called _expropriating_ the capitalist class: that is, depriving
the masters of the things they had no right to monopolize, the things
they had appropriated from the laboring classes, from the people.

In this manner the soil was expropriated from the landlords, the mines
and mills from their "owners," the warehouses from the speculators. The
workers and farmers took everything in charge through their labor unions
and agrarian organizations.

The "liberal" Government of Miliukov had insisted on keeping up the war
because the Allies wanted it. The "revolutionary" Government of Kerensky
also remained deaf to the popular demands. It passed drastic laws
against the "unauthorized" taking of land by the peasantry. Kerensky did
everything in his power to keep the army at the front and even
reintroduced the death penalty for "desertion." But the people now
ignored the government.

The situation again proved that the real power of a country lies in the
hands of the masses, of those who fight, toil, and produce, and not in
any parliament or government. Kerensky at one time was the adored idol
of Russia, more powerful than any Tsar. Yet his authority was lost, his
government fell, and he himself had to flee for his life when the people
realized that he was not serving their cause. While he was still the
head of the Provisional Government, the actual power began to go over to
the Petrograd Soviet, most of whose members were revolutionary workers,
peasants, and soldiers.

Various and even opposing views were represented in the Soviet, as is
inevitable in bodies composed of different classes of the population
with their particular interests. But the greatest influence under such
circumstances is always exerted by those who voice the deepest feelings
and needs of the People. Therefore, the more revolutionary elements in
the Soviet gradually gained the mastery, for they expressed the true
wants and aspirations of the masses.

There were those in the Soviet who held that a constitution, something
like that of the United States, was all that Russia needed to attain
freedom and well-being. They asserted that capitalism was all right:
there must be masters and servants, rich and poor; the people should be
satisfied with the rights and liberties which a democratic government
would grant them. These were the Constitutional Democrats, called for
short _Cadets_ in Russia. They quickly lost their influence, because the
"na√Øve" Russian workers and peasants knew that it was not rights and
liberties on paper they wanted, but a chance to work and enjoy the
fruits of their labor. They pointed to America with its Constitution and
Declaration of Independence, and said that they did not care for the
injustice, corruption, and wage slavery which constitutionally existed
in that country.

The next more liberal element were the Social Democrats, known as
Mensheviki. As Socialists they believed in the abolition of capitalism,
but they declared that the Revolution was not the time to do it. Why
not? Because it was not a proletarian revolution, they claimed, even if
it looked like one. They maintained that it could not be a social
revolution and therefore it should not alter the fundamental economic
conditions of the country. According to them it was only a bourgeois
revolution, a political one, and as such it should make only political
changes. It could not be anything more than a bourgeois revolution, the
Mensheviki argued, because had not the great Karl Marx taught that a
proletarian revolution could take place only in a country where
capitalism had reached its highest stage of development? Russia was very
backward industrially, and therefore it would be against the teachings
of Marx to consider the Revolution proletarian. For that reason
capitalism must remain in Russia and be given a chance to ripen before
the people could think of abolishing wage slavery.

The Social Democrats had a large following among the workers of Russia,
many labor unions being Menshevik. But the argument that the Revolution
was not proletarian only because Marx had fifty years before said that
it couldn't be, did not appeal to the toilers. They had made the
Revolution, they had fought and bled for it. They had driven out the
Tsar and his clique, and they were now driving out their industrial
masters, thus abolishing wage slavery and capitalism. They could not see
why they could not do what they were actually doing only because some
one who was dead long ago had believed that it couldn't be done. The
reasoning of the Socialist leaders was too "scientific" for them. Their
common sense told them that it was pure nonsense, and the Mensheviki
lost most of their following among the workers.

Another political party was called Socialists Revolutionists. To this
party belonged many of the terrorists who had been active against
Tsardom in the past. The Socialists Revolutionists had numerous
adherents, mainly among the farming population. But they alienated them
by taking a stand for the continuation of the war when the country was
against it. This attitude also caused a split in the party, the
conservative element becoming known as the Right Socialists
Revolutionists, while the more revolutionary faction called itself Left
Socialists Revolutionists. The latter, led by Maria Spiridonova, who had
suffered many years of Siberian imprisonment under the Tsar, advocated
the termination of the war and secured a very considerable following,
particularly among the poorer agricultural classes.

The most radical element in Russia were the Anarchists, who demanded
immediate peace, free land for the peasant, and the socialization of the
means of production and distribution. They wanted the abolition of
capitalism and wage slavery, equal rights for all and special privileges
to none. The land, the factories and mills, the machinery of production
and the means of distribution were to become the possession of the whole
people. Each able person was to work according to his ability and
receive according to his needs. There was to be full liberty for every
one and joint use on the basis of mutual interests. The Anarchists
warned the proletariat against delegating power to any government or
placing a political party in authority. Government of any kind, they
said, would stifle the Revolution and rob the workers of the results
already achieved. The life and welfare of a country depended on
economics, not on politics, they argued. That is, what people want is to
live, to work and satisfy their needs. For this, sensible management of
industry is necessary, not politics. Politics, they insisted, is a game
to rule and govern men, not to help them live. In short, the Anarchists
advised the toilers to permit no one to become their master again, to
abolish political government, and to manage their agrarian, industrial,
and social affairs for the good of all instead of for the benefit of
rulers and exploiters. They called upon the masses to stand by their
Soviets and look after their interests by means of their own
organizations.

The Anarchists were, however, comparatively small in numbers. As the
most advanced and revolutionary element they had been persecuted by the
Tsarist r√©gime even worse than the Socialists. Many of them had been
executed, others imprisoned and their organizations suppressed as
illegal. It was most dangerous to belong to the Anarchists, and their
work of education was exceedingly difficult. Therefore, the Anarchists
were not strong and could not exert much influence upon the people at
large in a vast country of 120 millions of population.

But they had a great advantage in that their idea appealed to the
healthy instincts and sound sense of the masses. To the extent of their
ability and limited power the Anarchists encouraged the demand for
peace, land, and bread, and actively helped carry out those demands by
direct expropriation and the formation of a free communal life.

There was another political party in Russia which was far more numerous
and better organized than the Anarchists. That party realized the value
of the Anarchist ideas and set to work to carry them out.

It was the Bolsheviki.

### Chapter 16: The Bolsheviki

Who were the Bolsheviki, and what did they want?

Up to the year 1903, the Bolsheviki were members of the Russian
Socialist Party; that is, Social Democrats, followers of Karl Marx and
his teachings. In that year the Social Democratic Labor Party of Russia
split on the question of organization and other minor matters. Under the
leadership of Lenin the opposition formed a new party, which called
itself Bolshevik. The old party became known as Menshevik.[^05]

The Bolsheviki were more revolutionary than the mother party from which
they seceded. When the world war broke out they did not betray the cause
of the workers and join the patriotic jingoes, as did the majority of
the other Socialist parties. To their credit be it said that, like most
of the Anarchists and Left Socialists Revolutionists, the Bolsheviki
opposed the war on the ground that the proletariat had no interest in
the quarrels of conflicting capitalist groups. When the February
Revolution began the Bolsheviki realized that political changes alone
would do no good, would not solve the labor and social problems. They
knew that putting one government in place of another would not help
matters. What was needed was a radical, fundamental change.

Though Marxists like their Menshevik step-brothers (believers in the
theories of Karl Marx), the Bolsheviki did not agree with the Mensheviki
in their attitude to the great upheaval. They scorned the idea that
Russia could not have a proletarian revolution because capitalist
industry had not developed there to its fullest possibilities. They
realized that it was not merely a bourgeois political change that was
taking place. They knew that the people were not satisfied with the
abolition of the Tsar and not content with a constitution. They saw that
things were developing further. They understood that the taking of the
land by the peasantry and the growing expropriation of the possessing
classes did not signify "reform." Closer to the masses than the
Mensheviki, the Bolsheviki felt the popular pulse and more correctly
judged the spirit and purpose of the tremendous events. It was foremost
of all Lenin, the Bolshevik leader, who believed that the time was
approaching when he and his Party might grasp the reins of government
and establish Socialism on the Bolshevik plan.

Bolshevik Socialism meant the seizing of political power by the
Bolsheviki in the name of the proletariat. They agreed with the
Anarchists that Communism would be the best economic system; that is,
the land, the machinery of production and distribution, and all public
utilities should be owned in common, excluding private possession in
those things. But while the Anarchists wanted the people as a whole to
be the owners, the Bolsheviki held that everything must be in the hands
of the State, which meant that the government would not only be the
political ruler of the country but also its industrial and economic
master. The Bolsheviki as Marxists believed in a strong government to
run the country, with absolute power over the lives and fortunes of the
people. In other words, the Bolshevik idea was a dictatorship, that
dictatorship to be in the hands of themselves, of _their_ political
Party.

They called such an arrangement the "dictatorship of the proletariat,"
because their Party, they said, represented the best and foremost
element, the advance guard of the working class, and their Party should
therefore be dictator in the name of the proletariat.

The great difference between the Anarchists and the Bolsheviki was that
the Anarchists wanted the masses to decide and manage their affairs for
themselves, through their own organizations, without orders from any
political party. They wanted real liberty and voluntary co√∂peration in
joint ownership. The Anarchists therefore called themselves _free_
Communists, or Communist Anarchists, while the Bolsheviki were
_compulsory_, governmental or State Communists. The Anarchists didn't
want any State to dictate to the people, because such dictation, they
argued, always means tyranny and oppression. The Bolsheviki, on the
other hand, while repudiating the capitalist State and bourgeois
dictatorship, wanted the State and the dictatorship to be _theirs_, of
their Party.

You can therefore see that there is all the difference in the world
between the Anarchists and the Bolsheviki. The Anarchists are opposed to
all government; the Bolsheviki are strong for government on condition
that it is in their hands. "They are not against the big stick," as a
clever friend of mine is wont to say; "they only want to be at the right
end of it."

But the Bolsheviki realized that the views and methods advocated by the
Anarchists were sound and practical, and that only such methods could
assure the success of the Revolution. They decided to make use of
Anarchist ideas for their own purposes. So it happened that although the
Anarchists were themselves too weak in numbers to reach the masses, they
succeeded in influencing the Bolsheviki, who presently began to advocate
Anarchist methods and tactics, pretending of course that they were their
own.

But they were not their own. You might say that it does not matter who
advocates or helps to carry out an idea that will benefit the people.
But if you think it over a bit you will realize that it matters very
much, as all history and particularly the Russian Revolution proves.

It matters because everything depends on the _motives_, on the purpose
and spirit in which a thing is carried out. Even the best idea can be
applied in such a manner as to bring much harm. Because the masses,
fired by the great idea, may fail to notice _how_, in what manner, and
by what means it is being carried out. But if carried out in the wrong
spirit or by false means, even the noblest and finest idea can be turned
to the ruin of the country and its people.

That is just what happened in Russia. The Bolsheviki advocated and
partly carried out Anarchist ideas, but the Bolsheviki were not
Anarchists and they did not at heart believe in those ideas. They used
them for their own purposes -- purposes that were _not_ Anarchistic,
that were really anti-Anarchistic, against the Anarchist idea. What were
those Bolshevik purposes?

The Anarchist idea was to do away with oppression of every kind, to
abolish the rule of one class over another, to substitute the management
of things for the mastery of man over man, to secure liberty and
well-being for all. Anarchist methods were calculated to bring about
such a result.

The Bolsheviki used the Anarchist methods for an entirely different
purpose. They did not want to abolish political domination and
government: they only meant to get it into their own hands. Their object
was, as already explained, to gain control of political power by their
Party and establish a Bolshevik dictatorship. It is necessary to get
this very clearly in order to understand what happened in the Russian
Revolution and why "proletarian dictatorship" quickly became a Bolshevik
dictatorship _over_ the proletariat.

It was soon after the February Revolution that the Bolsheviki began to
proclaim Anarchist principles and tactics. Among these were "direct
action," "the general strike," "expropriation," and similar modes of
action by the masses. As I have said, the Bolsheviki as Marxists did not
believe in such methods. At least they had not believed in them until
the Revolution. For years previously Socialists everywhere, including
the Bolsheviki, had ridiculed the Anarchist advocacy of the general
strike as the strongest weapon of the workers in their struggle against
capitalist exploitation and government oppression. "The general strike
is general nonsense," was the war cry of Socialists against the
Anarchists. Socialists did not want the workers to resort to direct mass
action and the general strike, because it might lead to revolution and
the taking of things into their own hands. The Socialists wanted no
independent revolutionary action by the masses. They advocated political
activity. They wanted the workers to put them, the Socialists, in power,
so _they_ could do the revolutionizing.

If you glance over the Socialist writings for the past forty years, you
will be convinced that Socialists were always against the general strike
and direct action, as they were also opposed to expropriation and
revolutionary syndicalism, which is another name for workers' soviets.
Socialist congresses passed drastic resolutions against, and Socialist
agitators fiercely denounced, all such revolutionary tactics.

But the Bolsheviki accepted these Anarchist methods and began advocating
them with new-born conviction. Not, of course, at the outbreak of the
Revolution, in February, 1917. They did it much later, when they saw
that the masses were not content with mere political changes and were
demanding bread instead of a constitution. The swiftly moving events of
the Revolution _compelled_ the Bolsheviki to fall in line with the most
radical popular aspirations in order not to be left behind by the
Revolution, as happened to the Mensheviki, to the Right Socialists
Revolutionists, the Constitutional Democrats, and to other reformers.

Very sudden was this Bolshevik acceptance of Anarchist methods, because
only a short time before they had been insistently calling for the
Constituent Assembly. For months following the February Revolution they
were demanding the convocation of a representative body to determine the
form of government that Russia was to have. It was right for the
Bolsheviki to favor the Constituent Assembly, since they were Marxists
and pretended to believe in majority rule. The Constituent Assembly was
to be elected by the entire people, and the majority in the Assembly was
to decide matters. But the real reason why the Bolsheviki agitated for
the Assembly was that they believed the masses were with them and that
they, the Bolshevik Party, would he sure of a majority in the Assembly.
Presently, however, it became clear that they would prove an
insignificant minority in that body. Their hope to dominate it vanished.
As good governmentalists and believers in majority rule they should have
bowed to the will of the people. But that did not suit the plans of
Lenin and his friends. They looked about for other ways of getting
control of the government, and their first step was to begin a vehement
agitation _against_ the Constituent Assembly.

To be sure, the Assembly could give nothing of value to the country. It
was a mere talking machine, lacking all vitality, and unable to
accomplish any constructive work. The Revolution was a fact outside and
independent of the Constituent Assembly, independent of any legislative
or governmental body. It began and was developing in spite of government
and constitution, in spite of all opposition, in defiance of law. In its
entire character it was unlawful, non-governmental, even anti-
governmental. The Revolution followed the healthy natural impulses of
the people, their needs and aspirations. In the truest sense it was
Anarchistic in spirit and deed. Only the Anarchists, those governmental
heretics who believe in liberty and popular initiative as the cure for
social ills, welcomed the Revolution as it was and worked for its
further growth and deepening, so as to bring the entire life of the
country within the sphere of its influence.

All the other parties, including the Bolsheviki, had the sole object of
lassoing the revolutionary movement and tying it to their particular
band-wagon. The Bolsheviki needed the support of the masses to wrest
political power for their Party and to proclaim the Communist
dictatorship. Seeing that there was no hope of accomplishing this
through the Constituent Assembly, they turned against it, joined the
Anarchists in condemning it, and later forcibly dispersed it. But you
can see that while the Anarchists could do this honestly, in keeping
with their no-government ideas, similar action on the part of the
Bolsheviki was rank hypocrisy and political trickery.

Together with their opposition to the Constituent Assembly the
Bolsheviki borrowed from the Anarchist arsenal a number of other
militant tactics. Thus they proclaimed the great war cry, "All power to
the Soviets," advised the workers to ignore and even defy the
Provisional Government, and to resort to direct mass action to carry out
their demands. At the same time they also adopted the Anarchist methods
of the general strike and energetically agitated for the "expropriation
of the expropriators."

It is important to keep in mind that these tactics of the Bolsheviki
were not, as I have already pointed out, the logical outcome of their
ideas, but only a means of gaining the confidence of the masses with the
object of achieving political domination. Indeed, those methods were
really _opposed_ to Marxist theories and were not believed in by the
Bolsheviki. It was therefore not surprising that, once in power, they
repudiated all those anti-Marxist ideas and tactics.

The Anarchist mottoes proclaimed by the Bolsheviki did not fail to bring
results. The masses rallied to their flag. From a Party with almost no
influence, with its main leaders, Lenin and Zinoviev, discredited[^06]
and hiding, with Trotsky and others in prison, they quickly became the
most important factor in the movement of the revolutionary proletariat.

Attentive to the demands of the masses, particularly of the soldiers and
workers, voicing their needs with energy and persistence, the Bolsheviki
constantly gained greater influence among the people and in the Soviets,
especially in those of Petrograd and Moscow. The inactivity of the
Provisional Government and its failure to undertake any important
changes aggravated the general dissatisfaction and resentment, which
were soon to break into fury. The pusillanimous character of the
Kerensky r√©gime served to strengthen the hands of the Bolsheviki in the
Soviets. Daily the rupture between the latter and the Government grew,
presently developing into open antagonism and struggle.

The evident helplessness of the government, the decision of Kerensky to
renew an aggressive movement at the front, together with the
reintroduction of the death penalty for military desertion, the
persecution of the revolutionary elements and the arrest of their
leaders, all hastened the crisis. On July 3, 1917,[^07] thousands of
armed workers, soldiers, and sailors demonstrated in the streets of
Petrograd in spite of government prohibition, demanding "All power to
the Soviets." Kerensky sought to suppress the popular movement. He even
recalled "trusted" regiments from the front to teach the proletariat of
Petrograd a "salutary lesson." But in vain were all the efforts of the
bourgeoisie, represented by Kerensky, by the Social Democratic leaders
and Right Socialists Revolutionists, to stem the rising tide. The July
demonstrations were suppressed, but within a short time the
revolutionary movement swept the Provisional Government away. The
Petrograd Soviet of soldiers and workers declared the government
abolished, and Kerensky saved his life only by fleeing in disguise.

The masses backed the Petrograd Soviet. The example of the capital was
soon followed by Moscow, thence spreading throughout the country.

It was on October 25th[^08] that the Provisional Government was declared
abolished, its members arrested, and the Winter Palace taken by the
military-revolutionary committee of the Petrograd Soviet. On the same
day the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets opened its sessions.
Political government was practically abolished in Russia. All power was
now in the hands of the workers, soldiers, and peasants represented in
the Congress. The latter immediately began to consider steps to carry
out the will of the masses: to terminate the war, secure land for the
peasants, the industries for the workers, and establish liberty and
welfare for all.

This was the status of the Russian Revolution in October, 1917.
Beginning with the abolition of the Tsar, it gradually widened and
developed into a thorough industrial and economic reorganization of the
country. The spirit of the people and their needs marked out the further
progress of the Revolution toward the rebuilding of life on the
foundation of political freedom, economic equality, and social justice.

This could be accomplished only as the previous great changes, from
February to October, had been; by the joint effort and free co√∂peration
of the workers and peasants, the latter now joined by the bulk of the
army.

But such a development did not come within the scheme of the Bolsheviki.
As already explained, their aim was to establish a dictatorship wielded
by their Party. But a dictatorship means dictation, the imposing of the
ruler's will upon the country. The Bolsheviki now felt themselves strong
enough to carry out their real object. They dropped the revolutionary
and Anarchist mottoes. There must be a vigorous political power, they
declared, to carry on the work of the Revolution. Under the guise of
protecting the people against the monarchists and the bourgeoisie they
began to use repressive measures. As a matter of fact, there were no
Tsarist supporters or monarchists in Russia worth mentioning. The people
had grown out of Tsarism, and there was no more chance whatever, for a
monarchy in Russia. As to the bourgeoisie, there had never been any
organized capitalist class in Russia, such as we have in highly
developed industrial countries -- in the United States, England, France,
and Germany. The Russian bourgeoisie was small in numbers and weak. It
continued to exist after the February Revolution only by the protection
of the Kerensky Government. The moment the latter was abolished, the
bourgeoisie went to pieces. It had neither strength nor means to stop
the confiscation of its lands and factories by the peasants and workers.
Strange as it may seem, it is a fact that throughout this whole period
of the Revolution the Russian bourgeoisie did not make any organized and
effectual attempt to regain its possessions.[^09]

Consider how different it would have been in America. There the
capitalists, who are strong and well organized, would have offered the
greatest resistance. They would have formed defense bodies to protect
themselves and their interests by force of arms. I have no doubt they
will do so when things begin to happen there as they did in Russia in
1917. Not that they will succeed, however. But as I say, the Revolution
in Russia did not produce any organized and effective bourgeois
resistance for the simple reason that there was no real bourgeoisie or
capitalist class in that country. Military attempts there were indeed,
such as that of the Tsarist General Kornilov to attack Petrograd with
Cossacks brought from the front, but so harmless was that adventure that
Kornilov's army melted away even before he could reach the capital. His
men went over to the revolutionary garrison of Petrograd almost without
firing a gun.[^10]

The point is that when the masses are with the Revolution, there can be
no thought of successful resistance by any enemy, no chance of
suppressing the Revolution. That was the situation in Russia in October,
1917, when the Soviets took the power into their hands.

The Bolshevik plan was to gain entire and exclusive control of the
government for their Party. It did not fit into their scheme to permit
the people themselves to manage things, through their Soviet
organizations. As long as the Soviets had the whole say the Bolsheviki
could not achieve their purpose. It was therefore necessary either to
abolish the Soviets or to gain control of them.

To abolish the Soviets was impossible. They represented the toiling
masses; the Soviet idea had been a cherished dream of the Russian people
for centuries. Even in the far past Russia had soviets of various kinds,
and the entire village life was built on the soviet principle; that is,
on the equal right and representation of all members alike. The ancient
Russian _mir_, the public assembly to transact the business of the
village or town, was one of the forms of the soviet idea.

The Bolsheviki knew that the revolutionary workers and peasants, as well
as the soldiers (who were workers and peasants in uniform), would not
stand for the abolition of their soviets. There remained the only
alternative of getting control of them. Holding to the Lenin principle
that the "end justifies the means," the Bolsheviki did not shrink from
any methods whatever to discredit and eliminate the other revolutionary
elements from the Soviets. They carried on a persistent campaign of
venom and detraction for the purpose of deluding the masses and turning
them against the other parties, particularly against the Left Socialists
Revolutionists and the Anarchists. Systematically and by the most
Jesuitic means they sought to become the _sole_ power, so as to be able
to carry out Lenin's scheme of "proletarian dictatorship."

By such tactics the Bolsheviki finally succeeded in organizing a Soviet
of People's Commissars, which in reality became the new government. All
its members were Bolsheviki, with two minor exceptions: the
Commissariats of justice and of Agriculture were headed by Left
Socialists Revolutionists. Before long these were also eliminated and
replaced by Bolsheviki. The Soviet of People's Commissars was the
political machine of the Bolshevik Party, which was now rechristened
into the Communist Party of Russia.

What this Communist Party stood for, what its objects and purposes were,
we already know. It openly avowed its determination to secure exclusive
Bolshevik domination under the label of the "dictatorship of the
proletariat."

This was fatal to the Revolution and its great aim of a deep social and
economic reconstruction, as the subsequent history of Russia has proven.

Why?

### Chapter 17: Revolution and Dictatorship

Because the Revolution and the Bolshevik dictatorship were things of an
entirely different and even opposite nature. And here is where most
people make the greatest mistake in confusing the Russian Revolution
with the Communist Party and speaking of them as if they were one and
the same, which emphatically they are not.

This will become clear to us if we compare the aims of the Revolution
with the ends sought by the Bolsheviki.

The Revolution was a mighty uprising against oppression and misery. It
voiced the longing of the masses for liberty and justice. It attempted
to do away with everything that kept man in subjection, made him a slave
and a beast of burden. The Revolution tried to establish new forms of
life, conditions of real equality and brotherhood.

We have already seen that the Revolution was not a superficial change,
that it did not stop with the February events. The Tsar had been
abolished and the power of his autocracy broken, but the result was only
another _form_ of government. The economic and social conditions
remained the same. Yet it was just those that the people meant to
change. That is why the October Revolution took place. Its purpose was
to rebuild life altogether, on new social foundations.

How was it to be rebuilt? It is evident that taking Romanov out of the
Kremlin palace and putting Lenin in his Place would not do it. Something
more was necessary. It was necessary to give the soil to the peasant, to
put the factories in the hands of the workers and their labor
organizations. In short, it was the aim of October to afford the people
an opportunity to make use of the political freedom won in February.

That is the way the masses sized up the situation. And they acted upon
it. They began to apply liberty to their needs. They wanted peace, so
they stopped the war, first of all. It was months later that the
Bolshevik Government signed the Brest-Litovsk treaty and concluded an
official peace with Germany. But so far as the Russian armies were
concerned, war was at an end long before, without diplomatic
negotiations. Trotsky frankly admits this in his work on the
Revolution.[^11]

The Russian workers and peasants, temporarily in soldiers' uniforms, had
taken matters into their own hands and terminated the war by leaving the
fronts.

Similarly did the peasantry and the proletariat act in solving the
industrial and agrarian problems. While the Provisional Government was
still discussing land reforms, the masses themselves acted, through
their local councils and Soviets. The peasants _took_ the land they
needed and began cultivating it. With simple common sense and inherent
popular justice they settled the agrarian problem over which politicians
and lawgivers had been breaking their heads for many decades without
result. The Bolsheviki, when they came to power, "legalized" what the
peasants had already accomplished without asking anybody's permission.

In like manner did the workers' Soviets start to solve the industrial
problem by taking over the factories and mines and managing them for the
general benefit instead of for the profit of the "owners." That was
_actual_ abolition of capitalism and wage slavery, long before the
Bolshevik Government declared capitalist ownership "legally" at an end.

All the other problems of every-day life the Revolution was similarly
solving by the practical and direct activity of the masses themselves.
Co√∂perative organizations brought city and village together for the
exchange of products; house Committees looked after the housing
question; street and district committees were organized for the safety
of the city, and other voluntary bodies were formed for the defense of
the people's interests and of the Revolution.

The requirements of the situation directed the efforts of the masses;
liberty of action brought initiative into play, and the wants of the
people shaped their creative capacities to the needs of the hour.

_These collective activities constituted the Revolution_. They were the
Revolution. For "revolution" is not some vague thing without definite
meaning and purpose; nor does it signify political scene shifting or new
legislation. The _actual_ Revolution took place neither in February nor
in October, but between those months. It consisted in the free play and
interplay of the revolutionary energies and efforts of the people, in
independent popular initiative and creative work, inspired by common
need and mutual interests.

That was the spirit and tendency of the great economic and social
upheaval in Russia. It solved problems as they arose, on the basis of
liberty and free co√∂peration.

This process of the Revolution was stopped in its development by the
Communist Party seizing political power and constituting itself a new
government.

We have just seen what the aim of the Revolution was; we know what the
masses of Russia wanted and what means they used to achieve it.

The objects of the Bolsheviki as a political party, on the other hand,
were of an entirely different nature. As frankly admitted by themselves,
their immediate goal was a dictatorship; that is, the formation of a
powerful Bolshevik State which should direct the life and activities of
the country according to the views and theories of the Communist Party.

To give due credit to the Bolsheviki let me say right here that there
never was any political party more devoted to its cause, more
wholehearted in its efforts to advance it, more determined and energetic
in the achievement of its purposes. But _those purposes_ were entirely
foreign to the Revolution and opposed to its real needs. They were, in
fact, so contrary to the spirit and aims of the Revolution that their
achievement meant the destruction of the Revolution itself.

No doubt the Bolsheviki really thought that only by means of their
dictatorship could Russia be converted into a Socialist paradise for the
worker and farmer. Indeed, as Marxists they could not see things in any
other way. Believers in an all-powerful State, they had no confidence in
the people; they had no faith in the initiative and creative ability of
the toilers. They distrusted them as a "multi-colored mob which has to
be forced into liberty." They agreed with the cynical maxim of Rousseau
that the masses "can be made free only by compulsion."

"Proletarian compulsion in all its forms," wrote Bukharin, the foremost
Communist theoretician, "beginning with summary execution and ending
with compulsory labor is, however paradoxical it may sound, a method of
reworking the human material of the capitalistic epoch into Communist
humanity."

That was the Bolshevik gospel; it was the attitude of a party that
believed a revolution could be run by the orders of a Central Committee.

What followed was the logical outcome of the Bolshevik idea.

Claiming that only the dictatorship of their Party could properly
conduct the Revolution, they bent all energies to secure that
dictatorship. It meant that they had to take things exclusively into
their own hands, to have the designs of the Party accomplished at any
cost.

We need not go into the details of the schemes and political
manipulations of those days which finally resulted in the Communist
Party gaining the upper hand. The important point is that the Bolsheviki
did contrive to carry out their plans. Within a few months after the
October Revolution, by April, 1918, they were in entire control of the
government.

By taking advantage of the excitement of the revolutionary days and the
inevitable confusion, they exploited the situation for their own
objects. They used the political differences to rouse fierce party
passions, resorted to every means to denounce their opponents as enemies
of the people, branded them counter-revolutionists, and finally
succeeded in damning them in the eyes of the workers and soldiers.
Declaring that the Revolution must be protected against those alleged
enemies, they were enabled to proclaim their own dictatorship. In the
name of "saving the Revolution" they began eliminating all other
revolutionary elements, non-Bolshevik, from positions of influence,
finishing by suppressing them entirely.

It must be left to future historians to determine whether Bolshevik
repression of the bourgeoisie, with which they started their rule, was
not merely a means toward the ulterior purpose of suppressing all other
non-Bolshevik elements. For the Russian bourgeoisie was not dangerous to
the Revolution. As already explained, it was an insignificant minority,
unorganized and powerless. The revolutionary elements, on the contrary,
were a real obstacle to the dictatorship of any political party.

Because dictatorship would meet with the strongest opposition not from
the bourgeoisie but from the truly revolutionary classes which
considered dictatorship inimical to the best interests of the
Revolution, the elimination of these would therefore be of prime
necessity to any political party seeking dictatorship. Such a policy,
however, could not successfully _begin_ with the suppression of the
revolutionists: it would provoke the disapproval and resistance of the
workers and soldiers. It would have to be begun at the bourgeois end and
means found gradually to spread the net over the other elements.
Distrust and antagonism would have to he wakened intolerance and
persecution stimulated, popular fear created for the safety of the
Revolution in order to secure the people's support for an ever-widening
campaign of elimination and suppression, for the introduction of the
bloody hand of red terror into the life of the Revolution.

But as I have said, it is the place of the future historian to determine
to what extent such motives fashioned the events of those days. Here we
are more concerned with what actually happened.

What happened was that before long the Bolsheviki established the
exclusive dictatorship of their Party.

"What was that dictatorship," you ask, "and what did it achieve?"

### Chapter 18: The Dictatorship at Work

It achieved the complete mastery of the Bolsheviki over a country of 140
millions of population. In the name of the "proletarian dictatorship"
_one_ political organization, the Communist Party, became the absolute
ruler of Russia. The proletarian dictatorship was not dictatorship by
the proletariat. Millions of people cannot all be dictators. Nor can
thousands of party members be dictators. By its very nature a
dictatorship is limited to a small number of persons. The less of them,
the stronger and more unified the dictatorship. In actual practice
dictatorship is always in the hands of _one_ person, the strong man
whose will compels the consent of his nominal co-dictators. It cannot be
otherwise, and so it was with the Bolsheviki.

The real dictator was neither the proletariat nor even the Communist
Party. Theoretically the power was held by the Central Committee of the
Party, but actually it was wielded by the inner circle of that
Committee, called the political bureau or "politbureau." But even the
politbureau was not the real dictator, though its membership was less
than a score. For in the politbureau there were differing views on every
important question, as there must be when there are many heads. The real
dictator was the man whose influence secured the support of the majority
of the politbureau. That man was Lenin, and it was he who was the real
"proletarian dictatorship," just as Mussolini, for instance, and not the
Fascist Party, is dictator in Italy. It was always the views and ideas
of Lenin that were carried out, from the very inception of the Bolshevik
Party to the last day of Lenin's life; carried out when the entire Party
was opposed to his opinion and even when the Central Committee bitterly
fought his proposals on their first presentation. It was Lenin who
always won, his will that prevailed. It was so in every critical period
of Bolshevik history. It could not help being so, because dictatorship
always means domination by the strongest personality, the supremacy of a
single will.

The whole history of the Communist Party, as that of every dictatorship,
indisputably demonstrates this. Bolshevik writings themselves prove it.
Here it is sufficient to mention but a few of the most vital events to
substantiate my contention.

In March, 1917, when Lenin returned home from exile in Switzerland, the
Central Committee of his Party in Russia had decided to enter the
Coalition Government formed after the abolition of the Tsarist r√©gime.
Lenin was opposed to co√∂peration with the bourgeois and Mensheviki who
were in the Government. Yet notwithstanding that the Party had already
decided the question and that Lenin was almost alone in his opposition,
his influence carried. The Central Committee reversed itself and took up
Lenin's position.

Later, in July, 1917, Lenin advocated an immediate revolution against
the Kerensky Government. His proposal was roundly condemned even by his
nearest comrades and friends as foolhardy and criminal. But again Lenin
won, even at the cost of Zinoviev, Kamenev, and other influential
Bolsheviki refusing to be parties to the scheme and resigning from the
Central Committee. Incidentally, the _Putsch_ (the attempt to upset
Kerensky) proved a failure and cost many workers' lives.

The red terror instituted by Lenin as soon as he came to power after the
October Revolution was bitterly denounced by his co-workers as entirely
uncalled for and as a direct betrayal of the Revolution. But in spite of
the official protests of the most active and influential members of the
Party, Lenin had his way.[^12]

During the Brest-Litovsk negotiations it was again Lenin who insisted
that "peace on any terms" he made with Germany, while Trotsky, Radek,
and other important Bolshevik leaders opposed the Kaiser's conditions as
humiliating and destructive. Once more Lenin scored.

The "new economic policy" (the "nep") submitted by Lenin to his Party
during the Kronstadt events[^13] was fought by the Central Committee as
nullifying all the revolutionary achievements and as a death blow to
Communism. It was indeed a complete reversal of everything the
Revolution stood for and a return to the very conditions that the great
October change had abolished. But Lenin's will again prevailed and his
resolution was carried at the IX Communist Congress held in Moscow, in
March, 1921.

As you see, the alleged dictatorship of the proletariat was only the
dictatorship of Lenin. He dictated to the politbureau, the politbureau
to the Central Committee, the Central Committee to the Party, the Party
to the proletariat and the rest of the people. Russia counted a
population of over a hundred millions; the Communist Party had less than
fifty thousand members; the Central Committee consisted of several
score; the politbureau numbered about a dozen; and Lenin was one. But
that one was _the_ proletarian dictatorship.

Russia is a country of vast extent, spread over half of Europe and a
goodly part of Asia. It is peopled by numerous races and nationalities
speaking different languages, with diversified psychology, varied
interests and outlook upon life. We know what the dictatorship of the
Tsars did to the country. Let us now see what the "proletarian"
dictatorship accomplished.

To-day, after over a decade of Bolshevik rule in Russia, we can form a
fair estimate of its effects and examine the results it achieved. Let us
sum them up.

_Politically_ the aim of the Revolution was to abolish governmental
tyranny and oppression and make the people free. The Bolshevik
Government is admittedly the worst despotism in Europe, with the sole
exception of Fascist rule in Italy. The citizen has no rights which the
government feels bound to respect. The Communist Party is a political
monopoly, with all the other parties and movements outlawed. Security of
person and domicile is unknown. Freedom of speech and press does not
exist. Even within the Party the least difference of opinion is
suppressed and punished by imprisonment and exile, as witness the fate
of Trotsky and his followers of the Opposition. Independent opinion is
not tolerated. The _G.P.U._, the secret service formerly called
_Tcheka_, is a super-government with unlimited arbitrary powers over the
liberty and lives of the people. Only those who are entirely on the side
of the dominant Party clique enjoy freedom and privileges. But _such_
"liberty" is to be had under the worst despotism: if you have nothing to
say you are perfectly free to say it even in the land of Mussolini. As a
prominent member of a recent Communist Congress put it, "There is room
for all political parties in Russia: the Communist Party is in the
Government, the others are in prison."

_Economically_ it was the fundamental aim of the Revolution to abolish
capitalism and establish Communism and equality.

The Bolshevik dictatorship began by instituting a system of unequal
compensation and discriminating rewards, and ended by reintroducing
capitalistic ownership after it had been abolished by the direct action
of the industrial and agrarian proletariat. To-day Russia is a country
partly State capitalistic and partly privately capitalistic.

The dictatorship and the red terror by which it was maintained proved
the main factors in paralyzing the economic life of the country.
High-handed Bolshevik rule antagonized the people, its despotism
embittered the masses. The repression of every independent effort
alienated the best elements from the Revolution and made them feel that
it had become the private concern of the political Party in power.
Facing a new tyranny instead of the longed-for liberty, the workers
became discouraged. They felt their revolutionary achievements taken
from them and used as a weapon against themselves and their aspirations.
The proletarian saw his factory committee subjected to the dictates of
the Communist Party and made helpless to protect his interests as a
toiler. His labor union became the mouthpiece and transmitter of
Bolshevik orders, and he found himself deprived of all voice, not only
in the management of industry but even in his own factory where he was
kept at work long hours at the poorest pay. The toilers soon realized
that the Revolution had been taken out of their hands, that their
soviets had been emasculated of all power, and that the country was
being ruled by some people far away in the Kremlin, just as it was in
the days of the Tsars. Eliminated from revolutionary and creative
activity, living only to obey the new masters, constantly harassed by
Bolsheviki and Tchekists, and ever in fear of prison or execution for
the least expression of protest, the worker became embittered against
the Revolution. He deserted the factory and sought the village where he
might be furthest removed from the dreaded rulers and at least secure of
his daily bread. Thus broke down the industries of the country.

The peasant saw leather-clad and armed Communists descend upon his quiet
village, despoil it of the fruit of his hard labor, and treat him with
the brutality and insolence of the old Tsarist officials. He saw his
Soviet dominated by some lazy, good-for-nothing village loafer calling
himself Bolshevik and holding power from Moscow. He had willingly, even
generously, given his wheat and corn to feed the workers and the
soldiers, but he saw his provisions lie rotting at the railroad stations
and in the warehouses, because the Bolsheviki could not themselves
manage things and would let no one else do it. He knew that his brothers
in the factory and in the army suffered for lack of food because of
Communist inefficiency, bureaucracy, and corruption. He understood why
more was always demanded of him. He saw his few possessions, his own
family provisions, confiscated by Tchekists who often took even his last
horse without which the peasant could neither work nor live. He saw his
neighbor villages, that rebelled against these outrages, leveled to the
ground and the peasants whipped and shot, just as in the old days. He
turned against the Revolution and in his desperation he determined to
plant and sow no more than he needed for himself and family and to hide
even that in the forest.

Such were the results of the dictatorship, of Lenin's military communism
and Bolshevik methods. Industry stood still, and famine overwhelmed the
country. The general suffering, the bitterness of the workers, and the
peasant uprisings began to threaten the existence of the Bolshevik
r√©gime. To save the dictatorship Lenin decided to introduce a new
economic policy, known as the "nep."

The purpose of the "nep" was to revive the economic life of the country.
It was to encourage greater production by the peasantry by allowing them
to sell their surplus instead of having it forcibly confiscated by the
government. It was also to enable exchange of products by legalizing
trade and reviving the co√∂peratives formerly suppressed as
counter-revolutionary. But the determination of the Communist Party to
hold on to its dictatorship made all these economic reforms ineffectual,
because industry cannot develop under a despotic r√©gime. Economic
growth, as well as trade and commerce, requires security of person and
property, a certain amount of freedom and non-interference in order to
function. But dictatorship does not permit that freedom; its
"guarantees" cannot inspire confidence. Hence the new economic policy
has not produced the results desired, and Russia remains in the throes
of poverty, constantly on the brink of economic disaster.

Industrially the dictatorship has emasculated the Revolution of its
basic purpose of placing production in the hands of the proletariat and
making the worker independent of economic masters. The dictatorship
merely changed masters: the government has become the boss instead of
the individual capitalist, though the latter is now also developing as a
new class in Russia. The toiler has remained dependent as before. In
fact, more so. His labor organizations have been deprived of all power,
and he has lost even the right to strike against his governmental
employer. "Since the workers, as a class, wield the dictatorship," the
Communists argue, "they cannot strike against themselves." Accordingly
the proletarians in Russia pay themselves wages that are not sufficient
for bare existence, live crowded in unhygienic quarters, work under most
unsanitary conditions, endanger their health and lives because of lack
of industrial precaution and safety, and arrest and imprison themselves
for an expression of discontent.

_Culturally_ the Bolshevik r√©gime is a training school in Communism and
party fanaticism, with no access to ideas differing from the views of
the dominant clique. It is the rearing of an entire people in the dogmas
of a political church, with no opportunity to broaden and cultivate the
mind outside the circle of opinions permitted by the ruling class. No
press exists in Russia except the official Communist publications and
such others as are approved of by the Bolshevik censor. No public
sentiment can find expression there, since the government has a monopoly
of speech, press, and assembly.

It is no exaggeration to say that there is less freedom of opinion and
opportunity to voice it under the Bolshevik dictatorship than there had
been under the Tsars. When Russia was ruled by the Romanovs you could at
least secretly issue pamphlets and books, since the government then had
no monopoly of the paper supply and printing presses. These were in
private hands, and the revolutionists could always find ways to use them
for their propaganda.

To-day in Russia all the means of publication and distribution are in
the exclusive possession of the Government, and no person can express
his views to the public unless he first secures Bolshevik permission.
Thousands of illegal publications had been issued by the revolutionary
parties during the autocratic Romanov r√©gime. Under Communist rule such
a happening is most exceptional, as witness the indignant amazement of
the Bolsheviki when it was discovered that Trotsky had succeeded in
publishing the platform of the Opposition element in the Party.

_Socially_ Bolshevik Russia, ten years after the Revolution, is a
country where no man can enjoy political security or economic
independence, where the hidden hand of the _G.P.U._ is always at work,
terrorizing the people by sudden night searches, arrests for no known
cause, secret denunciation for alleged counter-revolution out of
personal revenge, imprisonment without hearing or trial, and year-long
exile to the frozen North of Siberia or the and wastes of Western Asia.
A huge prison, where equality means the fear of all alike, and "freedom"
signifies unquestioning submission to the powers that be.

_Morally_ Russia represents the struggle of the finer qualities of man
against the degrading and corrupting effects of a system built on
coercion and intimidation. The Revolution brought the best instincts of
man to the fore: his manhood, his consciousness of human value, his love
of liberty and justice. The revolutionary atmosphere inspired and
cultivated these tendencies lying dormant in the people, particularly
the feeling against oppression, the hunger for freedom, the spirit of
mutual helpfulness and co√∂peration. But the dictatorship has had the
effect of counteracting these traits and arousing instead fear and
hatred, the spirit of intolerance and persecution. Bolshevik methods
have systematically weakened the people's morale, have encouraged
servility and hypocrisy, created disillusionment and distrust, and have
developed an atmosphere of time-serving now dominant in Russia.

Such is the situation to-day in that unhappy land, such the effects of
the Bolshevik idea that you can make a people free by compulsion, the
dogma that dictatorship can lead to liberty.

"So you think that the Revolution failed because of dictatorship?" you
ask. "Was not Russia too backward to make a success of it?"

It failed because of Bolshevik ideas and methods. The Russian masses
were not too "backward" to abolish the Tsar, to defeat the Provisional
Government, to destroy capitalism and the wage system, to turn the land
over to the peasantry and the industries to the workers. So far the
Revolution was the greatest success, and the people were beginning to
build their new life upon the foundation of equal liberty, opportunity,
and justice. But the moment a political party usurped the reins of
government and proclaimed its dictatorship, disastrous results were
inevitable.

Revolution, when it comes must deal with conditions as it finds them.
It is the means and methods used, and the purpose for which they are
used, that are vital. Upon them depends the course and fate of the
revolution.

Whatever the social, political, or economic situation of a given country
-- be it 'backward' Russia or 'advanced' America -- the most important
problem is what you want to accomplish and what means will best secure
your object.

But if the purpose of the Russian Revolution was to abolish oppression
and servitude, then the Bolsheviki and their policies are proving the
greatest failure.

It all depends, as you see, on what your purpose is, what you want to
accomplish. Your aims must determine the means. Means and aims are in
reality the same: you cannot separate them. It is the means that shape
your ends. The means are the seeds which but into flower and come to
fruition. The fruit will always be of the nature of the seed you
planted. You can't grow a rose from a cactus seed. No more can you
harvest liberty from compulsion, justice and manhood from dictatorship.

Let us learn this lesson well because the fate of revolution depends on
it. "You shall reap what you sow" is the acme of all human wisdom and
experience.

You cannot make a sick man well by drawing out his blood. The free
activity of the masses is the life-blood of revolution. Eliminate or
repress it, and revolution becomes an√¶mic and dies.

It means that the aims of the revolution must fashion its methods. Not
coercion and dictatorship, but only liberty and the free expression of
the masses can serve the objects of revolution. In revolution, as in
ordinary life, there is no middle road: it is either compulsion or
liberty.

Dictatorship and terror have been tried in Russia. The lesson of that
experiment is clear and convincing: those methods imply the destruction
of revolution. A new way must be found.

"Is there any other way?" you ask.

There is only the way of liberty, and that has never been tried, yet.

I don't know whether you are willing to try it: most people are afraid
of freedom. But I do know that unless that way is tried, the way of
liberty, justice, and reason, revolution must lead to dictatorship, to
failure and death.

Dictatorship, whether white or red, always means the same thing: it
means compulsion, oppression, and misery. That is its character and
essence. It cannot be anything else. Dictatorship is a government that
governments most. But as Thomas Jefferson wisely said, "That government
is best which governs least."

That is what the Anarchists claim, and so let us turn from Socialism and
Bolshevism, from Marx and Lenin, to consider what Anarchism has to offer
us.

## Part two: Anarchism

### Chapter 19: Is Anarchism Violence?

You have heard that Anarchists throw bombs, that they believe in
violence, and that Anarchy means disorder and chaos.

It is not surprising that you should think so. The press, the pulpit,
and every one in authority constantly din it into your ears. But most of
them know better, even if they have a reason for not telling you the
truth. It is time you should hear it.

I mean to speak to you honestly and frankly, and you can take my word
for it, because it happens that I am just one of those Anarchists who
are pointed out as men of violence and destruction. I ought to know, and
I have nothing to hide.

"Now, does Anarchism really mean disorder and violence?" you wonder.

No, my friend, it is capitalism and government which stand for disorder
and violence. Anarchism is the very reverse of it; it means order
without government and peace without violence.

"But is that possible?" you ask.

That is just what we are going to talk over now. But first your friend
demands to know whether Anarchists have never thrown bombs or ever used
any violence.

Yes, Anarchists have thrown bombs and have sometimes resorted to
violence.

"There you are!" your friend exclaims. "I thought so."

But do not let us be hasty. If Anarchists have sometimes employed
violence, does it necessarily mean that Anarchism means violence?

Ask yourself this question and try to answer it honestly.

When a citizen puts on a soldier's uniform, he may have to throw bombs
and use violence. Will you say, then, that citizenship stands for bombs
and violence?

You will indignantly resent the imputation. It simply means, you will
reply, that _under certain conditions_ a man may have to resort to
violence. The man may happen to he a Democrat, a Monarchist, a
Socialist, Bolshevik, or Anarchist.

You will find that this applies to all men and to all times.

Brutus killed Caesar because he feared his friend meant to betray the
republic and become king. Not that Brutus "loved Caesar less but that he
loved Rome more." Brutus was _not_ an Anarchist. He was a loyal
republican.

William Tell, as folklore tells us, shot to death the tyrant in order to
rid his country of oppression. Tell had never heard of Anarchism.

I mention these instances to illustrate the fact that from time
immemorial despots met their fate at the hands of outraged lovers of
liberty. Such men were rebels against tyranny. They were generally
patriots, Democrats or Republicans, occasionally Socialists or
Anarchists. Their acts were cases of individual rebellion against wrong
and injustice. Anarchism had nothing to do with it.

There was a time in ancient Greece when killing a despot was considered
the highest virtue. Modern law condemns such acts, but human feeling
seems to have remained the same in this matter as in the old days. The
conscience of the world does not feel outraged by tyrannicide. Even if
publicly not approved, the heart of mankind condones and often even
secretly rejoices at such acts. Were there not thousands of patriotic
youths in America willing to assassinate the German Kaiser whom they
held responsible for starting the World War? Did not a French court
recently acquit the man who killed Petlura to avenge the thousands of
men, women and children murdered in the Petlura pogroms against the Jews
of South Russia?

In every land, in all ages, there have been tyrannicides; that is, men
and women who loved their country well enough to sacrifice even their
own lives for it. Usually _they_ were persons of no political party or
idea, but simply haters of tyranny. Occasionally they were religious
fanatics, like the devout Catholic Kullmann, who tried to assassinate
Bismarck[^14] or the misguided enthusiast Charlotte Corday who killed
Marat during the French Revolution.

In the United States three Presidents were killed by individual acts.
Lincoln was shot in 1865, by John Wilkes Booth, who was a Southern
Democrat; Garfield, in 1881, by Charles Jules Guiteau, a Republican; and
McKinley, in 1901, by Leon Czolgosz. Out of the three only one was an
Anarchist.

The country that has the worst oppressors produces also the greatest
number of tyrannicides, which is natural. Take Russia, for instance.
With complete suppression of speech and press under the Tsars, there was
no way of mitigating the despotic r√©gime than by "putting the fear of
God" into the tyrant's heart.

Those avengers were mostly sons and daughters of the highest nobility,
idealistic youths who loved liberty and the people. With all other
avenues closed, they felt themselves compelled to resort to the pistol
and dynamite in the hope of alleviating the miserable conditions of
their country. They were known as nihilists and terrorists. They were
not Anarchists.

In modern times individual acts of political violence have been even
more frequent than in the past. The women suffragettes in England, for
example, frequently resorted to it to propagate and carry out their
demands for equal rights. In Germany, since the war, men of the most
conservative political views have used such methods in the hope of
reestablishing the kingdom. It was a monarchist who killed Karl
Erzberger, the Prussian Minister of Finance; and Walter Rathenau,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, was also laid low by a man of the same
political party.

Why, the original cause of, or at least excuse for, the Great War
itself was the killing of the Austrian heir to the throne by a Serbian
patriot who had never heard of Anarchism. In Germany, Hungary, France,
Italy, Spain, Portugal, and in every other European country men of the
most varied political views have resorted to acts of violence, not to
speak of the wholesale political terror, practiced by organized bodies
such as the Fascists in Italy, the Ku Klux Klan in America, or the
Catholic Church in Mexico.

You see, then, that Anarchists have no monopoly of political violence.
The number of such acts by Anarchists is infinitesimal as compared with
those committed by persons of other political persuasions.

The truth is that in every country, in every social movement, violence
has been a part of the struggle from time immemorial. Even the Nazarene,
who came to preach the gospel of peace, resorted to violence to drive
the money changers out of the temple.

As I have said, Anarchists have no monopoly on violence. On the
contrary, the teachings of Anarchism are those of peace and harmony, of
non-invasion, of the sacredness of life and liberty. But Anarchists are
human, like the rest of mankind, and perhaps more so. They are more
sensitive to wrong and injustice, quicker to resent oppression, and
therefore not exempt from occasionally voicing their protest by an act
of violence. But such acts are an expression of individual temperament,
not of any particular theory.

You might ask whether the holding of revolutionary ideas would not
naturally influence a person toward deeds of violence. I do not think
so, because we have seen that violent methods are also employed by
people of the most conservative opinions. If persons of directly
opposite political views commit similar acts, it is hardly reasonable to
say that their ideas are responsible for such acts.

Like results have a like cause, but that cause is not to be found in
political convictions; rather in individual temperament and the general
feeling about violence.

"You may be right about temperament," you say. "I can see that
revolutionary ideas are not the cause of political acts of violence,
else every revolutionist would be committing such acts. But do not such
views to some extent justify those who commit such acts?"

It may seem so at first sight. But if you think it over you will find
that it is an entirely wrong idea. The best proof of it is that
Anarchists who hold exactly the same views about government and the
necessity of abolishing it, often disagree entirely on the question of
violence. Thus Tolstoyan Anarchists and most Individualist Anarchists
condemn political violence, while other Anarchists approve of or at
least justify it.

Is it reasonable, then, to say that Anarchist views are responsible for
violence or in any way influence such acts?

Moreover, many Anarchists who at one time believed in violence as a
means of propaganda have changed their opinion about it and do not favor
such methods any more. There was a time, for instance, when Anarchists
advocated individual acts of violence, known as "propaganda by deed."
They did not expect to change government and capitalism into Anarchism
by such acts, nor did they think that the taking off of a despot would
abolish despotism. No, terrorism was considered a means of avenging a
popular wrong, inspiring fear in the enemy, and also calling attention
to the evil against which the act of terror was directed. But most
Anarchists to-day do not believe any more in "propaganda by deed" and do
not favor acts of that nature.

Experience has taught them that though such methods may have been
justified and useful in the past, modern conditions of life make them
unnecessary and even harmful to the spread of their ideas. But their
ideas remain the same, which means that it was not Anarchism which
shaped their attitude to violence. It proves that it is not certain
ideas or "isms" that lead to violence, but that some other causes bring
it about.

We must therefore look somewhere else to find the right explanation.

As we have seen, acts of political violence have been committed not only
by Anarchists, Socialists, and revolutionists of all kinds, but also by
patriots and nationalists, by Democrats and Republicans, by
suffragettes, by conservatives and reactionaries, by monarchists and
royalists, and even by religionists and devout Christians.

We know now that it could not have been any particular idea or "ism"
that influenced their acts, because the most varied ideas and "isms"
produced similar deeds. I have given as the reason individual
temperament and the general feeling about violence.

Here is the crux of the matter. What is this general feeling about
violence? If we can answer this question correctly, the whole matter
will be clear to us.

If we speak honestly, we must admit that every one believes in violence
and practices it, however he may condemn it in others. In fact, all of
the institutions we support and the entire life of present society are
based on violence.

What is the thing we call government? Is it anything else but organized
violence? The law orders you to do this or not to do that, and if you
fail to obey, it will compel you by force. We are not discussing just
now whether it is right or wrong, whether it should or should not be so,
just now we are interested in the fact that _it is_ so -- that all
government, all law and authority finally rest on force and violence, on
punishment or the fear of punishment.

Why, even spiritual authority, the authority of the church and of God
rests on force and violence, because it is the fear of divine wrath and
vengeance that wields power over you, compels you to obey, and even to
believe against your own reason.

Wherever you turn you will find that our entire life is built on
violence or the fear of it. From earliest childhood you are subjected to
the violence of parents or elders. At home, in school, in the office,
factory, field, or shop, it is always some one's _authority_ which keeps
you obedient and compels you to do his will.

The right to compel you is called authority. Fear of punishment has been
made into duty and is called obedience.

In this atmosphere of force and violence, of authority and obedience, of
duty, fear and punishment we all grow up; we breathe it throughout our
lives. We are so steeped in the spirit of violence that we never stop to
ask whether violence is right or wrong. We only ask if it is legal,
whether the law permits it.

You don't question the right of the government to kill, to confiscate
and imprison. If a private person should be guilty of the things the
government is doing all the time, you'd brand him a murderer, thief, and
scoundrel. But as long as the violence committed is "lawful," you
approve of it and submit to it. So it is not really violence that you
object to, but to people using violence "unlawfully."

This lawful violence and the fear of it dominate our whole existence,
individual and collective. Authority controls our lives from the cradle
to the grave -- authority parental, priestly and divine, political,
economic, social, and moral. But whatever the character of that
authority, it is always the same executioner wielding power over you
through your fear of punishment in one form or another. You are afraid
of God and the devil, of the priest and the neighbor, of your employer
and boss, of the politician and policeman, of the judge and the jailer,
of the law and the government. All your life is a long chain of fears --
fears which bruise your body and lacerate your soul. On those fears is
based the authority of God, of the church, of parents, of capitalist and
ruler.

Look into your heart and see if what I say is not true. Why, even among
children the ten-year-old Johnny bosses his younger brother or sister by
the authority of his greater physical strength, just as Johnny's father
bosses him by his superior strength, and by Johnny's dependence on his
support. You stand for the authority of priest and preacher because you
think they can "call down the wrath of God upon your head." You submit
to the domination of boss, judge, and government because of their power
to deprive you of work, to ruin your business, to put you in prison -- a
power, by the way, that you yourself have given into their hands.

So authority rules your whole life, the authority of the past and the
present, of the dead and the living, and your existence is a continuous
invasion and violation of yourself, a constant subjection to the
thoughts and the will of some one else.

And as you are invaded and violated, so you subconsciously revenge
yourself by invading and violating others over whom _you_ have authority
or can exercise compulsion, physical or moral. In this way all life has
become a crazy quilt of authority, of domination and submission, of
command and obedience, of coercion and subjection, of rulers and ruled,
of violence and force in a thousand and one forms.

Can you wonder that even idealists are still held in the meshes of this
spirit of authority and violence, and are often impelled by their
feelings and environment to invasive acts entirely at variance with
their ideas?

We are all still barbarians who resort to force and violence to settle
our doubts, difficulties, and troubles. Violence is the method of
ignorance, the weapon of the weak. The strong of heart and brain need no
violence, for they are irresistible in their consciousness of being
right. The further we get away from primitive man and the hatchet age,
the less recourse we shall have to force and violence. The more
enlightened man will become, the less he will employ compulsion and
coercion. The really civilized man will divest himself of all fear and
authority. He will rise from the dust and stand erect: he will bow to no
tsar either in heaven or on earth. He will become fully human when he
will scorn to rule and refuse to be ruled. He will be truly free only
when there shall be no more masters.

Anarchism is the ideal of such a condition; of a society without force
and compulsion, where all men shall be equals, and live in freedom,
peace, and harmony.

The word Anarchy comes from the Greek, meaning without force, without
violence or government, because government is the very fountainhead of
violence, constraint, and coercion.

Anarchy[^15] therefore does _not_ mean disorder and chaos, as you
thought before. On the contrary, it is the very reverse of it; it means
no government, which is freedom and liberty. Disorder is the child of
authority and compulsion. Liberty is the mother of order.

"A beautiful ideal," you say; "but only angels are fit for it."

Let us see, then, if we can grow the wings we need for that ideal state
of society.

### Chapter 20: What is Anarchism?

"Can you tell us briefly," your friend asks, "what Anarchism really is?"

I shall try. In the fewest words, Anarchism teaches that we can live in
a society where there is no compulsion of any kind.

A life without compulsion naturally means liberty; it means freedom from
being forced or coerced, a chance to lead the life that suits you best.

You cannot lead such a life unless you do away with the institutions
that curtail your liberty and interfere with your life, the conditions
that compel you to act differently from the way you really would like
to.

What are those institutions and conditions? Let us see what we have to
do away with in order to secure a free and harmonious life. Once we know
what has to be abolished and what must take its place, we shall also
find the way to do it.

What must be abolished, then, to secure liberty?

First of all, of course, the thing that invades you most, that handicaps
or prevents your free activity; the thing that interferes with your
liberty and compels you to live differently from what would be your own
choice.

That thing is government.

Take a good look at it and you will see that government is the greatest
invader; more than that, the worst criminal man has ever known of. It
fills the world with violence, with fraud and deceit, with oppression
and misery. As a great thinker once said, "its breath is poison." It
corrupts everything it touches.

"Yes, government means violence and it is evil," you admit; "but can we
do without it?"

That is just what we want to talk over. Now, if I should ask you whether
_you_ need government, I'm sure you would answer that you don't, but
that it is for the others that it is needed.

But if you should ask any one of those "others," he would reply as you
do: he would say that he does not need it, but that it is necessary "for
the others."

Why does every one think that he can be decent enough without the
policeman, but that the club is needed for "the others?"

"People would rob and murder each other if there were no government and
no law," you say.

If they really would, _why_ would they? Would they do it just for the
pleasure of it or because of certain reasons? Maybe if we examine their
reasons, we'd discover the cure for them.

Suppose you and I and a score of others had suffered shipwreck and found
ourselves on an island rich with fruit of every kind. Of course, we'd
get to work to gather the food. But suppose one of our number should
declare that it all belongs to him, and that no one shall have a single
morsel unless he first pays him tribute for it. We would be indignant,
wouldn't we? We'd laugh at his pretensions. If he'd try to make trouble
about it, we might throw him into the sea, and it would serve him right,
would it not?

Suppose further that we ourselves and our forefathers had cultivated the
island and stocked it with everything needed for life and comfort, and
that some one should arrive and claim it all as his. What would we say?
We'd ignore him, wouldn't we? We might tell him that he could share with
us and join us in our work. But suppose that he insists on his ownership
and that he produces a slip of paper and says that it proves that
everything belongs to him? We'd tell him he's crazy and we'd go about
our business. But if he should have a government back of him, he would
appeal to it for the protection of "his rights," and the government
would send police and soldiers who would evict us and put the "lawful
owner in possession."

That is the function of government; that is what government exists for
and what it is doing all the time.

Now, do you still think that without this thing called government we
should rob and murder each other?

Is it not rather true that _with_ government we rob and murder? Because
government does not secure us in our rightful possessions, but on the
contrary takes them away for the benefit of those who have no right to
them, as we have seen in previous chapters.

If you should wake up to-morrow morning and learn that there is no
government any more, would your first thought be to rush out into the
street and kill someone? No, you know that is nonsense. We speak of
sane, normal men. The insane man who wants to kill does not first ask
whether there is or isn't any government. Such men belong to the care of
physicians and alienists; they should be placed in hospitals to be
treated for their malady.

The chances are that if you or Johnson should awaken to find that there
is no government, you would get busy arranging your life under the new
conditions.

It is very likely, of course, that if you should then see people gorge
themselves while you go hungry, you would demand a chance to eat, and
you would be perfectly right in that. And so would every one else, which
means that people would not stand for any one hogging all the good
things of life: they would want to share in them. It means further that
the poor would refuse to stay poor while others wallow in luxury. It
means that the worker will decline to give up his product to the boss
who claims to "own" the factory and everything that is made there. It
means that the farmer will not permit thousands of acres to lie idle
while he has not enough soil to support himself and family. It means
that no one will be permitted to monopolize the land or the machinery of
production. It means that private ownership of the _sources of life_
will not be tolerated any more. It will be considered the greatest crime
for some to own more than they can use in a dozen lifetimes, while their
neighbors have not enough bread for their children. It means that all
men will share in the social wealth, and that all will help to produce
that wealth.

It means, in short, that for the first time in history right justice,
and equality would triumph instead of law.

You see therefore that doing away with government also signifies the
abolition of monopoly and of personal ownership of the means of
production and distribution.

It follows that when government is abolished, wage slavery and
capitalism must also go with it, because they cannot exist without the
support and protection of government. Just as the man who would claim a
monopoly of the island, of which I spoke before, could not put through
his crazy claim without the help of government.

Such a condition of things where there would be liberty instead of
government would be Anarchy. And where equality of use would take the
place of private ownership, would be Communism.

It would be Communist Anarchism.

"Oh, Communism," your friend exclaims, "but you said you were not a
Bolshevik!"

No, I am not a Bolshevik, because the Bolsheviki want a powerful
government or State, while Anarchism means doing away with the State or
government altogether.

"But are not the Bolsheviki Communists?" you demand.

Yes, the Bolsheviki are Communists, but they want their dictatorship,
their government, to _compel_ people to live in Communism. Anarchist
Communism, on the contrary, means voluntary Communism, Communism from
free choice.

"I see the difference. It would be fine, of course," your friend admits.
"But do you really think it possible?"

### Chapter 21: Is Anarchy Possible?

"It might be possible," you say, "if we could do without government. But
can we?"

Perhaps we can best answer your question by examining your own life.

What r√¥le does the government play in your existence? Does it help you
live? Does it feed, clothe, and shelter you? Do you need it to help you
work or play? If you are ill, do you call the physician or the
policeman? Can the government give you greater ability than nature
endowed you with? Can it save you from sickness, old age, or death?

Consider your daily life and you will find that in reality the
government is no factor in it at all except when it begins to interfere
in your affairs, when it compels you to do certain things or prohibits
you from doing others. It forces you, for instance, to pay taxes and
support it, whether you want to or not. It makes you don a uniform and
join the army. It invades your personal life, orders you about, coerces
you, prescribes your behavior, and generally treats you as it pleases.
It tells you even what you must believe and punishes you for thinking
and acting otherwise. It directs you what to eat and drink, and
imprisons or shoots you for disobeying. It commands you and dominates
every step of your life. It treats you as a bad boy or as an
_irresponsible_ child who needs the strong hand of a guardian, but if
you disobey it holds you _responsible_, nevertheless.

We shall consider later the details of life under Anarchy and see what
conditions and institutions will exist in that form of society, how they
will function, and what effect they are likely to have upon man.

For the present we want to make sure first that such a condition is
possible, that Anarchy is practicable.

What is the existence of the average man to-day? Almost all your time is
given to earning your livelihood. You are so busy making a living that
you hardly have time left to live, to enjoy life. Neither the time nor
the money. You are lucky if you have some source of support, some job.
Now and then comes slack-time: there is unemployment and thousands are
thrown out of work, every year, in every country.

That time means no income, no wages. It results in worry and privation,
in disease, desperation, and suicide. It spells poverty and crime. To
alleviate that poverty we build homes of charity, poorhouses, free
hospitals, all of which you support with your taxes. To prevent crime
and to punish the criminals it is again you who have to support police,
detectives, State forces, judges, lawyers, prisons, keepers. Can you
imagine anything more senseless and impractical? The legislatures pass
laws, the judges interpret them, the various officials execute them, the
police track and arrest the criminal, and finally the prison warden gets
him into custody. Numerous persons and institutions are busy keeping the
jobless man from stealing and punish him if he tries to. Then he is
provided with the means of existence, the lack of which had made him
break the law in the first place. After a shorter or longer term he is
turned loose. If he fails to get work he begins the same round of theft,
arrest, trial, and imprisonment all over again.

This is a rough but typical illustration of the stupid character of our
system; stupid and inefficient. Law and government support that system.

Is it not peculiar that most people imagine we could not do without
government, when in fact our real life has no connection with it
whatever, no need of it, and is only interfered with where law and
government step in?

"But security and public order," you object, "could we have that without
law and government? Who will protect us against the criminal?"

The truth is that what is called "law and order" is really the worst
disorder, as we have seen in previous chapters. What little order and
peace we do have is due to the good common sense and joint efforts of
the people, mostly in spite of the government. Do you need government to
tell you not to step in front of a moving automobile? Do you need it to
order you not to jump off the Brooklyn Bridge or from the Eiffel Tower?

Man is a social being: he cannot exist alone; he lives in communities or
societies. Mutual need and common interests result in certain
arrangements to afford us security and comfort. Such co-working is free,
voluntary; it needs no compulsion by any government. You join a sporting
club or a singing society because your inclinations lie that way, and
you co√∂perate with the other members without any one coercing you. The
man of science, the writer, the artist, and the inventor seek their own
kind for inspiration and mutual work. Their impulses and needs are their
best urge: the interference of any government or authority can only
hinder their efforts.

All through life you will find that the needs and inclinations of people
make for association, for mutual protection and help. That is the
difference between managing things and governing men; between doing
something from free choice and being compelled. It is the difference
between liberty and constraint, between Anarchism and government,
because Anarchism means voluntary co√∂peration instead of forced
participation. It means harmony and order in place of interference and
disorder.

"But who will protect us against crime and criminals?" you demand.

Rather ask yourself whether government really protects us against them.
Does not government itself create and uphold conditions which make for
crime? Does not the invasion and violence upon which all governments
rest cultivate the spirit of intolerance and persecution, of hatred and
more violence? Does not crime increase with the growth of poverty and
injustice fostered by government? Is not government itself the greatest
injustice and crime?

Crime is the result of economic conditions, of social inequality, of
wrongs and evils of which government and monopoly are the parents.
Government and law can only punish the criminal. They neither cure nor
prevent crime. The only real cure for crime is to abolish its causes,
and this the government can never do because it is there to preserve
those very causes. Crime can be eliminated only by doing away with the
conditions that create it. Government cannot do it.

Anarchism means to do away with those conditions. Crimes resulting from
government, from its oppression and injustice, from inequality and
poverty, will disappear under Anarchy. These constitute by far the
greatest percentage of crime.

Certain other crimes will persist for some time, such as those resulting
from jealousy, passion, and from the spirit of coercion and violence
which dominates the world to-day. But these, the offspring of authority
and possession, will also gradually disappear under wholesome conditions
with the passing away of the atmosphere that cultivated them.

Anarchy will therefore neither breed crime nor offer any soil for its
thriving. Occasional anti-social acts will be looked upon as survivals
of former diseased conditions and attitudes, and will be treated as an
unhealthy state of mind rather than as crime.

Anarchy would begin by feeding the "criminal" and securing him work
instead of first watching him, arresting, trying, and imprisoning him,
and finally ending by feeding him and the many others who have to watch
and feed him. Surely even this example shows how much more sensible and
simpler life would be under Anarchism than now.

The truth is, present life is impractical, complex and confused, and not
satisfactory from any point of view. That is why there is so much misery
and discontent. The worker is not satisfied; nor is the master happy in
his constant anxiety over "bad times" involving loss of property and
power. The specter of fear for to-morrow dogs the steps of poor and rich
alike.

Certainly the worker has nothing to lose by a change from government and
capitalism to a condition of no government, of Anarchy.

The middle classes are almost as uncertain of their existence as the
workers. They are dependent upon the good will of the manufacturer and
wholesaler, of the large combines of industry and capital, and they are
always in danger of bankruptcy and ruin.

Even the big capitalist has little to lose by the changing of the
present-day system to one of Anarchy, for under the latter every one
would be assured of living and comfort; the fear of competition would be
eliminated with the abolition of private ownership. Every one would have
full and unhindered opportunity to live and enjoy his life to the utmost
of his capacity.

Add to this the consciousness of peace and harmony; the feeling that
comes with freedom from financial or material worries; the realization
that you are in a friendly world with no envy or business rivalry to
disturb your mind; in a world of brothers, in an atmosphere of liberty
and general welfare.

It is almost impossible to conceive of the wonderful opportunities which
would open up to man in a society of Communist Anarchism. The scientist
could fully devote himself to his beloved pursuits, without being
harassed about his daily bread. The inventor would find every facility
at his disposal to benefit humanity by his discoveries and inventions.
The writer, the poet, the artist -- all would rise on the wings of
liberty and social harmony to greater heights of attainment.

Only then would justice and right come into their own. Do not
underestimate the r√¥le of these sentiments in the life of man or nation.
We do not live by bread alone. True, existence is not possible without
opportunity to satisfy our physical needs. But the gratification of
these by no means constitutes all of life. Our present system of
civilization has, by disinheriting millions, made the belly the center
of the universe, so to speak. But in a sensible society, with plenty for
all, the matter of mere existence, the security of a livelihood would be
considered self-evident and free as the air is for all. The feelings of
human sympathy, of justice and right would have a chance to develop, to
be satisfied, to broaden and grow. Even to-day the sense of justice and
fair play is still alive in the heart of man, in spite of centuries of
repression and perversion. It has not been exterminated, it cannot be
exterminated because it is inborn, innate in man, an instinct as strong
as that of self-preservation, and just as vital to our happiness. For
not all the misery we have in the world today comes from the lack of
material welfare. Man can better stand starvation than the consciousness
of injustice. The consciousness that you are treated unjustly will rouse
you to protest and rebellion just as quickly as hunger, perhaps even
quicker. Hunger may be the immediate cause of every rebellion or
uprising, but beneath it is the slumbering antagonism and hatred of the
masses against those at whose hands they are suffering injustice and
wrong. The truth is that right and justice play a far more important
r√¥le in our lives than most people are aware of. Those who would deny
this know as little of human nature as of history. In every-day life you
constantly see people grow indignant at what they consider to be an
injustice. "That isn't right," is the instinctive protest of man when he
feels wrong done. Of course, every one's conception of wrong and right
depends on his traditions, environment and bringing up. But whatever his
conception, his natural impulse is to resent what he thinks wrong and
unjust.

Historically the same holds true. More rebellions and wars have been
fought for ideas of right and wrong than because of material reasons.
Marxists may object that our views of right and wrong are themselves
formed by economic conditions, but that in no way alters the fact that
the sense of justice and right has at all times inspired people to
heroism and self-sacrifice in behalf of ideals.

The Christs and the Buddhas of all ages were not prompted by material
considerations but by their devotion to justice and right. The pioneers
in every human endeavor have suffered calumny, persecution, even death,
not for motives of personal aggrandizement but because of their faith in
the justice of their cause. The John Husses, the Luthers, Brunos,
Savonarolas, Gallileos and numerous other religious and social idealists
fought and died championing the cause of right as they saw it. Similarly
in paths of science, philosophy, art, poetry, and education men from the
time of Socrates to modern days have devoted their lives to the service
of truth and justice. In the field of political and social advancement,
beginning with Moses and Spartacus, the noblest of humanity have
consecrated themselves to ideals of liberty and equality. Nor is this
compelling power of idealism limited only to exceptional individuals.
The masses have always been inspired by it. The American War of
Independence, for instance, began with popular resentment in the
Colonies against the injustice of taxation without representation. The
Crusades continued for two hundred years in an effort to secure the Holy
Land for the Christians. This religious ideal inspired six millions of
men, even armies of children, to face untold hardships, pestilence, and
death in the name of right and justice. Even the late World War,
capitalistic as it was in cause and result, was fought by millions of
men in the fond belief that it was being waged for a just cause, for
democracy and the termination of all wars.

So all through history, past and modern, the sense of right and justice
has inspired man, individually and collectively, to deeds of
self-sacrifice and devotion, and raised him far above the mean drabness
of his every-day existence. It is tragic, of course, that this idealism
expressed itself in acts of persecution, violence, and slaughter. It was
the viciousness and self-seeking of king, priest, and master, ignorance
and fanaticism which determined those forms. But the spirit that filled
them was that of right and justice. All past experience proves that this
spirit is ever alive and that it is a powerful and dominant factor in
the whole scale of human life.

The conditions of our present-day existence weaken and vitiate this
noblest trait of man, pervert its manifestation, and turn it into
channels of intolerance, persecution, hatred, and strife. But once man
is freed from the corrupting influences of material interests, lifted
out of ignorance and class antagonism, his innate spirit of right and
justice would find new forms of expression, forms that would tend toward
greater brotherhood and good will, toward individual peace and social
harmony.

Only under Anarchy could this spirit come into its full development.
Liberated from the degrading and brutalizing struggle for our daily
bread, all sharing in labor and well-being, the best qualities of man's
heart and mind would have opportunity for growth and beneficial
application. Man would indeed become the noble work of nature that he
has till now visioned himself only in his dreams.

It is for these reasons that Anarchy is the ideal not only of some
particular element or class, but of all humanity, because it would
benefit, in the largest sense, all of us. For Anarchism is the
formulation of a universal and perennial desire of mankind.

Every man and woman, therefore, should be vitally interested in helping
to bring Anarchy about. They would surely do so if they but understood
the beauty and justice of such a new life. Every human being who is not
devoid of feeling and common sense is inclined to Anarchism. Every one
who suffers from wrong and injustice, from the evil, corruption, and
filth of our present-day life, is instinctively sympathetic to Anarchy.
Every one whose heart is not dead to kindness, compassion, and
fellow-sympathy must be interested in furthering it. Every one who has
to endure poverty and misery, tyranny and oppression should welcome the
coming of Anarchy. Every liberty and justice-loving man and woman should
help realize it.

And foremost and most vitally of all the subjected and submerged of the
world must be interested in it. Those who build palaces and live in
hovels; who set the table of life but are not permitted to partake of
the repast; who create the wealth of the world and are disinherited; who
fill life with joy and sunshine, and themselves remain scorned in the
depths of darkness; the Samson of life shorn of his strength by the hand
of fear and ignorance; the helpless Giant of Labor, the proletariat of
brain and brawn, the industrial and agrarian masses -- these should most
gladly embrace Anarchy.

It is to them that Anarchism makes the strongest appeal; it is they who,
first and foremost, must work for the new day that is to give them back
their inheritance and bring liberty and well-being, joy and sunshine to
the whole of mankind.

"A splendid thing," you remark; "but will it work? And how shall we
attain it?"

### Chapter 22: Will Communist Anarchism Work?

As we have seen in the preceding chapter, no life can be free and
secure, harmonious and satisfactory unless it is built on principles of
justice and fair play. The first requirement of justice is equal liberty
and opportunity.

Under government and exploitation there can be neither equal liberty nor
equal opportunity -- hence all the evils and troubles of present-day
society.

Communist Anarchism is based on the understanding of this
incontrovertible truth. It is founded on the principle of
non-invasiveness and non-coercion; in other words, on liberty and
opportunity.

Life on such a basis fully satisfies the demands of justice. You are to
be entirely free, and everybody else is to enjoy equal liberty, which
means that no one has a right to compel or force another, for coercion
of any kind is interference with your liberty.

Similarly equal opportunity is the heritage of all. Monopoly and the
private ownership of the means of existence are therefore eliminated as
an abridgement of the equal opportunity of all.

If we keep in mind this simple principle of equal liberty and
opportunity, we shall be able to solve the questions involved in
building a society of Communist Anarchism.

Politically, then, man will recognize no authority which can force or
coerce him. Government will be abolished.

Economically he will permit no exclusive possession of the sources of
life in order to preserve his opportunity of free access.

Monopoly of land, private ownership of the machinery of production,
distribution, and communication can therefore not be tolerated under
Anarchy. Opportunity to use what every one needs in order to live must
be free to all.

In a nutshell, then, the meaning of Communist Anarchism is this: the
abolition of government, of coercive authority and all its agencies, and
joint ownership -- which means free and equal participation in the
general work and welfare.

"You said that Anarchy will secure economic equality," remarks your
friend. "Does that mean equal pay for all?"

It does. Or, what amounts to the same, equal participation in the public
welfare. Because, as we already know, labor is social. No man can create
anything all by himself, by his own efforts. Now, then, if labor is
social, it stands to reason that the results of it, the wealth produced,
must also be social, belong to the collectivity. No person can therefore
justly lay claim to the exclusive ownership of the social wealth. It is
to be enjoyed by all alike.

"But why not give each according to the value of his work?" you ask.

Because there is no way by which value can be measured. That is the
difference between value and price. Value is what a thing is worth,
while price is what it can be sold or bought for in the market. What a
thing is worth no one really can tell. Political economists generally
claim that the value of a commodity is the amount of labor required to
produce it, of "socially necessary labor," as Marx says. But evidently
it is not a just standard of measurement. Suppose the carpenter worked
three hours to make a kitchen chair, while the surgeon took only half an
hour to perform an operation that saved your life. If the amount of
labor used determines value, then the chair is worth more than your
life. Obvious nonsense, of course. Even if you should count in the years
of study and practice the surgeon needed to make him capable of
performing the operation, how are you going to decide what "an hour of
operating" is worth? The carpenter and mason also had to be trained
before they could do their work properly, but you don't figure in those
years of apprenticeship when you contract for some work with them.
Besides, there is also to be considered the particular ability and
aptitude that every worker, writer, artist or physician must exercise in
his labors. That is a purely individual, personal factor. How are you
going to estimate its value?

That is why value cannot be determined. The same thing may be worth a
lot to one person while it is worth nothing or very little to another.
It may be worth much or little even to the same person, at different
times. A diamond, a painting, or a book may be worth a great deal to one
man and very little to another. A loaf of bread will be worth a great
deal to you when you are hungry, and much less when you are not.
Therefore the real value of a thing cannot be ascertained; it is an
unknown quantity.

But the price is easily found out. If there are five loaves of bread to
be had and ten persons want to get a loaf each, the price of bread will
rise. If there are ten loaves and only five buyers, then it will fall.
Price depends on supply and demand.

The exchange of commodities by means of prices leads to profit making,
to taking advantage and exploitation; in short, to some form of
capitalism. If you do away with profits, you cannot have any price
system, nor any system of wages or payment. That means that exchange
must be according to value. But as value is uncertain or not
ascertainable, exchange must consequently be free, without "equal"
value, since such does not exist. In other words, labor and its products
must be exchanged without price, without profit, freely, according to
necessity. This logically leads to ownership in common and to joint use.
Which is a sensible, just, and equitable system, and is known as
Communism.

"But is it just that all should share alike?" you demand. "The man of
brains and the dullard, the efficient and the inefficient, all the same?
Should there be no distinction, no special recognition for those of
ability?"

Let me in turn ask you, my friend, shall we punish the man whom nature
has not endowed as generously as his stronger or more talented neighbor?
Shall we add injustice to the handicap nature has put upon him? All we
can reasonably expect from any man is that he do his best -- can any one
do more? And if John's best is not as good as his brother Jim's, it is
his misfortune, but in no case a fault to be punished.

There is nothing more dangerous than discrimination. The moment you
begin discriminating against the less capable, you establish conditions
that breed dissatisfaction and resentment: you invite envy, discord, and
strife. You would think it brutal to withhold from the less capable the
air or water they need. Should not the same principle apply to the other
wants of man? After all, the matter of food, clothing, and shelter is
the smallest item in the world's economy.

The surest way to get one to do his best is not by discriminating
against him, but by treating him on an equal footing with others. That
is the most effective encouragement and stimulus. It is just and human.

"But what will you do with the lazy man, the man who does not want to
work?" inquires your friend.

That is an interesting question, and you will probably be very much
surprised when I say that there is really no such thing as laziness.
What we call a lazy man is generally a square man in a round hole. That
is, the right man in the wrong place. And you will always find that when
a fellow is in the wrong place, he will be inefficient or shiftless. For
so-called laziness and a good deal of inefficiency are merely unfitness,
misplacement. If you are compelled to do the thing you are unfitted for
by your inclinations or temperament, you will be inefficient at it; if
you are forced to do work you are not interested in, you will be lazy at
it.

Every one who has managed affairs in which large numbers of men were
employed can substantiate this. Life in prison is a particularly
convincing proof of the truth of it -- and, after all, present-day
existence for most people is but that of a larger jail. Every prison
warden will tell you that inmates put to tasks for which they have no
ability or interest are always lazy and subject to continuous
punishment. But as soon as these "refractory convicts" are assigned to
work that appeals to their leanings, they become "model men," as the
jailers term them.

Russia has also signally demonstrated the verity of it. It has shown how
little we know of human potentialities and of the effect of environment
upon them -- how we mistake wrong conditions for bad conduct. Russian
refugees, leading a miserable and insignificant life in foreign lands,
on returning home and finding in the Revolution a proper field for their
activities, have accomplished most wonderful work in their right sphere,
have developed into brilliant organizers, builders of railroads and
creators of industry. Among the Russian names best known abroad to-day
are those of men considered shiftless and inefficient under conditions
where their ability and energies could not find proper application.

That is human nature: efficiency in a certain direction means
inclination and capability for it; industry and application signify
interest. That is why there is so much inefficiency and laziness in the
world to-day. For who indeed is nowadays in his right place? Who works
at what he really likes and is interested in?

Under present conditions there is little choice given the average man to
devote himself to the tasks that appeal to his leanings and preferences.
The accident of your birth and social station generally predetermines
your trade or profession. The son of the financier does not, as a rule,
become a woodchopper, though he may be more fit to handle logs than bank
accounts. The middle classes send their children to colleges which turn
them into doctors, lawyers, or engineers. But if your parents were
workers who could not afford to let you study, the chances are that you
will take any job which is offered you, or enter some trade that happens
to afford you an apprenticeship. Your particular situation will decide
your work or profession, not your natural preferences, inclinations, or
abilities. Is it any wonder, then, that most people, the overwhelming
majority, in fact, are misplaced? Ask the first hundred men you meet
whether they would have selected the work they are doing, or whether
they would continue in it, if they were free to choose, and ninety-nine
of them will admit that they would prefer some other occupation.
Necessity and material advantages, or the hope of them, keep most people
in the wrong place.

It stands to reason that a person can give the best of himself only when
his interest is in his work, when he feels a natural attraction to it,
when he likes it. Then he will be industrious and efficient. The things
the craftsman produced in the days before modern capitalism were objects
of joy and beauty, because the artisan loved his work. Can you expect
the modern drudge in the ugly huge factory to make beautiful things? He
is part of the machine, a cog in the soulless industry, his labor
mechanical, forced. Add to this his feeling that he is not working for
himself but for the benefit of some one else, and that he hates his job
or at best has no interest in it except that it secures his weekly wage.
The result is shirking, inefficiency, laziness.

The need of activity is one of the most fundamental urges of man. Watch
the child and see how strong is his instinct for action, for movement,
for doing something. Strong and continuous. It is the same with the
healthy man. His energy and vitality demand expression. Permit him to do
the work of his choice, the thing he loves, and his application will
know neither weariness nor shirking. You can observe this in the factory
worker when he is lucky enough to own a garden or a patch of ground to
raise some flowers or vegetables on. Tired from his toil as he is, he
enjoys the hardest labor for his own benefit, done from free choice.

Under Anarchism each will have the opportunity of following whatever
occupation will appeal to his natural inclinations and aptitude. Work
will become a pleasure instead of the deadening drudgery it is to-day.
Laziness will be unknown, and the things created by interest and love
will be objects of beauty and joy.

"But can labor ever become a pleasure?" you demand.

Labor is toil to-day, unpleasant, exhausting, and wearisome. But usually
it is not the work itself that is so hard: it is the conditions under
which you are compelled to labor that make it so. Particularly the long
hours, unsanitary workshops, bad treatment, insufficient pay, and so on.
Yet the most unpleasant work could be made lighter by improving the
environment. Take gutter cleaning, for instance. It is dirty work and
poorly paid for. But suppose, for example, that you should get 20
dollars a day instead of 5 dollars for such work. You will immediately
find your job much lighter and pleasanter. The number of applicants for
the work would increase at once. Which means that men are not lazy, not
afraid of hard and unpleasant labor if it is properly rewarded. But such
work is considered menial and is looked down upon. Why is it considered
menial? Is it not most useful and absolutely necessary? Would not
epidemics sweep our city but for the street and gutter cleaners? Surely,
the men who keep our town clean and sanitary are real benefactors, more
vital to our health and welfare than the family physician. From the
viewpoint of social usefulness the street cleaner is the professional
colleague of the doctor: the latter treats us when we are ill, but the
former helps us keep well. Yet the physician is looked up to and
respected, while the street cleaner is slighted. Why? Is it because the
street cleaner's work is dirty? But the surgeon often has much "dirtier"
jobs to perform. Then why is the street cleaner scorned? Because he
_earns little_.

In our perverse civilization things are valued according to money
standards. Persons doing the most useful work are lowest in the social
scale when their employment is ill paid. Should something happen,
however, that would cause the street cleaner to get 100 dollars a day,
while the physician earns so, the "dirty" street cleaner would
immediately rise in estimation and social station, and from the "filthy
laborer" he would become the much-sought man of good income.

You see that it is pay, remuneration, _the wage scale_, not worth or
merit, that to-day-under our system of profit determines the value of
work as well as the "worth" of a man.

A sensible society -- under Anarchist conditions -- would have entirely
different standards of judging such matters. People will then be
appreciated according to their _willingness to be socially useful_.

Can you perceive what great changes such a new attitude would produce?
Every one yearns for the respect and admiration of his fellow men; it is
a tonic we cannot live without. Even in prison I have seen how the
clever pickpocket or safe blower longs for the appreciation of his
friends and how hard he tries to earn their good estimate of him. The
opinions of our circle rule our behavior. The social atmosphere to a
profound degree determines our values and our attitude. Your personal
experience will tell you how true this is, and therefore you will not be
surprised when I say that in an Anarchist society it will be the most
useful and difficult toil that men will seek rather than the lighter
job. If you consider this, you will have no more fear of laziness or
shirking.

But the hardest and most onerous task could be made easier and cleaner
than is the case today. The capitalist employer does not care to spend
money, if he can help it, to make the toil of his employees pleasanter
and brighter. He will introduce improvements only when he hopes to gain
larger profits thereby, but he will not go to extra expense out of
purely humanitarian reasons. Though here I must remind you that the more
intelligent employers are beginning to see that it pays to improve their
factories, make them more sanitary and hygienic, and generally better
the conditions of labor. They realize it is a good investment: it
results in the increased contentment and consequent greater efficiency
of their workers. The principle is sound. To-day, of course, it is being
exploited for the sole purpose of bigger profits. But under Anarchism it
would be applied not for the sake of personal gain, but in the interest
of the workers' health, for the lightening of labor. Our progress in
mechanics is so great and continually advancing that most of the hard
toil could be eliminated by the use of modern machinery and labor saving
devices. In many industries, as in coal mining, for instance, new safety
and sanitary appliances are not introduced because of the masters'
indifference to the welfare of their employees and on account of the
expenditure involved. But in a non-profit system technical science would
work exclusively with the aim of making labor safer, healthier, lighter,
and more pleasant.

"But however light you'll make work, eight hours a day of it is no
pleasure," objects your friend.

You are perfectly right. But did you ever stop to consider why we have
to work eight hours a day? Do you know that not so long ago people used
to slave twelve and fourteen hours, and that it is still the case in
backward countries like China and India?

It can be statistically proven that three hours' work a day, at most, is
sufficient to feed, shelter, and clothe the world and supply it not only
with necessities but also with all modern comforts of life. The point is
that not one man in five is to-day doing any productive work. The entire
world is supported by a small minority of toilers.

First of all, consider the amount of work done in present-day society
that would become unnecessary under Anarchist conditions. Take the
armies and navies of the world, and think how many millions of men would
be released for useful and productive effort once war is abolished, as
would of course be the case under Anarchy.

In every country to-day labor supports the millions who contribute
nothing to the welfare of the country, who create nothing, and perform
no useful work whatever. Those millions are only consumers, without
being producers. In the United States, for instance, out of a population
of 120 millions there are less than 30 million workers, farmers
included.[^16] A similar situation is the rule in every land.

Is it any wonder that labor has to toil long hours, since there are only
30 workers to every 120 persons? The large business classes with their
clerks, assistants, agents, and commercial travelers; the courts with
their judges, record keepers, bailiffs, etc.; the legion of attorneys
with their staffs; the militia and police forces; the churches and
monasteries; the charity institutions and poorhouses; the prisons with
their wardens, officers, keepers, and the non-productive convict
population; the army of advertisers and their helpers, whose business it
is to persuade you to buy what you don't want or need, not to speak of
the numerous elements that live luxuriously in entire idleness. All
these mount into the millions in every country.

Now, if all those millions would apply themselves to useful labor, would
the worker have to drudge eight hours a day? If 30 men have to put in
eight hours to perform a certain task, how much less time would it 'take
120 men to accomplish the same thing? I don't want to burden you with
statistics, but there are enough data to prove that less than 3 hours of
daily physical effort would be sufficient to do the world's work.

Can you doubt that even the hardest toil would become a pleasure instead
of the cursed slavery it is at present, if only three hours a day were
required, and that under the most sanitary and hygienic conditions, in
an atmosphere of brotherhood and respect for labor?

But it is not difficult to foresee the day when even those short hours
would be still further reduced. For we are constantly improving our
technical methods, and new labor saving machinery is being invented all
the time. Mechanical progress means less work and greater comforts, as
you can see by comparing life in the United States with that in China or
India. In the latter countries they toil long hours to secure the barest
necessities of existence, while in America even the average laborer
enjoys a much higher standard of living with fewer hours of work. The
advance of science and invention signifies more leisure for the pursuits
we love.

I have sketched in large, broad outline the possibilities of life under
a sensible system where profit is abolished. It is not necessary to go
into the minute details of such a social condition: sufficient has been
said to show that Communist Anarchism means the greatest material
welfare with a life of liberty for each and all.

We can visualize the time when labor will have become a pleasant
exercise, a joyous application of physical effort to the needs of the
world. Man will then look back at our present day and wonder that work
could ever have been slavery, and question the sanity of a generation
that suffered less than one fifth of its population to earn the bread
for the rest by the sweat of their brow while those others idled and
wasted their time, their health, and the people's wealth. They will
wonder that the freest satisfaction of man's needs could have ever been
considered as anything but self-evident, or that people naturally
seeking the same objects insisted on making life hard and miserable by
mutual strife. They will refuse to believe that the whole existence of
man was a continuous struggle for food in a world rich with luxuries, a
struggle that left the great majority neither time nor strength for the
higher quest of the heart and mind.

"But will not life under Anarchy, in economic and social equality mean
general leveling?" you ask.

No, my friend, quite the contrary. Because equality does not mean an
equal amount but equal _opportunity_. It does not mean, for instance,
that if Smith needs five meals a day, Johnson also must have as many. If
Johnson wants only three meals while Smith requires five, the quantity
each consumes may be unequal, but both men are perfectly equal in the
opportunity each has to consume as much as he needs, as much as his
particular nature demands.

Do not make the mistake of identifying equality in liberty with the
forced equality of the convict camp. True Anarchist equality implies
freedom, not quantity. It does not mean that every one must eat, drink,
or wear the same things, do the same work, or live in the same manner.
Far from it; the very reverse, in fact.

Individual needs and tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is _equal
opportunity to satisfy_ them that constitutes true equality.

Far from leveling, such equality opens the door for the greatest
possible variety of activity and development. For human character is
diverse, and only the repression of this diversity results in leveling,
in uniformity and sameness. Free opportunity of expressing and acting
out your individuality means development of natural dissimilarities and
variations.

It is said that no two blades of grass are alike. Much less so are human
beings. In the whole wide world no two persons are exactly similar even
in physical appearance; still more dissimilar are they in their
physiological, mental, and psychical make-up. Yet in spite of this
diversity and of a thousand and one differentiations of character we
compel people to be alike to-day. Our life and habits, our behavior and
manners, even our thoughts and feelings are pressed into a uniform mold
and fashioned into sameness. The spirit of authority, law, written and
unwritten, tradition and custom force us into a common groove and make
of man a will-less automaton without independence or individuality. This
moral and intellectual bondage is more compelling than any physical
coercion, more devastating to our manhood and development. All of us are
its victims, and only the exceptionally strong succeed in breaking its
chains, and that only partly.

The authority of the past and of the present dictates not only our
behavior but dominates our very minds and souls, and is continuously at
work to stifle every symptom of non-conformity, of independent attitude
and unorthodox opinion. The whole weight of social condemnation comes
down upon the head of the man or woman who dares defy conventional
codes. Ruthless vengeance is wreaked upon the protestant who refuses to
follow the beaten track, or upon the heretic who disbelieves in the
accepted formulas. In science and art, in literature, poetry, and
painting this spirit compels adaptation and adjustment, resulting in
imitation of the established and approved, in uniformity and sameness,
in stereotyped expression. But more terribly still is punished
non-conformity in actual life, in our every-day relationships and
behavior. The painter and writer may occasionally be forgiven for
defiance of custom and precedent because, after all, their rebellion is
limited to paper or canvas: it affects only a comparatively small
circle. They may be disregarded or labeled cranks who can do little
harm, but not so with the man of action who carries his challenge of
accepted standards into social life. Not harmless he. He is dangerous by
the power of example, by his very presence. His infraction of social
canons can be neither ignored nor forgiven. He will be denounced as an
enemy of society.

It is for this reason that revolutionary feeling or thought expressed in
exotic poetry or masked in high-brow philosophic dissertations may be
condoned, may pass the official and unofficial censor, because it is
neither accessible to nor understood by the public at large. But give
voice to the same dissenting attitude in a popular manner, and
immediately you will face the frothing denunciation of all the forces
that stand for the preservation of the established.

More vicious and deadening is compulsory compliance than the most
virulent poison. Throughout the ages it has been the greatest impediment
to man's advance, hedging him in with a thousand prohibitions and
taboos, weighting his mind and heart down with outlived canons and
codes, thwarting his will with imperatives of thought and feeling, with
"thou shalt" and "thou shalt not" of behavior and action. Life, the art
of living, has become a dull formula, flat and inert.

Yet so strong is the innate diversity of man's nature that centuries of
this stultification have not succeeded in entirely eradicating his
originality and uniqueness. True, the great majority have fallen into
ruts so deepened by countless feet that they cannot get back to the
broad spaces. But some do break away from the beaten track and find the
open road where new vistas of beauty and inspiration beckon to heart and
spirit. These the world condemns, but little by little it follows their
example and lead, and finally it comes up abreast of them. In the
meantime those pathfinders have gone much further or died, and then we
build monuments to them and glorify the men we have vilified and
crucified as we go on crucifying their brothers in spirit, the pioneers
of our own day.

Beneath this spirit of intolerance and persecution is the habit of
authority: coercion to conform to dominant standards, compulsion --
moral and legal -- to be and act as others, according to precedent and
rule.

But the general view that conformity is a natural trait is entirely
false. On the contrary, given the least chance, unimpeded by the mental
habits instilled from the very cradle, man evidences uniqueness and
originality. Observe children, for instance, and you will see most
varied differentiation in manner and attitude, in mental and psychic
expression. You will discover an instinctive tendency to individuality
and independence, to non-conformity, manifested in open and secret
defiance of the will imposed from the outside, in rebellion against the
authority of parent and teacher. The whole training and "education" of
the child is a continuous process of stifling and crushing this
tendency, the eradication of his distinctive characteristics, of his
unlikeness to others, of his personality and originality. Yet even in
spite of year-long repression, suppression, and molding, some
originality persists in the child when it reaches maturity, which shows
how deep are the springs of individuality. Take any two persons, for
example, who have witnessed some tragedy, a big fire, let us say, at the
same time and place. Each will tell the story in a different manner,
each will be original in his way of relating it and in the impression he
will produce, because of his naturally different psychology. But talk to
the same two persons on some fundamental social matter, about life and
government, for instance, and immediately you hear expressed an exactly
similar attitude, the accepted view, the dominant mentality.

Why? Because where man is left free to think and feel for himself,
unhindered by precept and rule, and not restrained by the fear of being
"different" and unorthodox, with the unpleasant consequences it
involves, he will be independent and free. But the moment the
conversation touches matters within the sphere of our social
imperatives, one is in the clutches of the taboos and becomes a copy and
a parrot.

Life in freedom, in Anarchy, will do more than liberate man merely from
his present political and economic bondage. That will be only the first
step, the preliminary to a truly human existence. Far greater and more
significant will be the _results_ of such liberty, its effects upon
man's mind, upon his personality. The abolition of the coercive external
will, and with it of the fear of authority, will loosen the bonds of
moral compulsion no less than of economic and physical. Man's spirit
will breathe freely, and that mental emancipation will be the birth of a
new culture, of a new humanity. Imperatives and taboos will disappear,
and man will begin to be himself, to develop and express his individual
tendencies and uniqueness. Instead of "thou shalt not," the public
conscience will say "thou mayest, taking full responsibility." That will
be a training in human dignity and self-reliance, beginning at home and
in school, which will produce a new race with a new attitude to life.

The man of the coming day will see and feel existence on an entirely
different plane. Living to him will be an art and a joy. He will cease
to consider it as a race where every one must try to become as good a
runner as the fastest. He will regard leisure as more important than
work, and work will fall into its proper, subordinate place as the means
to leisure, to the enjoyment of life.

Life will mean the striving for finer cultural values, the penetration
of nature's mysteries, the attainment of higher truth. Free to exercise
the limitless possibilities of his mind, to pursue his love of
knowledge, to apply his inventive genius, to create, and to soar on the
wings of imagination, man will reach his full stature and become man
indeed. He will grow and develop according to his nature. He will scorn
uniformity, and human diversity will give him increased interest in, and
a more satisfying sense of, the richness of being. Life to him will not
consist in functioning but in living, and he will attain the greatest
kind of freedom man is capable of, freedom in joy.

"That day lies far in the future," you say; "how shall we bring it
about?"

Far in the future, maybe; yet perhaps not so far -- one cannot tell. At
any rate we should always hold our ultimate object in view if we are to
remain on the right road. The change I have described will not come over
night; nothing ever does. It will be a gradual development, as
everything in nature and social life is. But a logical, necessary, and,
I dare say, an inevitable development. Inevitable, because the whole
trend of man's growth has been in that direction; even if in zigzags,
often losing its way, yet always returning to the right path.

How, then, might it be brought about?

### Chapter 23: Non-Communist Anarchists

Before we proceed let me make a short explanation. I owe it to those
Anarchists who are not Communists.

Because you should know that not all Anarchists are Communists: not all
of them believe that Communism -- social ownership and sharing according
to need -- would be the best and justest economic arrangement.

I have first explained to you Communist Anarchism because it is, in my
estimation, the most desirable and practical form of society. The
Communist Anarchists hold that only under Communist conditions could
Anarchy prosper, and equal liberty, justice, and well-being be assured
to every one without discrimination.

But there are Anarchists who do not believe in Communism. They can be
generally classed as Individualists and Mutualists.[^17]

_All_ Anarchists agree on this fundamental position: that government
means injustice and oppression, that it is invasive, enslaving, and the
greatest hindrance to man's development and growth. They all believe
that freedom can exist only in a society where there is no compulsion of
any kind. All Anarchists are therefore at one on the basic principle of
abolishing government.

They disagree mostly on the following points:

First: the manner in which Anarchy will come about. The Communist
Anarchists say that only a social revolution can abolish government and
establish Anarchy, while Individualist Anarchists and Mutualists do not
believe in revolution. They think that present society will gradually
develop out of government into a non-governmental condition.

Second: Individualist Anarchists and Mutualists believe in individual
ownership, as against the Communist Anarchists who see in the
institution of private property one of the main sources of injustice and
inequality, of poverty and misery. The Individualists and Mutualists
maintain that liberty means "the right of every one to the product of
his toil"; which is true, of course. Liberty does mean that. But the
question is not whether one has a right to his product, but whether
there is such a thing as an individual product. I have pointed out in
preceding chapters that there is no such thing in modern industry: all
labor and the products of labor are social. The argument, therefore,
about the right of the individual to his product has no practical merit.

I have also shown that exchange of products or commodities cannot be
individual or private, unless the profit system is employed. Since the
value of a commodity cannot be adequately determined, no barter is
equitable. This fact leads, in my opinion, to social ownership and use;
that is, to Communism, as the most practicable and just economic system.

But, as stated, Individualist Anarchists and Mutualists disagree with
the Communist Anarchists on this point. They assert that the source of
economic inequality is monopoly, and they argue that monopoly will
disappear with the abolition of government, because it is special
privilege -- given and protected by government -- which makes monopoly
possible. Free competition, they claim, would do away with monopoly and
its evils.

Individualist Anarchists, followers of Stirner and Tucker, as well as
Tolstoyan Anarchists who believe in nonresistance, have no very clear
plan of the economic life under Anarchy. The Mutualists, on the other
hand, propose a definite new economic system. They believe with their
teacher, the French philosopher Proudhon, that mutual banking and credit
without interest would be the best economic form of a non-government
society. According to their theory, free credit, affording every one
opportunity to borrow money without interest, would tend to equalize
incomes and reduce profits to a minimum, and would thus eliminate riches
as well as poverty. Free credit and competition in the open market, they
say, would result in economic equality, while the abolition of
government would secure equal freedom. The social life of the Mutualist
community, as well as of the Individualist society, would be based on
the sanctity of voluntary agreement, of free contract.

I have given here but the briefest outline of the attitude of
Individualist Anarchists and Mutualists. It is not the purpose of this
work to treat in detail those Anarchist ideas which the author thinks
erroneous and impractical. Being a Communist Anarchist I am interested
in submitting to the reader the views that I consider best and soundest.
I thought it fair, however, not to leave you in ignorance about the
existence of other, non-Communist Anarchist theories. For a closer
acquaintance with them I refer you to the appended list of books on
Anarchism in general.

## Part three: The Social Revolution

### Chapter 24: Why Revolution?

Let us return to your question, "How will Anarchy come? Can we help
bring it about?"

This is a most important point, because in every problem there are two
vital things: first, to know clearly just what you want; second, how to
attain it.

We already know what we want. We want social conditions wherein all will
be free and where each shall have the fullest opportunity to satisfy his
needs and aspirations, on the basis of equal liberty for all. In other
words, we are striving for the free co√∂perative commonwealth of
Communist Anarchism.

How will it come about?

We are not prophets, and no one can tell just how a thing will happen.
But the world does not exist since yesterday; and man, as a reasonable
being, must benefit by the experience of the past.

Now, what is that experience? If you glance over history you will see
that the whole life of man has been a struggle for existence. In his
primitive state man fought single-handed the wild beasts of the forest,
and helplessly he faced hunger, cold, darkness, and storm. Because of
his ignorance all the forces of nature were his enemies: they worked
evil and destruction to him, and he, alone, was powerless to combat
them. But little by little man learned to come together with others of
his kind; together they sought safety and security. By joint effort they
presently began to turn the energies of nature to their service. Mutual
help and co√∂peration gradually multiplied man's strength and ability
till he has succeeded in conquering nature, in applying her forces to
his use, in chaining the lightning, bridging oceans, and mastering even
the air.

Similarly the primitive man's ignorance and fear made life a continuous
struggle of man against man, of family against family, of tribe against
tribe, until men realized that by getting together, by joint effort and
mutual aid, they could accomplish more than by strife and enmity. Modern
science shows that even animals had learned that much in the struggle
for existence. Certain kinds survived because they quit fighting each
other and lived in herds, and in that way were better able to protect
themselves against other beasts.[^18] In proportion as men substituted
joint effort and co√∂peration in place of mutual struggle, they advanced,
grew out of barbarism, and became civilized. Families which had formerly
fought each other to the death combined and formed one common group;
groups joined and became tribes, and tribes federated into nations. The
nations still stupidly keep on fighting each other, but gradually they
are also learning the same lesson, and now they are beginning to look
for a way to stop the international slaughter known as war.

Unfortunately in our social life we are yet in a condition of barbarism,
destructive and fratricidal: group still combats group, class fights
against class. But here also men are beginning to see that it is a
senseless and ruinous warfare, that the world is big and rich enough to
be enjoyed by all, like the sunshine, and that a united mankind would
accomplish more than one divided against itself.

What is called progress is just the realization of this, a step in that
direction.

The whole advance of man consists in the striving for greater safety and
peace, for more security and welfare. Man's natural impulse is toward
mutual help and joint effort, his most instinctive longing is for
liberty and joy. These tendencies seek to express and assert themselves
in spite of all obstacles and difficulties. The lesson of the entire
history of man is that neither hostile natural forces nor human
opposition can hold back his onward march. If I were asked to define
civilization in a single phrase I should say that it is the triumph of
man over the powers of darkness, natural and human. The inimical forces
of nature we have conquered, but we still have to fight the dark powers
of men.

History fails to show a single important social improvement made without
meeting the opposition of the dominant powers -- the church, government,
and capital. Not a step forward but was achieved by breaking down the
resistance of the masters. Every advance has cost a bitter struggle. It
took many long fights to destroy slavery; it required revolts and
uprisings to secure the most fundamental rights for the people; it
necessitated rebellions and revolutions to abolish feudalism and
serfdom. It needed civil warfare to do away with the absolute power of
kings and establish democracies, to conquer more freedom and well-being
for the masses. There is not a country on earth, not an epoch in
history, where any great social evil was eliminated without a bitter
struggle with the powers that be. In recent days it again took
revolutions to get rid of Tsardom in Russia, of the Kaiser in Germany,
the Sultan in Turkey, the monarchy in China, and so on, in various
lands.

There is no record of any government or authority, of any group or class
in power having given up its mastery voluntarily. In every instance it
required the use of force, or at least the threat of it.

Is it reasonable to assume that authority and wealth will experience a
sudden change of heart, and that they will behave differently in the
future than they had in the past?

Your common sense will tell you that it is a vain and foolish hope.
Government and capital will _fight_ to retain power. They do it even
to-day at the least menace to their privileges. They will fight to the
death for their existence.

That is why it is no prophecy to foresee that some day it must come to a
decisive struggle between the masters of life and the dispossessed
classes.

As a matter of fact, that struggle is going on all the time.

There is a continuous warfare between capital and labor. That warfare
generally proceeds within so-called legal form. But even these erupt now
and then in violence, as during strikes and lockouts, because the armed
fist of government is always at the service of the masters, and that
fist gets into action the moment capital feels its profits threatened:
then it drops the mask of "mutual interests" and "partnership" with
labor and resorts to the final argument of every master, to coercion and
force.

It is therefore certain that government and capital will not allow
themselves to be quietly abolished if they can help it; nor will they
miraculously "disappear" of themselves, as some people pretend to
believe. It will require a revolution to get rid of them.

There are those who smile incredulously at the mention of revolution.
"Impossible!" they say confidently. So did Louis XVI and Marie
Antoinette of France think only a few weeks before they lost their
throne together with their heads. So did the nobility at the court of
Tsar Nicholas II believe on the very eve of the upheaval that swept them
away. "It doesn't look like revolution," the superficial observer
argues. But revolutions have a way of breaking out when it "doesn't look
like it." The more far-seeing modern capitalists, however, do not seem
willing to take any chances. They know that uprisings and revolutions
are possible at any time. That is why the great corporations and big
employers of labor, particularly in America, are beginning to introduce
new methods calculated to serve as lightning rods against popular
disaffection and revolt. They initiate bonuses for their employees,
profit sharing, and similar methods designed to make the worker more
satisfied and financially interested in the prosperity of his industry.
These means may temporarily blind the proletarian to his true interests,
but do not believe that the worker will forever remain content with his
wage slavery even if his cage be slightly gilded from time to time.
Improving material conditions is no insurance against revolution. On the
contrary, the satisfaction of our wants creates new needs, gives birth
to new desires and aspirations. That is human nature, and that's what
makes improvement and progress possible. Labor's discontent is not to be
choked down with an extra piece of bread, even if it be buttered. That
is why there is more conscious and active revolt in the industrial
centers of better-situated Europe than in backward Asia and Africa. The
spirit of man forever yearns for greater comfort and freedom, and it is
the masses who are the truest bearers of this incentive to further
advancement. The hope of modern plutocracy to forestall revolution by
throwing a fatter bone to the toiler now and then is illusory and
baseless. The new policies of capital may seem to appease labor for a
while, but its onward march cannot be stopped by such makeshifts. The
abolition of capitalism is inevitable, in spite of all schemes and
resistance, and it will be accomplished only by revolution.

A revolution is similar to the struggle of man against nature.
Single-handed he is powerless and cannot succeed; by the aid of his
fellow-men he triumphs over all obstacles.

Can the individual worker accomplish anything against the big
corporation? Can a small labor union compel the large employer to grant
its demands? The capitalist class is organized in its fight against
labor. It stands to reason that a revolution can be fought successfully
only when the workers are united, when they are organized throughout the
land; when the proletariat of all countries will make a joint effort,
for capital is international and the masters always combine against
labor in every big issue. That is why, for instance, the plutocracy of
the whole world turned against the Russian Revolution. As long as the
people of Russia meant only to abolish the Tsar, international capital
did not interfere: it did not care what political form Russia would
have, as long as the government would be bourgeois and capitalistic. But
as soon as the Revolution attempted to do away with the system of
capitalism, the governments and the bourgeoisie of every land combined
to crush it. They saw in it a menace to the continuance of their own
mastery.

Keep that well in mind, my friend. Because there are revolutions and
revolutions. Some revolutions change only the governmental form by
putting in a new set of rulers in place of the old. These are political
revolutions, and as such they often meet with little resistance. But a
revolution that aims to abolish the entire system of wage slavery must
also do away with the power of one class to oppress another. That is, it
is not any more a mere change of rulers, of government, not a political
revolution, but one that seeks to alter the whole character of society.
That would be a _social_ revolution. As such it would have to fight not
only government and capitalism, but it would also meet with the
opposition of popular ignorance and prejudice, of those who believe in
government and capitalism.

How is it then to come about?

### Chapter 25: The Idea is the Thing

Did you ever ask yourself how it happens that government and capitalism
continue to exist in spite of all the evil and trouble they are causing
in the world?

If you did, then your answer must have been that it is because the
people support those institutions, and that they support them because
they _believe_ in them.

That is the crux of the whole matter: present-day society rests on the
belief of the people that it is good and useful. It is founded on the
idea of authority and private ownership. It is _ideas_ that maintain
conditions. Government and capitalism are the forms in which the popular
ideas express themselves. Ideas are the foundation; the institutions are
the house built upon it.

A new social structure must have a new foundation, new ideas at its
base. However you may change the form of an institution, its character
and meaning will remain the same as the foundation on which it is built.
Look closely at life and you will perceive the truth of this. There are
all kinds and forms of government in the world, but their real nature is
the same everywhere, as their effects are the same: it always means
authority and obedience.

Now, what makes governments exist? The armies and navies? Yes, but only
apparently so. What supports the armies and navies? It is the belief of
the people, of the masses, that government is necessary; it is the
generally accepted idea of the _need_ of government. That is its real
and solid foundation. Take that idea or belief away, and no government
could last another day.

The same applies to private ownership. The idea that it is right and
necessary is the pillar that supports it and gives it security.

Not a single institution exists to-day but is founded on the popular
belief that it is good and beneficial.

Let us take an illustration; the United States, for instance. Ask
yourself why revolutionary propaganda has been of so little effect in
that country in spite of fifty years of Socialist and Anarchist effort.
Is the American worker not exploited more intensely than labor in other
countries? Is political corruption as rampant in any other land? Is the
capitalist class in America not the most arbitrary and despotic in the
world? True, the worker in the United States is better situated
materially than in Europe, but is he not at the same time treated with
the utmost brutality and terrorism the moment he shows the least
dissatisfaction? Yet the American worker remains loyal to the government
and is the first to defend it against criticism. He is still the most
devoted champion of the "grand and noble institutions of the greatest
country on earth." Why? Because he believes that they are _his_
institutions, that _he_, as sovereign and free citizen, is running them
and that he could change them if he so wished. It is his _faith_ in the
existing order that constitutes its greatest security against
revolution. His faith is stupid and unjustified, and some day it will
break down and with it American capitalism and despotism. But as long as
that faith persists, American plutocracy is safe against revolution.

As men's minds broaden and develop, as they advance to new ideas and
lose faith in their former beliefs, institutions begin to change and are
ultimately done away with. The people grow to understand that their
former views were false, that they were not truth but prejudice and
superstition.

In this way many ideas, once held to be true, have come to be regarded
as wrong and evil. Thus the ideas of the divine right of kings, of
slavery and serfdom. There was a time when the whole world believed
those institutions to be right, just, and unchangeable. In the measure
that those superstitions and false beliefs were fought by advanced
thinkers, they became discredited and lost their hold upon the people,
and finally the institutions that incorporated those ideas were
abolished. Highbrows will tell you that they had "outlived their
usefulness" and that therefore they "died." But how did they "outlive"
their "usefulness?" To whom were they useful, and how did they "die?"

We know already that they were useful only to the master class, and that
they were done away with by popular uprisings and revolutions.

Why did not old and effete institutions "disappear" and die off in a
peaceful manner?

For two reasons: first, because some people think faster than others. So
that it happens that a minority in a given place advance in their views
quicker than the rest. The more that minority will become imbued with
the new ideas, the more convinced of their truth, and the stronger they
will feel themselves, the sooner they will try to realize their ideas;
and that is usually before the majority have come to see the new light.
So that the minority have to struggle against the majority who still
cling to the old views and conditions.

Second, the resistance of those who hold power. It makes no difference
whether it is the church, the king, or kaiser, a democratic government
or a dictatorship, a republic or an autocracy -- those in authority will
fight desperately to retain it as long as they can hope for the least
chance of success. And the more aid they get from the slower-thinking
majority the better the fight they can put up. Hence the fury of revolt
and revolution.

The desperation of the masses, their hatred of those responsible for
their misery, and the determination of the lords of life to hold on to
their privileges and rule combine to produce the violence of popular
uprisings and rebellions.

But blind rebellion without definite object and purpose is not
revolution. Revolution is rebellion become conscious of its aims.
Revolution is _social_ when it strives for a _fundamental_ change. As
the foundation of life is economics, the social revolution means the
reorganization of the industrial, economic life of the country and
consequently also of the entire structure of society.

But we have seen that the social structure rests on the basis of
_ideas_, which implies that changing the structure presupposes changed
ideas. In other words, social ideas must change _first_ before a new
social structure can be built.

The social revolution, therefore, is not an accident, not a sudden
happening. There is nothing sudden about it, for ideas don't change
suddenly. They grow slowly, gradually, like the plant or flower. Hence
the social revolution is a result, a development, which means that it is
revolutionary. It develops to the point when considerable numbers of
people have embraced the new ideas and are determined to put them into
practice. When they attempt to do so and meet with opposition, then the
slow, quiet, and peaceful social evolution becomes quick, militant, and
violent. Evolution becomes revolution.

Bear in mind, then, that evolution and revolution are _not_ two separate
and different things. Still less are they opposites, as some people
wrongly believe. Revolution is merely the boiling point of evolution.

Because revolution is evolution at its boiling point you cannot "make" a
real revolution any more than you can hasten the boiling of a tea
kettle. It is the fire underneath that makes it boil: how quickly it
will come to the boiling point will depend on how strong the fire is.

The economic and political conditions of a country are the fire under
the evolutionary pot. The worse the oppression, the greater the
dissatisfaction of the people, the stronger the flame. This explains why
the fires of social revolution swept Russia, the most tyrannous and
backward country, instead of America where industrial development has
almost reached its highest point -- and that in spite of all the learned
demonstrations of Karl Marx to the contrary.

We see, then, that revolutions, though they cannot be made, can be
hastened by certain factors; namely, by pressure from above: by more
intense political and economical oppression; and by pressure from below:
by greater enlightenment and agitation. These spread the ideas; they
further evolution and thereby also the coming of revolution.

But pressure from above, though hastening revolution, may also cause its
failure, because such revolution is apt to break out before the
evolutionary process has been sufficiently advanced. Coming prematurely,
as it were, it will fizzle out in mere rebellion; that is, without
clear, conscious aim and purpose. At best, rebellion can secure only
some temporary alleviation; the real causes of the strife, however,
remain intact and continue to operate to the same effect, to cause
further dissatisfaction and rebellion.

Summing up what I have said about revolution, we must come to the
conclusion that:

1. a social revolution is one that entirely changes the foundation of
society, its political, economic, and social character;

2. such a change must _first_ take place in the ideas and opinions of
the people, in the minds of men;

3. oppression and misery may hasten revolution, but may _thereby_ also
turn it into failure, because lack of evolutionary preparation will make
real accomplishment impossible;

4. only that revolution can be fundamental, social, and successful which
will be the expression of a basic change of ideas and opinions.

From this it obviously follows that the social revolution must be
_prepared_. Prepared in the sense of furthering the evolutionary
process, of enlightening the people about the evils of present-day
society and convincing them of the desirability and possibility, of the
justice and practicability of a social life based on liberty; prepared,
moreover, by making the masses realize very clearly just what they need
and how to bring it about.

Such preparation is not only an absolutely necessary preliminary step.
Therein lies also the safety of the revolution, the only guarantee of
its accomplishing its objects.

It has been the fate of most revolutions -- as a result of lack of
preparation -- to be sidetracked from their main purpose, to be misused
and led into blind alleys. Russia is the best recent illustration of it.
The February Revolution, which sought to do away with the autocracy, was
entirely successful. The people knew exactly what they wanted; namely
the abolition of Tsardom. All the machinations of politicians, all the
oratory and schemes of the Lvovs and Miliukovs -- the "liberal" leaders
of those days could not save the Romanov r√©gime in the face of the
intelligent and conscious will of the people. It was this clear
understanding of its aims which made the February Revolution a complete
success, with, mind you, almost no bloodshed.

Furthermore, neither appeals nor threats by the Provisional Government
could avail against the determination of the people to end the war. The
armies left the fronts and thus terminated the matter by their own
direct action. The will of a people conscious of their objects always
conquers.

It was the will of the people again, their resolute aim to get hold of
the soil, which secured for the peasant the land he needed. Similarly
the city workers, as repeatedly mentioned before, possessed themselves
of the factories and the machinery of production.

So far the Russian Revolution was a complete success. But at the point
where the masses lacked the consciousness of definite purpose, defeat
began. That is always the moment when politicians and political parties
step in to exploit the revolution for their own uses or to experiment
their theories upon it. This happened in Russia, as in many previous
revolutions. The people fought the good fight -- the political parties
fought over the spoils to the detriment of the revolution and to the
ruin of the people.

This is, then, what took place in Russia. The peasant, having secured
the land, did not have the tools and machinery he needed. The worker,
having taken possession of the machinery and factories, did not know how
to handle them to accomplish his aims. In other words, he did not have
the experience necessary to organize production and he could not manage
the distribution of the things he was producing.

His own efforts -- the worker's, the peasant's, the soldier's -- had
done away with Tsardom, paralyzed the Government, stopped the war, and
abolished private ownership of land and machinery. For _that_ he was
prepared by years of revolutionary education and agitation. But for no
more than that. And because he was prepared for no more, where his
knowledge ceased and definite purpose was lacking, there stepped in the
political party and took affairs out of the hands of the masses who had
made the revolution. Politics replaced economic reconstruction and
thereby sounded the death knell of the social revolution; for people
live by bread, by economics, not by politics.

Food and supplies are not created by decree of party or government.
Legislative edicts don't till the soil; laws can't turn the wheels of
industry. Dissatisfaction, strife, and famine came upon the heels of
government coercion and dictatorship. Again, as always, politics and
authority proved the swamp in which the revolutionary fires became
extinguished.

Let us learn this most vital lesson: thorough understanding by the
masses of the true aims of revolution means success. Carrying out their
conscious will by their own efforts guarantees the right development of
the new life. On the other hand, lack of this understanding and of
preparation means certain defeat, either at the hands of reaction or by
the experimental theories of would-be political party friends.

Let us prepare, then.

What and how?

### Chapter 26: Preparation

"Prepare for revolution!" exclaims your friend; "is that possible?

Yes. Not only is it possible but absolutely necessary.

"Do you refer to secret preparations, armed bands, and men to lead the
fight?" you ask.

No, my friend, not that at all.

If the social revolution meant only street battles and barricades, then
the preparations you have in mind would be the thing. But revolution
does not signify that; at least the fighting phase of it is the smallest
and least important part.

The truth is, in modern times revolution does not mean barricades any
more. These belong to the past. The social revolution is a far different
and more essential matter: it involves the reorganization of the entire
life of society. You will agree that this is certainly not to be
accomplished by mere fighting.

Of course, the obstacles in the path of the social reconstruction have
to be removed. That is to say the means of that reconstruction must be
secured by the masses. Those means are at present in the hands of
government and capitalism, and these will resist every effort to deprive
them of their power and possessions. That resistance will involve a
fight. But remember that the fight is not the main thing, is not the
object, not the revolution. It is only the preface, the preliminary to
it.

It is very necessary that you get this straight. Most people have very
confused notions about revolution. To them it means just fighting,
smashing things, destroying. It is the same as if rolling up your
sleeves for work should be considered as the work itself that you have
to do. The fighting part of revolution is merely the rolling up of your
sleeves. The real, actual task is ahead.

What is that task?

"The destruction of the existing conditions," you reply.

True. But _conditions_ are not destroyed by breaking and smashing
things. You can't destroy wage slavery by wrecking the machinery in
mills and factories, can you? You won't destroy government by setting
fire to the White House.

To think of revolution in terms of violence and destruction is to
misinterpret and falsify the whole idea of it. In practical application
such a conception is bound to lead to disastrous results.

When a great thinker, like the famous Anarchist Bakunin, speaks of
revolution as destruction, he has in mind the ideas of authority and
obedience which are to be destroyed. It is for this reason that he said
that destruction means construction, for to destroy a false belief is
indeed most constructive work.

But the average man, and too often even the revolutionist, thoughtlessly
talks of revolution as being exclusively destructive in the physical
sense of the word. That is a wrong and dangerous view. The sooner we get
rid of it the better.

Revolution, and particularly the social revolution, is _not destruction
but construction_. This cannot be sufficiently emphasized, and unless we
clearly realize it, revolution will remain only destructive and thereby
always a failure. Naturally revolution is accompanied by violence, but
you might as well say that building a new house in place of an old one
is destructive because you have first to tear down the old one.
Revolution is the culminating point of a certain evolutionary process:
it _begins_ with a violent upheaval. It is the rolling up of your
sleeves preparatory to _starting the actual work_.

Indeed, consider what the social revolution is to do, what it is to
accomplish, and you will perceive that it comes not to destroy but to
build.

What, really, is there to destroy?

The wealth of the rich? Nay, that is something we want the whole of
society to enjoy.

The land, the fields, the coal mines, the railroads, factories, mills,
and shops? These we want not to destroy but to make useful to the entire
people.

The telegraphs, telephones, the means of communication and distribution
-- do we want to destroy them? No, we want them to serve the needs of
all.

What, then, is the social revolution to destroy? It is to _take over_
things for the general benefit, not to destroy them. It is to reorganize
conditions for the public welfare.

Not to destroy is the aim of the revolution, but to reconstruct and
rebuild.

It is for this that preparation is needed, because the social revolution
is not the Biblical Messiah who is to accomplish his mission by simple
edict or order. Revolution works with the hands and brains of _men_.
And these have to understand the objects of the revolution so as to be
able to carry them out. They will have to know what they want and how to
achieve it. The way to achieve it will be pointed by the objects to be
attained. For the end determines the means, just as you have to sow a
particular seed to grow the thing you need.

What, then, must the preparation for the social revolution be?

If your object is to secure liberty, you must learn to do without
authority and compulsion. If you intend to live in peace and harmony
with your fellow-men, you and they should cultivate brotherhood and
respect for each other. If you want to work together with them for your
mutual benefit, you must practice co√∂peration. The social revolution
means much more than the reorganization of conditions only: it means the
establishment of new human values and social relationships, a changed
attitude of man to man, as of one free and independent to his equal; it
means a different spirit in individual and collective life, and that
spirit cannot be born overnight. It is a spirit to be cultivated, to be
nurtured and reared, as the most delicate flower is, for indeed it is
the flower of a new and beautiful existence.

Do not dupe yourself with the silly notion that "things will arrange
themselves." Nothing ever arranges itself, least of all in human
relations. It is men who do the arranging, and they do it according to
their attitude and understanding of things.

New situations and changed conditions make us feel, think, and act in a
different manner. But the new conditions themselves come about only as a
result of new feelings and ideas. The social revolution is such a new
condition. We must learn to think differently before the revolution can
come. That alone can bring the revolution.

We must learn to think differently about government and authority, for
as long as we think and act as we do to-day, there will be intolerance,
persecution, and oppression, even when organized government is
abolished. We must learn to respect the humanity of our fellow-man, not
to invade him or coerce him, to consider his liberty as sacred as our
own; to respect his freedom and his personality, to foreswear compulsion
in any form: to understand that the cure for the evils of liberty is
more liberty, that liberty is the mother of order.

And furthermore we must learn that equality means equal opportunity,
that monopoly is the denial of it, and that only brotherhood secures
equality. We can learn this only by freeing ourselves from the false
ideas of capitalism and of property, of mine and thine, of the narrow
conception of ownership.

By learning this we shall grow into the spirit of true liberty and
solidarity, and know that free association is the soul of every
achievement. We shall then realize that the social revolution is the
work of co√∂peration, of solidaric purpose, of mutual effort.

Maybe you think this too slow a process, a work that will take too long.
Yes, I must admit that it is a difficult task. But ask yourself if it is
better to build your new house quickly and badly and have it break down
over your head, rather than to do it efficiently, even if it requires
longer and harder work.

Remember that the social revolution represents the liberty and welfare
of the whole of mankind, that the complete and final emancipation of
labor depends upon it. Consider also that if the work is badly done, all
the effort and suffering involved in it will be for nothing and perhaps
even worse than for nothing, because making a botch job of revolution
means putting a new tyranny in place of the old, and new tyrannies,
because they are new, have a new lease on life. It means forging new
chains which are stronger than the old.

Consider also that the social revolution we have in mind is to
accomplish the work that many generations of men have been laboring to
achieve, for the whole history of man has been a struggle of liberty
against servitude, of social well-being against poverty and
wretchedness, of justice against iniquity. What we call progress has
been a painful but continuous march in the direction of limiting
authority and the power of government and increasing the rights and
liberties of the individual, of the masses. It has been a struggle that
has taken thousands of years. The reason that it took such a long time
-- and is not ended yet -- is because people did not know what the real
trouble was: they fought against this and for that, they changed kings
and formed new governments, they put out one ruler only to set up
another, they drove away a "foreign" oppressor only to suffer the yoke
of a native one, they abolished one form of tyranny, such as the Tsars,
and submitted to that of a party dictatorship, and always and ever they
shed their blood and heroically sacrificed their lives in the hope of
securing liberty and welfare.

But they secured only new masters, because however desperately and nobly
they fought, they never touched the _real source_ of trouble, the
_principle of authority_ and _government_. They did not know that _that_
was the fountainhead of enslavement and oppression, and therefore they
never succeeded in gaining liberty.

But now we understand that true liberty is not a matter of changing
kings or rulers. We know that the whole system of master and slave must
go, that the entire social scheme is wrong, that government and
compulsion must be abolished, that the very foundations of authority and
monopoly must be uprooted. Do you still think any kind of preparation
for such a great task can be too difficult?

Let us, then, fully realize how important it is to prepare for the
social revolution, and to prepare for it in the right way.

"But what is the right way?" you demand. "And who is to prepare?"

Who is to prepare? First of all, you and I -- those who are interested
in the success of the revolution, those who want to help bring it about.
And you and I means every man and woman; at least every decent man and
woman, every one who hates oppression and loves liberty, every one who
cannot endure the misery and injustice which fill the world to-day.

And above all it is those who suffer most from existing conditions, from
wage slavery, subjection, and indignity.

"The workers, of course," you say.

Yes, the workers. As the worst victims of present institutions, it is to
their own interest to abolish them. It has been truly said that "the
emancipation of the workers must be accomplished by the workers
themselves," for no other social class will do it for them. Yet labor's
emancipation means at the same time the redemption of the whole of
society, and that is why some people speak of labor's "historic mission"
to bring about the better day.

But "mission" is the wrong word. It suggests a duty or task imposed on
one from the outside, by some external power. It is a false and
misleading conception, essentially a religious, metaphysical sentiment.
Indeed, if the emancipation of labor is a "historic mission," then
history will see to it that it is carried out no matter what we may
think, feel, or do about it. This attitude makes human effort
unnecessary, superfluous; because "what must be will be." Such a
fatalistic notion is destructive to all initiative and the exercise of
one's mind and will.

It is a dangerous and harmful idea. There is no power outside of man
which can free him, none which can charge him with any "mission."
Neither heaven nor history can do it. History is the story of what has
happened. It can teach a lesson but not impose a task. It is not the
"mission" but _the interest_ of the proletariat to emancipate itself
from bondage. If labor does not consciously and actively strive for it,
it will never "happen." It is necessary to free ourselves from the
stupid and false notion of "historic missions." It is only by growing to
a true realization of their present position, by visualizing their
possibilities and powers, by learning unity and co√∂peration, and
practicing them, that the masses can attain freedom. In achieving that
they will also have liberated the rest of mankind.

Because of this the proletarian struggle is the concern of every one,
and all sincere men and women should therefore be at the service of
labor in its great task. Indeed, though only the toilers can accomplish
the work of emancipation they need the aid of other social groups. For
you must remember that the revolution faces the difficult problem of
reorganizing the world and building a new civilization -- a work that
will require the greatest revolutionary integrity and the intelligent
co√∂peration of all well-meaning and liberty-loving elements. We already
know that the social revolution is not a matter of abolishing capitalism
only. We might turn out capitalism, as feudalism was got rid of, and
still remain slaves as before. Instead of being, as now, the bondmen of
private monopoly we might become the servants of State capitalism, as
has happened to the people in Russia, for instance, and as conditions
are developing in Italy and other lands.

The social revolution, it must never be forgotten, is not to alter one
form of subjection for another, but is to do away with everything that
can enslave and oppress you.

A political revolution may be carried to a successful issue by a
conspirative minority, putting one ruling faction in place of another.
But the social revolution is not a mere political change: it is a
fundamental economic, ethical, and cultural transformation. A
conspirative minority or political party undertaking such a work must
meet with the active and passive opposition of the great majority and
therefore degenerate into a system of dictatorship and terror.

In the face of a hostile majority the social revolution is doomed to
failure from its very beginning. It means, then, that the first
preparatory work of the revolution consists in winning over the masses
at large in favor of the revolution and its objects, winning them over,
at least, to the extent of neutralizing them, of turning them from
active enemies to passive sympathizers, so that they may not fight
against the revolution even if they do not fight for it.

The actual, positive work of the social revolution must, of course, be
carried on by the toilers themselves, by the laboring people. And here
let us bear in mind that it is not only the factory hand who belongs to
labor but the farm worker as well. Some radicals are inclined to lay too
much stress on the industrial proletariat, almost ignoring the existence
of the agricultural toiler. Yet what could the factory worker accomplish
without the farmer? Agriculture is the _primal_ source of life, and the
city would starve but for the country. It is idle to compare the
industrial worker with the farm laborer or discuss their relative value.
Neither can do without the other; both are equally important in the
scheme of life and equally so in the revolution and the building of a
new society.

It is true that revolution first breaks out in industrial localities
rather than in agricultural. This is natural, since these are greater
centers of laboring population and therefore also of popular
dissatisfaction. But if the industrial proletariat is the advance-guard
of revolution, then the farm laborer is its backbone. If the latter is
weak or broken, the advance-guard, the revolution itself, is lost.

Therefore, the work of the social revolution lies in the hands of _both_
the industrial worker and the farm laborer. Unfortunately it must be
admitted that there is too little understanding and almost no friendship
or direct co√∂peration between the two. Worse than that -- and no doubt
the result of it -- there is a certain dislike and antagonism between
the proletarians of field and factory. The city man has too little
appreciation of the hard and exhausting toil of the farmer. The latter
instinctively resents it; moreover, unfamiliar with the strenuous and
often dangerous labor of the factory, the farmer is apt to look upon the
city worker as an idler. A closer approach and better understanding
between the two is absolutely vital. Capitalism thrives not so much on
division of work as on the division of the workers. It seeks to incite
race against race, the factory hand against the farmer, the laborer
against the skilled man, the workers of one country against those of
another. The strength of the exploiting class lies in disunited, divided
labor. But the social revolution requires the _unity_ of the toiling
masses, and first of all the co√∂peration of the factory-proletarian with
his brother in the field.

A nearer approach between the two is an important step in preparation
for the social revolution. Actual contact between them is of prime
necessity. Joint councils, exchange of delegates, a system of
co√∂peratives, and other similar methods, would tend to form a closer
bond and better understanding between the worker and farmer.

But it is not only the co√∂peration of the factory proletarian with the
farm laborer which is necessary for the revolution. There is another
element absolutely needed in its constructive work. It is the trained
mind of the professional man.

Do not make the mistake of thinking that the world has been built with
hands only. It has also required brains. Similarly does the revolution
need _both_ the man of brawn and the man of brain. Many people imagine
that the manual worker alone can do the entire work of society. It is a
false idea, a very grave error that can bring no end of harm. In fact,
this conception has worked great evil on previous occasions, and there
is good reason to fear that it may defeat the best efforts of the
revolution.

The working class consists of the industrial wage earners and the
agricultural toilers. But the workers require the services of the
professional elements, of the industrial organizer, the electrical and
mechanical engineer, the technical specialist, the scientist, inventor,
chemist, the educator, doctor, and surgeon. In short, the proletariat
absolutely needs the aid of certain professional elements without whose
co√∂peration no productive labor is possible.

Most of those professional men in reality also belong to the
proletariat. They are the intellectual proletariat, the proletariat of
brain. It is clear that it makes no difference whether one earns his
living with his hands or with his head. As a matter of fact, no work is
done _only_ with the hands or only with the brain. The application of
both is required in every kind of effort. The carpenter, for instance,
must estimate, measure, and figure in the course of his task: he must
use both hand and brain. Similarly the architect must think out his plan
before it can be drawn on paper and put to practical use.

"But only labor can produce," your friend objects; "brain work is not
productive."

Wrong, my friend. Neither manual labor nor brain work can produce
anything _alone_. It requires both, working together, to create
something. The bricklayer and mason can't build the factory without the
architect's plans, nor can the architect erect a bridge without the iron
and steel worker. Neither can produce alone. But both together can
accomplish wonders.

Furthermore, do not fall into the error of believing that only
productive labor counts. There is much work that is not directly
productive, but which is useful and even absolutely necessary to our
existence and comfort, and therefore just as important as productive
labor.

Take the railroad engineer and contractor, for instance. They are not
producers, but they are essential factors in the system of production.
Without the railroads and other means of transport and communication we
could manage neither production nor distribution.

Production and distribution are the two points of the same life pole.
The labor required for the one is as important as that needed for the
other.

What I said above applies to numerous phases of human effort which,
though themselves not directly productive, play a vital part in the
manifold processes of our economic and social life. The man of science,
the educator, the physician and surgeon are not productive in the
industrial sense of the word. But their work is absolutely necessary to
our life and welfare. Civilized society could not exist without them.

It is therefore evident that useful work is equally important whether it
be that of brain or of brawn, manual or mental. Nor does it matter
whether it is a salary or wages which one receives, whether he is paid
much or little, or what his political or other opinions might be.

All the elements that can contribute useful work to the general welfare
are needed in the revolution for the building of the new life. No
revolution can succeed without their solidaric co√∂peration, and the
sooner we understand this the better. The reconstruction of society
involves the reorganization of industry, the proper functioning of
production, the management of distribution, and numerous other social,
educational, and cultural efforts to transform present-day wage slavery
and servitude into a life of liberty and well-being. Only by working
hand in hand will the proletariat of brain and brawn be able to solve
those problems.

It is most regrettable that there exists a spirit of unfriendliness,
even of enmity, between the manual and intellectual workers. That
feeling is rooted in lack of understanding, in prejudice and
narrow-mindedness on both sides. It is sad to admit that there is a
tendency in certain labor circles, even among some Socialists and
Anarchists, to antagonize the workers against the members of the
intellectual proletariat. Such an attitude is stupid and criminal,
because it can only work evil to the growth and development of the
social revolution. It was one of the fatal mistakes of the Bolshevik;
during the first phases of the Russian Revolution that they deliberately
set the wage earners against the professional classes, to such an extent
indeed that friendly co√∂peration became impossible. A direct result of
that policy was the breaking down of industry for lack of intelligent
direction, as well as the almost total suspension of railroad
communication because that was no trained management. Seeing Russia
facing economic shipwreck, Lenin decided that the factory worker and
farmer alone could not carry on the industrial and agricultural life of
the country, and that the aid of the professional elements was
necessary. He introduced a new system to induce the technical men to
help in the work of reconstruction. But almost too late came the change,
for the years of mutual hating and hounding had created such a gulf
between the manual worker and his intellectual brother that common
understanding and co√∂peration were made exceptionally difficult. It has
taken Russia years of heroic effort to undo, to some extent, the effects
of that fratricidal war.

Let us learn this valuable lesson from the Russian experiment.

"But professional men belong to the middle classes," you object, "and
they are bourgeois-minded."

True, men of the professions generally have a bourgeois attitude toward
things; but are not most workingmen also bourgeois-minded? It merely
means that both are steeped in authoritarian and capitalistic
prejudices. It is just these that must be eradicated by enlightening and
educating the people, be they manual or brain workers. That is the first
step in preparation for the social revolution.

But it is not true that professional men, as such, necessarily belong to
the middle classes.

The real interests of the so-called intellectuals are with the workers
rather than with the masters. To be sure, most of them do not realize
that. But no more does the comparatively highly-paid railroad conductor
or locomotive engineer feel himself a member of the working class. By
his income and attitude he also belongs to the bourgeoisie. But it is
not income or feeling that determines to what social class a person
belongs. If the street beggar should fancy himself a millionaire, would
he thereby be one? What one imagines himself to be does not alter his
actual situation. And the actual situation is that whoever has to sell
his labor is an employee, a salaried dependent, a wage earner, and as
such his true interests are those of employees and he belongs to the
working class.

As a matter of fact, the intellectual proletarian is even more subject
to his capitalistic master than the man with pick and shovel. The latter
can easily change his place of employment. If he does not care to work
for a certain boss he can look for another. The intellectual
proletarian, on the other hand, is much more dependent on his particular
job. His sphere of exertion is more limited. Not skilled in any trade
and physically incapable of serving as a day laborer, he is (as a rule)
confined to the comparatively narrow field of architecture, engineering,
journalism, or similar work. This puts him more at the mercy of his
employer and therefore also inclines him to side with the latter as
against his more independent fellow-worker at the bench.

But whatever the attitude of the salaried and dependent intellectual, he
belongs to the proletarian class. Yet it is entirely false to maintain
that the intellectuals always side with the masters as against the
workers. "Generally they do," I hear some radical fanatic interject. And
the workers? Do _they_ not, generally, support the masters and the
system of capitalism? Could that system continue but for their support?
It would be wrong to argue from that, however, that the workers
consciously join hands with their exploiters. No more is it true of the
intellectuals. If the majority of the latter stand by the ruling class
it is because of social ignorance, because they do not understand their
own best interests, for all their "intellectuality." Just so the great
masses of labor, similarly unaware of their true interests, aid the
masters against their fellow-workers, sometimes even in the same trade
and factory, not to speak of their lack of national and international
solidarity. It merely proves that the one as the other, the manual
worker no less than the brain proletarian, needs enlightenment.

In justice to the intellectuals let us not forget that their best
representatives have always sided with the oppressed. They have
advocated liberty and emancipation, and often they were the first to
voice the deepest aspirations of the toiling masses. In the struggle for
freedom they have frequently fought on the barricades shoulder to
shoulder with the workers and died championing their cause.

We need not look far for proof of this. It is a familiar fact that every
progressive, radical, and revolutionary movement within the past hundred
years has been inspired, mentally and spiritually, by the efforts of the
finest element of the intellectual classes. The initiators and
organizers of the revolutionary movement in Russia, for instance, dating
back a century, were intellectuals, men and women of non-proletarian
origin and station. Nor was their love of freedom merely theoretical.
Literally thousands of them consecrated their knowledge and experience,
and dedicated their lives, to the service of the masses. Not a land
exists but where such noble men and women have testified to their
solidarity with the disinherited by exposing themselves to the wrath and
persecution of their own class and joining hands with the downtrodden.
Recent history, as well as the past, is full of such examples. Who were
the Garibaldis, the Kossuths, the Liebknechts, Rosa Luxemburgs, the
Landauers, the Lenins, and Trotskys but intellectuals of the middle
classes who gave themselves to the proletariat? The history of every
country and of every revolution shines with their unselfish devotion to
liberty and labor.

Let us bear these facts in mind and not be blinded by fanatical
prejudice and baseless antagonism. The intellectual has done labor great
service in the past. It will depend on the attitude of the workers
toward him as to what share he will be able and willing to contribute to
the preparation and realization of the social revolution.

### Chapter 27: Organization of Labor for the Social Revolution

Proper preparation, as suggested in the preceding pages, will greatly
lighten the task of the social revolution and assure its healthy
development and functioning.

Now, what will be the main functions of the revolution?

Every country has its specific conditions, its own psychology, habits,
and traditions, and the process of revolution will naturally reflect the
peculiarities of every land and its people. But fundamentally all
countries are alike in their social (rather anti-social) character:
whatever the political forms or economic conditions, they are all built
on invasive authority, on monopoly, on the exploitation of labor. The
main task of the social revolution is therefore essentially the same
everywhere: the abolition of government and of economic inequality, and
the socialization of the means of production and distribution.

Production, distribution, and communication are the basic sources of
existence; upon them rests the power of coercive authority and capital.
Deprived of that power, governors and rulers become just ordinary men,
like you and me, common citizens among millions of others. To accomplish
that is consequently the primal and most vital function of the social
revolution.

We know that revolution begins with street disturbances and outbreaks:
it is the initial phase which involves force and violence. But that is
merely the spectacular prologue of the real revolution. The age long
misery and indignity suffered by the masses burst into disorder and
tumult, the humiliation and injustice meekly borne for decades find vent
in acts of fury and destruction. That is inevitable, and it is solely
the master class which is responsible for this preliminary character of
revolution. For it is even more true socially than individually that
"whoever sows the wind will reap the whirlwind": the greater the
oppression and wretchedness to which the masses had been made to submit,
the fiercer will rage the social storm. All history proves it, but the
lords of life have never harkened to its warning voice.

This phase of the revolution is of short duration. It is usually
followed by the more conscious, yet still spontaneous, destruction of
the citadels of authority, the visible symbols of organized violence and
brutality: jails, police stations, and other government buildings are
attacked, the prisoners liberated, legal documents destroyed. It is the
manifestation of instinctive popular justice. Thus one of the first
gestures of the French Revolution was the demolition of the Bastille.
Similarly in Russia prisons were stormed and the prisoners released at
the very outset of the Revolution.[^19] The wholesome intuition of the
people justly sees in prisoners social unfortunates, victims of
conditions, and sympathizes with them as such. The masses regard the
courts and their records as instruments of class injustice, and these
are destroyed at the beginning of the revolution, and quite properly so.

But this stage passes quickly: the people's ire is soon spent.
Simultaneously the revolution begins its constructive work.

"Do you really think that reconstruction could start so soon?" you ask.

My friend, it must begin immediately. In fact, the more enlightened the
masses have become, the clearer the workers realize their aims, and the
better they are prepared to carry them out, the less destructive the
revolution will be, and the quicker and more effectively will begin the
work of reconstruction.

"Are you not too hopeful?"

No, I don't think so. I am convinced that the social revolution will not
"just happen." It will have to be prepared, organized. Yes, indeed,
organized -- just as a strike is organized. In truth, it will be a
strike, the strike of the united workers of an entire country -- a
_general strike_.

Let us pause and consider this.

How do you imagine a revolution could be fought in these days of armored
tanks, poison gas, and military planes? Do you believe that the unarmed
masses and their barricades could withstand high-power artillery and
bombs thrown upon them from flying machines? Could labor fight the
military forces of government and capital?

It's ridiculous on the face of it, isn't it? And no less ridiculous is
the suggestion that the workers should form their own regiments, "shock
troops," or a "red front," as the Communist parties advise you to do.
Will such proletarian bodies ever be able to stand up against the
trained armies of the government and the private troops of capital? Will
they have the least chance?

Such a proposition needs only to be stated to be seen in all its
impossible folly. It would simply mean sending thousands of workers to
certain death.

It is time to have done with this obsolete idea of revolution. Nowadays
government and capital are too well organized in a military way for the
workers ever to be able to cope with them. It would be criminal to
attempt it, insanity even to think of it.

The strength of labor is not on the field of battle. It is in the shop,
in the mine and factory. There lies its power that no army in the world
can defeat, no human agency conquer.

In other words, the social revolution can take place only by means of
the _General Strike_. The General Strike, rightly understood and
thoroughly carried out, _is_ the social revolution. Of this the British
Government became aware much quicker than the workers when the General
Strike was declared in England in May, 1926. "It means revolution," the
Government said, in effect, to the strike leaders. With all their armies
and navies the authorities were powerless in the face of the situation.
You can shoot people to death but you can't shoot them to work. The
labor leaders themselves were frightened at the thought that the General
Strike actually implied revolution.

British capital and government won the strike -- not by the strength of
arms, but because of the lack of intelligence and courage on the part of
the labor leaders and because the English workers were not prepared for
the consequences of the General Strike. As a matter of fact, the idea
was quite new to them. They had never before been interested in it,
never studied its significance and potentialities. It is safe to say
that a similar situation in France would have developed quite
differently, because in that country the toilers have for years been
familiar with the General Strike as a revolutionary proletarian weapon.

It is most important that we realize that the General Strike is the only
possibility of social revolution. In the past the General Strike has
been propagated in various countries without sufficient emphasis that
its real meaning is revolution, that it is the only practical way to it.
It is time for us to learn this, and when we do so the social revolution
will cease to be a vague, unknown quantity. It will become an actuality,
a definite method and aim, a program whose first step is the taking over
of the industries by organized labor.

"I understand now why you said that the social revolution means
construction rather than destruction," your friend remarks.

I am glad you do. And if you have followed me so far, you will agree
that the matter of taking over the industries is not something that can
be left to chance, nor can it be carried out in a haphazard manner. It
can be accomplished only in a well-planned, systematic, and organized
way. You alone can't do it, nor I, nor any other man, be he worker,
Ford, or the Pope of Rome. There is no man nor any body of men that can
manage it except the _workers themselves_, for it takes the workers to
operate the industries. But even the workers can't do it unless they are
organized and _organized just for such an undertaking_.

"But I thought you were an Anarchist," interrupts your friend.

I am.

"I've heard that Anarchists don't believe in organization."

I imagine you have, but that's an old argument. Any one who tells you
that Anarchists don't believe in organization is talking nonsense.
Organization is everything, and everything is organization. The whole of
life is organization, conscious or unconscious. Every nation, every
family, why, even every individual is an organization or organism. Every
part of every living thing is organized in such a manner that the whole
works in harmony. Otherwise the different organs could not function
properly and life could not exist.

But there is organization and organization. Capitalist society is so
badly organized that its various members suffer: just as when you have
pain in some part of you, your whole body aches and you are ill.

There is organization that is painful because it is ill, and
organization that is joyous because it means health and strength. An
organization is ill or evil when it neglects or suppresses any of its
organs or members. In the healthy organism all parts are equally
valuable and none is discriminated against. The organization built on
compulsion, which coerces and forces, is bad and unhealthy. The
libertarian organization, formed voluntarily and in which every member
is free and equal, is a sound body and can work well. Such an
organization is a free union of equal parts. It is the kind of
organization the Anarchists believe in.

Such must be the organization of the workers if labor is to have a
healthy body, one that can operate effectively.

It means, first of all, that not a single member of the organization or
union may with impunity be discriminated against, suppressed or ignored.
To do so would be the same as to ignore an aching tooth: you would be
sick all over.

In other words, the labor union must be built on the principle of the
equal liberty of all its members.

Only when each is a free and independent unit, co√∂perating with the
others from his own choice because of mutual interests, can the whole
work successfully and become powerful.

This equality means that it makes no difference what or who the
particular worker is: whether he is skilled or unskilled, whether he is
mason, carpenter, engineer or day laborer, whether he earn much or
little. The interests of _all_ are the same; all belong together, and
only by standing together can they accomplish their purpose.

It means that the workers in the factory, mill, or mine must be
organized as one body; for it is not a question of what particular jobs
they hold, what craft or trade they follow, but what their interests
are. And their interests are identical, as against the employer and the
system of exploitation.

Consider yourself how foolish and inefficient is the present form of
labor organization in which one trade or craft may be on strike while
the other branches of the same industry continue at work. Is it not
ridiculous that when the street car workers of New York, for instance,
quit work, the employees of the subway, the cab and omnibus drivers
remain on the job? The main purpose of a strike is to bring about a
situation that will compel the employer to give in to the demands of
labor. Such a situation can be created only by a complete tie-up of the
industry in question, so that a partial strike is merely a waste of
labor's time and energy, not to speak of the harmful moral effect of the
inevitable defeat.

Think over the strikes in which you yourself have taken part and of
others you know of. Did your union ever win a fight unless it was able
to compel the employer to give in? But _when_ was it able to do so? Only
when the boss knew that the workers meant business, that there was no
dissent among them, that there was no hesitation and dallying, that they
were determined to win, at whatever cost. But particularly when the
employer felt himself at the mercy of the union, when he could not
operate his factory or mine in the face of the workers' resolute stand,
when he could not get scabs or strikebreakers, and when he saw that his
interests would suffer more by defying his employees than by granting
their demands.

It is clear, then, that you can compel compliance only when you are
determined, when your union is strong, when you are well organized, when
you are united in such a manner that the boss cannot run his factory
against your will. But the employer is usually some big manufacturer or
a company that has mills or mines in various places. Suppose it is a
coal combine. If it cannot operate its mines in Pennsylvania because of
a strike, it will try to make good its losses by continuing mining in
Virginia or Colorado and increasing production there. Now, if the miners
in those States keep on working while you in Pennsylvania are on strike,
the company loses nothing. It may even welcome the strike in order to
raise the price of coal on the ground that the supply is short because
of your strike. In that way the company not only breaks your strike, but
it also influences public opinion against you, because the people
foolishly believe that the higher price of coal is really the result of
your strike while in fact it is due to the greed of the mine owners. You
will lose your strike, and for some time to come you and the workers
everywhere will have to pay more for coal, and not only for coal but for
all the other necessities of life, because together with the price of
coal the general cost of living will go up.

Reflect, then, how stupid is the present union policy to permit the
other mines to operate while your mine is on strike. The others remain
at work and give financial support to your strike, but don't you see
that their aid only helps to break your strike, because they have to
keep on working, really scabbing on you, in order to contribute to your
strike fund? Can anything be more senseless and criminal?

This holds true of every industry and every strike. Can you wonder that
most strikes are lost? That is the case in America as well as in other
countries. I have before me the Blue Book just published in England
under the title of _Labor Statistics_. The data prove that strikes do
not lead to labor victories. The figures for the last eight years are as
follows:

Results in Favor of:

| Year | Working People | Employers |
|------|----------------|-----------|
| 1920 | 390            | 507       |
| 1921 | 152            | 315       |
| 1922 | 111            | 222       |
| 1923 | 187            | 183       |
| 1924 | 163            | 235       |
| 1925 | 154            | 189       |
| 1926 | 67             | 126       |
| 1927 | 61             | 118       |

Actually, then, almost 60% of the strikes were lost. Incidentally,
consider also the loss of working days resulting from strikes, which
means no wages. The total number of workdays lost by English labor in
1912 was 40,890,000, which is almost equal to the lives of 2,000 men,
allotting to each 60 years. In 1919 the number of workdays lost was
34,969,000; in 1920, 26,568,000; in 1921, 85,872,000; in 1926, as a
result of the general strike, 162,233,000 days. These figures do not
include time and wages lost through unemployment.

It doesn't take much arithmetic to see that strikes as at present
conducted don't pay, that the labor unions are not the winners in
industrial disputes.

This does not mean, however, that strikes serve no purpose. On the
contrary, they are of great value: they teach the worker the vital need
of co√∂peration, of standing shoulder to shoulder with his fellows and
unitedly fighting in the common cause. Strikes train him in the class
struggle and develop his spirit of joint effort, of resistance to the
masters, of solidarity and responsibility. In this sense even an
unsuccessful strike is not a complete loss. Through it the toilers learn
that "an injury to one is the concern of all," the practical wisdom that
embodies the deepest meaning of the proletarian struggle. This does not
relate only to the daily battle for material betterment, but equally so
to everything pertaining to the worker and his existence, and
particularly to matters where justice and liberty are involved.

It is one of the most inspiring things to see the masses roused in
behalf of social justice, whomever the case at issue may concern. For,
indeed, it is the concern of all of us, in the truest and deepest sense.
The more labor becomes enlightened and aware of its larger interests,
the broader and more universal grow its sympathies, the more world-wide
its defense of justice and liberty. It was a manifestation of this
understanding when the workers in every country protested against the
judicial murder of Sacco and Vanzetti in Massachusetts. Instinctively
and consciously the masses throughout the world felt, as did all decent
men and women, that it is _their_ concern when such a crime is being
perpetrated. Unfortunately that protest, as many similar ones, contented
itself with mere resolutions. Had organized labor resorted to action,
such as a general strike, its demands would not have been ignored, and
two of the workers' best friends and noblest of men would not have been
sacrificed to the forces of reaction.

Equally important, it would have served as a valuable demonstration of
the tremendous power of the proletariat, the power that always conquers
when it is unified and resolute. This has been proven on numerous
occasions in the past when the determined stand of labor prevented
planned legal outrages, as in the case of Haywood, Moyer, and Pettibone,
officials of the Western Federation of Miners, whom the coal barons of
the State of Idaho had conspired to send to the gallows during the
miners' strike of 1905. Again, in 1917, it was the solidarity of the
toilers which thwarted the execution of Tom Mooney, in California. The
sympathetic attitude of organized labor in America toward Mexico has
also till now been an obstacle to the military occupation of that
country by the United States Government in behalf of the American oil
interests. Similarly in Europe united action by the workers has been
successful in repeatedly forcing the authorities to grant amnesty to
political prisoners. The Government of England so feared the expressed
sympathy of British labor for the Russian Revolution that it was
compelled to pretend neutrality. It did not dare openly to aid the
counter-revolution in Russia. When the dock workers refused to load food
and ammunition intended for the White armies, the English Government
resorted to deception. It solemnly assured the workers that the
shipments were intended for France. In the course of my work collecting
historic material in Russia, in 1920 and 1921, I came into possession of
official British documents proving that the shipments had been
immediately forwarded from France, by direct orders of the British
Government, to the counter-revolutionary generals in the North of Russia
who had established there the so-called Tchaikovsky-Miller Government.
This incident -- one out of many -- demonstrates the wholesome fear the
powers that be have of the awakening class-consciousness and solidarity
of the international proletariat.

The stronger the workers grow in this spirit the more effective will be
their struggle for emancipation. Class consciousness and solidarity must
assume national and international proportions before labor can attain
its full strength. Wherever there is injustice, wherever persecution and
suppression -- be it the subjugation of the Philippines, the invasion of
Nicaragua, the enslavement of the toilers in the Congo by Belgian
exploiters, the oppression of the masses in Egypt, China, Morocco, or
India -- it is the business of the workers everywhere to raise their
voice against all such outrages and demonstrate their solidarity in the
common cause of the despoiled and disinherited throughout the world.

Labor is slowly advancing to this social consciousness: strikes and
other sympathetic expressions are a valuable manifestation of this
spirit. If the greater number of strikes are lost at present, it is
because the proletariat is not yet fully aware of its national and
international interests, is not organized on the right principles, and
does not sufficiently realize the need of world-wide co√∂peration.

Your daily struggles for better conditions would quickly assume a
different character if you were organized in such a manner that when
your factory or mine goes on strike, the whole industry should quit
work; not gradually but at once, all at the same time. Then the employer
would be at your mercy, for what could he do when not a wheel turns in
the whole industry? He can get enough strikebreakers for one or a few
mills, but an entire industry cannot be supplied with them, nor would he
consider it safe or advisable. Moreover, suspension of work in any one
industry would immediately affect a large number of others, because
modern industry is interwoven. The situation would become the direct
concern of the whole country, the public would be aroused and demand a
settlement. (At present, when your single factory strikes, no one cares
and you may starve as long as you remain quiet.) That settlement would
again depend on yourself, on the strength of your organization. When the
bosses would see that you know your power and that you are determined,
they'd give in quickly enough or seek a compromise. They would be losing
millions every day, the strikers might even sabotage the works and
machinery, and the employers would be only too anxious to "settle,"
while in a strike of one factory or district they usually welcome the
situation, knowing as they do that the chances are all against you.

Reflect therefore how important it is in what manner, _on what
principles your union is built_, and how vital labor solitarily and
co√∂peration are in your every-day struggle for better conditions. In
unity is your strength, but that unity is non-existent and impossible as
long as you are organized on craft lines instead of by industries.

There is nothing more important and urgent than that you and your fellow
workers see to it immediately that you change the form of your
organization.

But it is not only the form that must be changed. Your union must become
clear about its aims and purposes. The worker should most earnestly
consider what he really wants, how he means to achieve it, by what
methods. He must learn what his union should be, how it should function,
and what it should try to accomplish.

Now, what is the union to accomplish? What should be the arms of a real
labor union?

First of all, the purpose of the union is to serve the interests of its
members. That is its primary duty. There is no quarrel about that; every
workingman understands it. If some refuse to join a labor body it is
because they are too ignorant to appreciate its great value, in which
case they must be enlightened. But generally they decline to belong to
the union because they have no faith or are disappointed in it. Most of
those who remain away from the union do so because they hear much
boasting about the strength of organized labor while they know, often
from bitter experience, that it is defeated in almost every important
struggle. "Oh, the union," they say scornfully, "it don't amount to
anything." To speak quite truthfully, to a certain extent they are
right. They see organized capital proclaim the open shop policy and
defeat the unions; they see labor leaders sell out strikes and betray
the workers; they see the membership, the rank and file, helpless in the
political machinations in and out of the union. To be sure, they don't
understand why it is so; but they do see the facts, and they turn
against the union.

Some again refuse to have anything to do with the union because they had
at one time belonged to it, and they know what an insignificant r√¥le the
individual member, the average worker, plays in the affairs of the
organization. The local leaders, the district and central bodies, the
national and international officers, and the chiefs of the American
Federation of Labor, in the United States, "run the whole show," they
will tell you; "you have nothing to do but vote, and if you object
you'll fly out."

Unfortunately they are right. You know how the union is managed. The
rank and file have little to say. They have delegated the whole power to
the leaders, and these have become the bosses, just as in the larger
life of society the people are made to submit to the orders of those who
were originally meant to serve them -- the government and its agents.
Once you do that, the power you have delegated will be used against you
and your own interests every time. And then you complain that your
leaders "misuse their power." No, my friend, they don't misuse it; they
only use it, for it is the _use_ of power which is itself the worst
misuse.

All this has to be changed if you really want to achieve results. In
society it has to be changed by taking political power away from your
governors, abolishing it altogether. I have shown that political power
means authority, oppression, and tyranny, and that it is not political
government that we need but rational management of our collective
affairs.

Just so in your union you need sensible administration of your business.
We know what tremendous power labor has as the creator of all wealth and
the supporter of the world. If properly organized and united, the
workers could control the situation, be the masters of it. But the
strength of the worker is not in the union meeting-hall; it is in the
shop and factory, in the mill and mine. It is _there_ that he must
organize; there, on the job. There he knows what he wants, what his
needs are, and it is there that he must concentrate his efforts and his
will. Every shop and factory should have its special committee to attend
to the wants and requirements of the men, not leaders, but members of
the rank and file, from the bench and furnace, to look after the demands
and complaints of their fellow employees. Such a committee, being on the
spot and constantly under the direction and supervision of the workers,
wields no power: it merely carries out instructions. Its members are
recalled at will and others selected in their place, according to the
need of the moment and the ability required for the task in hand. It is
the workers who decide the matters at issue and carry their decisions
out through the shop committees.

That is the character and form of organization that labor needs. Only
this form can express its real purpose and will, be its adequate
spokesman, and serve its true interests.

These shop and factory committees, combined with similar bodies in other
mills and mines, associated locally, regionally, and nationally, would
constitute a new type of labor organization which would be the virile
voice of toil and its effective agency. It would have the whole weight
and energy of the united workers back of it and would represent a power
tremendous in its scope and potentialities.

In the daily struggle of the proletariat such an organization would be
able to achieve victories about which the conservative union, as at
present built, cannot even dream. It would enjoy the respect and
confidence of the masses, would attract the unorganized and unite the
labor forces on the basis of the equality of all workers and their joint
interests and aims. It would face the masters with the whole might of
the working class back of it, in a new attitude of consciousness and
strength. Only then would labor acquire unity and the expression of it
assume real significance.

Such a union would soon become something more than a mere defender and
protector of the worker. It would gain a vital realization of the
meaning of unity and consequent power, of labor solidarity. The factory
and shop would serve as a training camp to develop the worker's
understanding of his proper r√¥le in life, to cultivate his self-reliance
and independence, teach him mutual help and co√∂peration, and make him
conscious of his responsibility. He will learn to decide and act on his
own judgment, not leaving it to leaders or politicians to attend to his
affairs and look out for his welfare. It will be he who will determine,
together with his fellows at the bench, what they want and what methods
will best serve their aims, and his committee on the spot would merely
carry out instructions. The shop and factory would become the worker's
school and college. There he will learn his place in society, his
function in industry, and his purpose in life. He will mature as a
workingman and as a man, and the giant of labor will attain his full
stature. He will know and be strong thereby.

Not long will he then be satisfied to remain a wage slave, an employee
and dependent on the good will of his master whom his toil supports. He
will grow to understand that present economic and social arrangements
are wrong and criminal, and he will determine to change them. The shop
committee and union will become the field of preparation for a new
economic system, for a new social life.

You see, then, how necessary it is that you and I, and every man and
woman who has the interests of labor at heart, work toward these
objects.

And right here I want to emphasize that it is particularly urgent that
the more advanced proletarian, the radical and the revolutionary,
reflect upon this more earnestly, for to most of them, even to some
Anarchists, this is only a pious wish, a distant hope. They fail to
realize the transcending importance of efforts in that direction. Yet it
is no mere dream. Large numbers of progressive workingmen are coming to
this understanding: the Industrial Workers of the World and the
revolutionary Anarchist-syndicalists in every country are devoting
themselves to this end. It is the most pressing need of the present. It
cannot be stressed too much that _only the right organization of the
workers_ can accomplish what we are striving for. In it lies the
salvation of labor and of the future. Organization from the bottom up,
beginning with the shop and factory, on the foundation of the joint
interests of the workers everywhere, irrespective of trade, race, or
country, by means of mutual effort and united will, alone can solve the
labor question and serve the true emancipation of man.

"You were speaking of the workers taking over the industries," your
friend reminds me. "How are they going to do this?"

Yes, I was on the subject when you made that remark about organization.
But it is well that the matter was discussed, because there is nothing
more vital in the problems we are examining.

To return to the taking over of the industries. It means not only taking
them over, but the running of them by labor. As concerns the taking
over, you must consider that the workers are actually now _in_ the
industries. The taking over consists in the workers _remaining_ where
they are, yet remaining not as employees but as the rightful collective
possessors.

Grasp this point, my friend. The expropriation of the capitalist class
during the social revolution -- the taking over of the industries --
requires tactics directly the reverse of those you now use in a strike.
In the latter you quit work and leave the boss in full possession of the
mill, factory, or mine. It is an idiotic proceeding, of course, for you
give the master the entire advantage: he can put scabs in your place,
and you remain out in the cold.

In expropriating, on the contrary, you _stay_ on the job and you put the
boss out. He may remain only on equal terms with the rest: a worker
among workers.

The labor organizations of a given place take charge of the public
utilities, of the means of communication, of production and distribution
in their particular locality. That is, the telegraphers, the telephone
and electrical workers, the railroad men, and so on, take possession (by
means of their revolutionary shop committees) of the workshop, factory,
or other establishment. The capitalistic foremen, overseers, and
managers are removed from the premises if they resist the change and
refuse to co√∂perate. If willing to participate, they are made to
understand that henceforth there are neither masters nor owners: that
the factory becomes public property in charge of the union of workers
engaged in the industry, all equal partners in the general undertaking.

It is to be expected that the higher officials of large industrial and
manufacturing concerns will refuse to co√∂perate. Thus they eliminate
themselves. Their place must be taken by workers previously prepared for
the job. That is why I have emphasized the utmost importance of
industrial preparation. This is a primal necessity in a situation that
will inevitably develop and on it will depend, more than on any other
factor, the success of the social revolution. Industrial preparation is
the most essential point, for without it the revolution is doomed to
collapse.

The engineers and other technical specialists are more likely to join
hands with labor when the social revolution comes, particularly if a
closer bond and better understanding have in the meantime been
established between the manual and mental workers.

Should they refuse and should the workers have failed to prepare
themselves industrially and technically, then production would depend on
_compelling_ the willfully obstinate to co√∂perate -- an experiment tried
in the Russian Revolution and proved a complete failure.

The grave mistake of the Bolsheviki in this connection was their hostile
treatment of the whole class of the intelligentsia on account of the
opposition of some members of it. It was the spirit of intolerance,
inherent in fanatical dogma, which caused them to persecute an entire
social group because of the fault of a few. This manifested itself in
the policy of wholesale vengeance upon the professional elements, the
technical specialists, the co√∂perative organizations, and all cultured
persons in general. Most of them, at first friendly to the Revolution,
some even enthusiastic in its favor, were alienated by these Bolshevik
tactics, and their co√∂peration was made impossible. As a result of their
dictatorial attitude the Communists were led to resort to increased
oppression and tyranny till they finally introduced purely martial
methods in the industrial life of the country. It was the era of
compulsory labor, the militarization of factory and mill, which
unavoidably ended in disaster, because forced labor is, by the very
nature of coercion, bad and inefficient; moreover, those so compelled
react upon the situation by willful sabotage, by systematic delay and
spoilage of work, which an intelligent enemy can practice in a way that
cannot be detected in due time and which results in greater harm to
machinery and product than direct refusal to work. In spite of the most
drastic measures against this kind of sabotage, in spite even of the
death penalty, the government was powerless to overcome the evil. The
placing of a Bolshevik, of a political commissar, over every technician
in the more responsible positions did not help matters. It merely
created a legion of parasitic officials who, ignorant of industrial
matters, only interfered with the work of those friendly to the
Revolution and willing to aid, while their unfamiliarity with the task
in no way prevented continued sabotage. The system of forced labor
finally developed in what practically became economic
counter-revolution, and no efforts of the dictatorship could alter the
situation. It was this that caused the Bolsheviki to change from
compulsory labor to a policy of winning over the specialists and
technicians by returning them to authority in the industries and
rewarding them with high pay and special emoluments.

It would be stupid and criminal to try again the methods which have so
signally failed in the Russian Revolution and which, by their very
character, are bound to fail every time, both industrially and morally.

The only solution of this problem is the already suggested preparation
and training of the workers in the art of organizing and managing
industry, as well as closer contact between the manual and technical
men. Every factory, mine, and mill should have its special workers'
council, separate from and independent of the shop committee, for the
purpose of familiarizing the workers with the various phases of their
particular industry, including the sources of raw material, the
consecutive processes of manufacture, by-products, and manner of
distribution. This industrial council should be permanent, but its
membership must rotate in such a manner as to take in practically all
the employees of a given factory or mill. To illustrate: suppose the
industrial council in a certain establishment consists of five members
or of twenty-five, as the case may be, according to the complexity of
the industry and the size of the particular factory. The members of the
council, after having thoroughly acquainted themselves with their
industry, publish what they had learned for the information of their
fellow-workers, and new council members are chosen to continue the
industrial studies. In this manner the whole factory or mill can
consecutively acquire the necessary knowledge about the organization and
management of their trade and keep step with its development. These
councils would serve as industrial colleges where the workers would
become familiar with the technique of their industry in all its phases.

At the same time the larger organization, the union, must use every
effort to compel capital to permit greater labor participation in the
actual management. But this, even at best, can benefit only a small
minority of the workers. The plan suggested above, on the other hand,
opens the possibility of industrial training to practically every worker
in shop, mill, and factory.

It is true, of course, that there are certain kinds of work -- such as
engineering: civil, electrical, mechanical -- which the industrial
councils will not be able to acquire by actual practice. But what they
will learn of the general processes of industry will be of inestimable
value as preparation. For the rest, the closer bond of friendship and
co√∂peration between worker and technician is a paramount necessity.

The taking over of the industries is therefore the first great object of
the social revolution. It is to be accomplished by the proletariat, by
the part of it organized and prepared for the task. Considerable numbers
of workers are already beginning to realize the importance of this and
to understand the task before them. But understanding what is necessary
to be done is not sufficient. Learning how to do it is the next step. It
is up to the organized working class to enter at once upon this
preparatory work.

### Chapter 28: Principles and Practice

The main purpose of the social revolution must be the _immediate_
betterment of conditions for the masses. The success of the revolution
fundamentally depends on it. This can be achieved only by organizing
consumption and production so as to be of real benefit to the populace.
In that lies the greatest -- in fact, the only -- security of the social
revolution. It was not the Red army which conquered counter-revolution
in Russia: it was the peasants holding on for dear life to the land they
had taken during the upheaval. The social revolution must be of material
gain to the masses if it is to live and grow. The people at large must
be sure of actual advantage from their efforts, or at least entertain
the hope of such advantage in the near future. The revolution is doomed
if it relies for its existence and defense on _mechanical_ means, such
as war and armies. The real safety of the revolution is _organic_; that
is, it lies in industry and production.

The object of revolution is to secure greater freedom, to increase the
material welfare of the people. The aim of the social revolution, in
particular, is to enable the masses _by their own efforts_ to bring
about conditions of material and social well-being, to rise to higher
moral and spiritual levels.

In other words, it is liberty which is to be established by the social
revolution. For true liberty is based on economic opportunity. Without
it all liberty is a sham and lie, a mask for exploitation and
oppression. In the profoundest sense liberty is the daughter of economic
equality.

The main aim of the social revolution is therefore to establish equal
liberty on the basis of equal opportunity. The revolutionary
reorganization of life must immediately proceed to secure the equality
of all, economically, politically, and socially.

That reorganization will depend, first and foremost, on the thorough
familiarity of labor with the economic situation of the country: on a
complete inventory of the supply, on exact knowledge of the sources of
raw material, and on the proper organization of the labor forces for
efficient management.

It means that statistics and intelligent workers' associations are vital
needs of the revolution, on the day after the upheaval. The entire
problem of production and distribution -- the life of the revolution --
is based on it. It is obvious, as pointed out before, that this
knowledge must be acquired by the workers _before_ the revolution if the
latter is to accomplish its purposes.

That is why the shop and factory committee, dealt with in the previous
chapter, are so important and will play such a decisive r√¥le in the
revolutionary reconstruction.

For a new society is not born suddenly, any more than a child is. New
social life gestates in the body of the old just as new individual life
does in the mother's womb. Time and certain processes are required to
develop it till it becomes a complete organism capable of functioning.
When that stage has been reached birth takes place in agony and pain,
socially as individually. Revolution, to use a trite but expressive
saying, is the midwife of the new social being. This is true in the most
literal sense. Capitalism is the parent of the new society; the shop and
factory committee, the union of class-conscious labor and revolutionary
aims, is the germ of the new life. In that shop committee and union the
worker must acquire the knowledge of how to manage his affairs: in the
process he will grow to the perception that social life is a matter of
proper organization, of united effort, of solidarity. He will come to
understand that it is not the bossing and ruling of men but free
association and harmonious working together which accomplish things;
that it is not government and laws which produce and create, make the
wheat grow and the wheels turn, but concord and co√∂peration. Experience
will teach him to substitute the management of things in place of the
government of men. In the daily life and struggles of his shop-committee
the worker must learn how to conduct the revolution.

Shop and factory committees, organized locally, by district, region, and
State, and federated nationally, will be the bodies best suited to carry
on revolutionary production.

Local and State labor councils, federated nationally, will be the form
of organization most adapted to manage distribution by means of the
people's co√∂peratives.

These committees, elected by the workers on the job, connect their shop
and factory with other shops and factories of the same industry. The
Joint Council of an entire industry links that industry with other
industries, and thus is formed a federation of labor councils for the
entire country.

Co√∂perative associations are the mediums of exchange between the country
and city. The farmers, organized locally and federated regionally and
nationally, supply the needs of the cities by means of the co√∂peratives
and receive through the latter in exchange the products of the city
industries.

Every revolution is accompanied by a great outburst of popular
enthusiasm full of hope and aspiration. It is the spring-board of
revolution. This high tide, spontaneous and powerful, opens up the human
sources of initiative and activity. The sense of equality liberates the
best there is in man and makes him consciously creative. These are the
great motors of the social revolution, its moving forces. Their free and
unhindered expression signifies the development and deepening of the
revolution. Their suppression means decay and death. The revolution is
safe, it grows and becomes strong, as long as the masses feel that they
are direct participants in it, that they are fashioning their own lives,
that _they_ are making the revolution, that they _are_ the revolution.
But the moment their activities are usurped by a political party or are
centered in some special organization, revolutionary effort becomes
limited to a comparatively small circle from which the large masses are
practically excluded. The natural result is that popular enthusiasm is
dampened, interest gradually weakens, initiative languishes,
creativeness wanes, and the revolution becomes the monopoly of a clique
which presently turns dictator.

This is fatal to the revolution. The sole prevention of such a
catastrophe lies in the continued active interest of the workers through
their every-day participation in all matters pertaining to the
revolution. The source of this interest and activity is the shop and the
union.

The interest of the masses and their loyalty to the revolution depend
furthermore on their feeling that the revolution represents justice and
fair play. This explains why revolutions have the power of rousing the
people to acts of great heroism and devotion. As already pointed out,
the masses instinctively see in revolution the enemy of wrong and
iniquity and the harbinger of justice. In this sense revolution is a
highly ethical factor and an inspiration. Fundamentally it is only great
moral principles which can fire the masses and lift them to spiritual
heights.

All popular upheavals have shown this to be true; particularly so the
Russian Revolution. It was because of that spirit that the Russian
masses so strikingly triumphed over all obstacles in the days of
February and October. No opposition could conquer their devotion
inspired by a great and noble cause. But the Revolution began to decline
when it had become emasculated of its high moral values, when it was
denuded of its elements of justice, equality, and liberty. Their loss
was the doom of the Revolution.

It cannot be emphasized too strongly how essential spiritual values are
to the social revolution. These and the consciousness of the masses that
the revolution also means material betterment are dynamic influences in
the life and growth of the new society. Of the two factors the spiritual
values are foremost. The history of previous revolutions proves that the
masses were ever willing to suffer and to sacrifice material well-being
for the sake of greater liberty and justice. Thus in Russia neither cold
nor starvation could induce the peasants and workers to aid
counter-revolution. All privation and misery notwithstanding they served
heroically the interests of the great cause. It was only when they saw
the Revolution monopolized by a political party, the new-won liberties
curtailed, a dictatorship established, and injustice and inequality
dominant again that they became indifferent to the Revolution, declined
to participate in the sham, refused to co√∂perate, and even turned
against it.

To forget ethical values, to introduce practices and methods
inconsistent with or opposed to the high moral purposes of the
revolution means to invite counter-revolution and disaster.

It is therefore clear that the success of the social revolution
primarily depends on liberty and equality. Any deviation from them can
only be harmful; indeed, is sure to prove destructive. It follows that
_all_ the activities of the revolution must be based on freedom and
equal rights. This applies to small things as to great. Any acts or
methods tending to limit liberty, to create inequality and injustice,
can result only in a popular attitude inimical to the revolution and in
best interests.

It is from this angle that all the problems of the revolutionary period
must be considered and solved. Among those problems the most important
are consumption and housing, production and exchange.

### Chapter 29: Consumption and Exchange

Let us take up the organization of consumption first, because people
have to eat before they can work and produce.

"What do you mean by the organization of consumption?" your friend asks.

"He means rationing, I suppose," you remark.

I do. Of course, when the social revolution has become thoroughly
organized and production is functioning normally there will be enough
for everybody. But in the first stages of the revolution, during the
process of reconstruction, we must take care to supply the people as
best we can, and equally, which means rationing.

"The Bolsheviki did not have equal rationing," your friend interrupts;
"they had different kinds of rations for different people.

They did, and that was one of the greatest mistakes they made. It was
resented by the people as a wrong and it provoked irritation and
discontent. The Bolsheviki had one kind of ration for the sailor,
another of lower quality and quantity for the soldier, a third for the
skilled worker, a fourth for the unskilled one; another ration again for
the average citizen, and yet another for the bourgeois. The best rations
were for the Bolsheviki, the members of the Party, and special rations
for the Communist officials and commissars. At one time they had as many
as fourteen different food rations. Your own common sense will tell you
that it was all wrong. Was it fair to discriminate against people
because they happened to be laborers, mechanics, or intellectuals rather
than soldiers or sailors? Such methods were unjust and vicious: they
immediately created material inequality and opened the door to misuse of
position and opportunity, to speculation, graft, and swindle. They also
stimulated counter-revolution, for those indifferent or unfriendly to
the Revolution were embittered by the discrimination and therefore
became an easy prey to counter-revolutionary influences.

This initial discrimination and the many others which followed were not
dictated by the needs of the situation but solely by political party
considerations. Having usurped the reins of government and fearing the
opposition of the people, the Bolsheviki sought to strengthen themselves
in the government seat by currying favor with the sailors, soldiers, and
workers. But by these means they succeeded only in creating indignation
and antagonizing the masses, for the injustice of the system was too
crying and obvious. Furthermore, even the "favored class," the
proletariat, felt discriminated against because the soldiers were given
better rations. Was the worker not as good as the soldier? Could the
soldier fight for the Revolution -- the factory man argued -- if the
worker would not supply him with ammunition? The soldier, in his turn,
protested against the sailor getting more. Was he not as valuable as the
sailor? And all condemned the special rations and privileges bestowed on
the Bolshevik members of the Party, and particularly the comforts and
even luxuries enjoyed by the higher officials and commissars, while the
masses suffered privation.

Popular resentment of such practices was strikingly expressed by the
Kronstadt sailors. It was in the midst of an extremely severe and hungry
winter, in March, 1921, that a public mass-meeting of the sailors
unanimously resolved voluntarily to give up their extra rations in
behalf of the less favored population of Kronstadt, and to equalize the
rations in the entire city.[^20] This truly ethical revolutionary action
voiced the general feeling against discrimination and favoritism, and
gave convincing proof of the deep sense of justice inherent in the
masses.

All experience teaches that the just and square thing is at the same
time also the most sensible and practical in the long run. This holds
equally true of the individual as of collective life. Discrimination and
injustice are particularly destructive to revolution, because the very
spirit of revolution is born of the hunger for equity and justice.

I have already mentioned that when the social revolution attains the
stage where it can produce sufficient for all, then is adopted the
Anarchist principle of "to each according to his needs." In the more
industrially developed and efficient countries that stage would
naturally be reached sooner than in backward lands. But until it is
reached, the system of equal sharing, equal distribution per capita, is
imperative as the only just method. It goes without saying, of course,
that special consideration must be given to the sick and the old, to
children, and to women during and after pregnancy, as was also the
practice in the Russian Revolution.

"Let me get this straight," you remark. "There is to be equal sharing,
you say. Then you won't be able to buy anything?"

No, there will be no buying or selling. The revolution abolishes private
ownership of the means of production and distribution, and with it goes
capitalistic business. Personal possession remains only in the things
you use. Thus, your watch is your own, but the watch factory belongs to
the people. Land, machinery, and all other public utilities will be
collective property, neither to be bought nor sold. Actual use will be
considered the only title -- not to ownership but to possession. The
organization of the coal miners, for example, will be in charge of the
coal mines, not as owners but as the operating agency. Similarly will
the railroad brotherhoods run the railroads, and so on. Collective
possession, co√∂peratively managed in the interests of the community,
will take the place of personal ownership privately conducted for
profit.

"But if you can't buy anything, then what's the use of money?" you ask.

None whatever; money becomes useless. You can't get anything for it.
When the sources of supply, the land, factories, and products become
public property, socialized, you can neither buy nor sell. As money is
only a medium for such transactions, it loses its usefulness.

"But how will you exchange things?"

Exchange will be free. The coal miners, for instance, will deliver the
coal they mined to the public coal yards for the use of the community.
In their turn the miners will receive from the community's warehouses
the machinery, tools, and the other commodities they need. That means
free exchange without the medium of money and without profit, on the
basis of requirement and the supply on hand.

"But if there is no machinery or food to be given to the miners?"

If there is none, money will not help matters. The miners couldn't feed
on banknotes. Consider how such things are managed to-day. You trade
coal for money, and for the money you get food. The free community we
are speaking of will exchange the coal for food _directly_, without the
medium of money.

"But on what basis? To-day you know what a dollar is worth, more or
less, but how much coal will you give for a sack of flour?"

You mean, how will value or price be determined. But we have seen
already in preceding chapters that there is no real measure of value,
and that price depends on supply and demand and varies accordingly. The
price of coal rises if there is a scarcity of it; it becomes cheaper if
the supply is greater than the demand. To make bigger profits the coal
owners artificially limit the output, and the same methods obtain
throughout the capitalistic system. With the abolition of capitalism no
one will be interested in raising the price of coal or limiting its
supply. As much coal will be mined as will be necessary to satisfy the
need. Similarly will as much food be raised as the country needs. It
will be the _requirements_ of the community and the supply obtainable
which will determine the amount it is to receive. This applies to coal
and food as to all other needs of the people.

"But suppose there is not enough of a certain product to go around. What
will you do then?"

Then we'll do what is done even in capitalistic society in time of war
and scarcity: the people are rationed, with the difference that in the
free community rationing will be managed on principles of equality.

"But suppose the farmer refuses to supply the city with his products
unless he gets money?"

The farmer, like any one else, wants money only if he can buy with it
the things he needs. He will quickly see that money is useless to him.
In Russia during the Revolution you could not get a peasant to sell you
a pound of flour for a bagful of money. But he was eager to give you a
barrel of the finest grain for an old pair of boots. It is plows,
spades, rakes, agricultural machinery, and clothing which the farmer
wants, not money. For these he will let you have his wheat, barley, and
corn. In other words, the city will exchange with the farm the products
each requires, on the basis of need.

It has been suggested by some that exchange during the reconstruction
should be based on some definite standard. It is proposed, for example,
that every community issue its own money, as is often done in time of
revolution; or that a day's work should be considered the unit of value
and so-called labor notes serve as medium of exchange. But neither of
these proposals is of practical help. Money issued by communities in
revolution would quickly depreciate to the point of no value, since such
money would have no secure guarantees behind it, without which money is
worth nothing. Similarly labor notes would not represent any definite
and measurable value as a means of exchange. What would, for instance,
an hour's work of the coal miner be worth? Or fifteen minutes'
consultation with the physician? Even if all effort should be considered
equal in value and an hour's labor be made the unit, could the house
painter's hour of work or the surgeon's operation be equitably measured
in terms of wheat?

Common sense will solve this problem on the basis of human equality and
the right of every one to life.

"Such a system might work among decent people," your friend objects;
"but how about shirkers? Were not the Bolsheviki right in establishing
the principle that 'whoever doesn't work, doesn't eat'?"

No, my friend, you are mistaken. At first sight it may appear as if that
was a just and sensible idea. But in reality it proved impractical, not
to speak of the injustice and harm it worked all around.

"How so?"

It was impractical because it required an army of officials to keep tab
on the people who worked or didn't work. It led to incrimination and
recrimination and endless disputes about official decisions. So that
within a short time the number of those who didn't work was doubled and
even trebled by the effort to force people to work and to guard against
their dodging or doing bad work. It was the system of compulsory labor
which soon proved such a failure that the Bolsheviki were compelled to
give it up.

Moreover, the system caused even greater evils in other directions. Its
injustice lay in the fact that you cannot break into a person's heart or
mind and decide what peculiar physical or mental condition makes it
temporarily impossible for him to work. Consider further the precedent
you establish by introducing a false principle and thereby rousing the
opposition of those who feel it wrong and oppressive and therefore
refuse co√∂peration.

A rational community will find it more practical and beneficial to treat
all alike, whether one happens to work at the time or not, rather than
create more non-workers to watch those already on hand, or to build
prisons for their punishment and support. For if you refuse to feed a
man, for whatever cause, you drive him to theft and other crimes -- and
thus you yourself create the necessity for courts, lawyers, judges,
jails, and warders, the upkeep of whom is far more burdensome than to
feed the offenders. And these you have to feed, anyhow, even if you put
them in prison.

The revolutionary community will depend more on awakening the social
consciousness and solidarity of its delinquents than on punishment. It
will rely on the example set by its working members, and it will be
right in doing so. For the natural attitude of the industrious man to
the shirker is such that the latter will find the social atmosphere so
unpleasant that he will prefer to work and enjoy the respect and good
will of his fellows rather than to be despised in idleness.

Bear in mind that it is more important, and in the end more practical
and useful, to do the square thing rather than to gain a seeming
immediate advantage. That is, to do justice is more vital than to
punish. For punishment is never just and always harmful to both sides,
the punished and the punisher; harmful even more spiritually than
physically, and there is no greater harm than that, for it hardens and
corrupts you. This is unqualifiedly true of your individual life and
with the same force it applies to the collective social existence.

On the foundations of liberty, justice, and equality, as also on
understanding and sympathy, must be built every phase of life in the
social revolution. Only so it can endure. This applies to the problems
of shelter, food, and the security of your district or city, as well as
to the defense of the revolution.

As regards housing and local safety Russia has shown the way in the
first months of the October Revolution. House committees, chosen by the
tenants, and city federations of such committees, take the problem in
hand. They gather statistics of the facilities of a given district and
of the number of applicants requiring quarters. The latter are assigned
according to personal or family need on the basis of equal rights.

Similar house and district committees have charge of the provisioning of
the city. Individual application for rations at the distributing centers
is a stupendous waste of time and energy. Equally false is the system,
practiced in Russia in the first years of the Revolution, of issuing
rations in the institutions of one's employment, in shops, factories,
and offices. The better and more efficient way, which at the same time
insures more equitable distribution and closes the door to favoritism
and misuse, is rationing by houses or streets. The authorized house or
street committee procures at the local distributing center the
provisions, clothing, etc., apportioned to the number of tenants
represented by the committee. Equal rationing has the added advantage of
eradicating food speculation, the vicious practice which grew to
enormous proportions in Russia because of the system of inequality and
privilege. Party members or persons with a political pull could freely
bring to the cities carloads of flour while some old peasant woman was
severely punished for selling a loaf of bread. No wonder speculation
flourished, and to such an extent, indeed, that the Bolsheviki had to
form special regiments to cope with the evil.[^21] The prisons were
filled with offenders; capital punishment was resorted to; but even the
most drastic measures of the government failed to stop speculation, for
the latter was the direct consequence of the system of discrimination
and favoritism. Only equality and freedom of exchange can obviate such
evils or at least reduce them to a minimum.

Taking care of the sanitary and kindred needs of street and district by
voluntary committees of house and locality affords the best results,
since such bodies, themselves tenants of the given district, are
personally interested in the health and safety of their families and
friends. This system worked much better in Russia than the subsequently
established regular police force. The latter consisting mostly of the
worst city elements, proved corrupt, brutal, and oppressive.

The hope of material betterment is, as already mentioned, a powerful
factor in the forward movement of humanity. But that incentive alone is
not sufficient to inspire the masses to give them the vision of a new
and better world, and cause them to face danger and privation for its
sake. For that an ideal is needed, an ideal which appeals not only to
the stomach but even more to the heart and imagination, which rouses our
dormant longing for what is fine and beautiful, for the spiritual and
cultural values of life. An ideal, in short, which wakens the inherent
social instincts of man, feeds his sympathies and fellow-feeling, fires
his love of liberty and justice, and imbues even the lowest with
nobility of thought and deed, as we frequently witness in the
catastrophic events of life. Let a great tragedy happen anywhere -- an
earthquake, flood, or railroad accident -- and the compassion of the
whole world goes out to the sufferers. Acts of heroic self-sacrifice, of
brave rescue, and of unstinted aid demonstrate the real nature of man
and his deep-felt brotherhood and unity.

This is true of mankind in all times, climes, and social strata. The
story of Amundsen is a striking illustration of it. After decades of
arduous and dangerous work the famous Norwegian explorer resolves to
enjoy his remaining years in peaceful literary pursuits. He is
announcing his decision at a banquet given in his honor, and almost at
the same moment comes the news that the Nobile expedition to the North
Pole had met with disaster. On the instant Amundsen renounces all his
plans of a quiet life and prepares to fly to the aid of the lost
aviators, fully aware of the peril of such an undertaking. Human
sympathy and the compelling impulse to help those in distress overcome
all considerations of personal safety, and Amundsen sacrifices his life
in an attempt to rescue the Nobile party.

Deep in all of us lives the spirit of Amundsen. How many men of science
have given up their lives in seeking knowledge by which to benefit their
fellow-men -- how many physicians and nurses have perished in the work
of ministering to people stricken with contagious disease -- how many
men and women have voluntarily faced certain death in the effort to
check an epidemic which was decimating their country or even some
foreign land -- how many men, common workingmen, miners, sailors,
railroad employees -- unknown to fame and unsung -- have given
themselves in the spirit of Amundsen? Their name is legion.

It is _this_ human nature, this idealism, which must be roused by the
social revolution. Without it the revolution cannot be, without it, it
cannot live. Without it man is forever doomed to remain a slave and a
weakling.

It is the work of the Anarchist, of the revolutionist, of the
intelligent, class-conscious proletarian to exemplify and cultivate this
spirit and instill it in others. It alone can conquer the powers of evil
and darkness, and build a new world of humanity, liberty, and justice.

### Chapter 30: Production

"What about production," you ask; "how is it to be managed?"

We have already seen what principles must underlie the activities of the
revolution if it is to be social and accomplish its aims. The same
principles of freedom and voluntary co√∂peration must also direct the
reorganization of the industries.

The first effect of the revolution is reduced production. The general
strike, which I have forecast as the starting point of the social
revolution, itself constitutes a suspension of industry. The workers lay
down their tools, demonstrate in the streets, and thus temporarily stop
production.

But life goes on. The essential needs of the people must be satisfied.
In that stage the revolution lives on the supplies, already on hand. But
to exhaust those supplies would be disastrous. The situation rests in
the hands of labor: the immediate resumption of industry is imperative.
The organized agricultural and industrial proletariat takes possession
of the land, factories, shops, mines and mills. Most energetic
application is now the order of the day.

It should be clearly understood that _the social revolution necessitates
more intensive production_ than under capitalism in order to supply the
needs of the large masses who till then had lived in penury. This
greater production can be achieved only by the workers having previously
prepared themselves for the new situation. Familiarity with the
processes of industry, knowledge of the sources of supply, and
determination to succeed will accomplish the task. The enthusiasm
generated by the revolution, the energies liberated, and the
inventiveness stimulated by it must be given full freedom and scope to
find creative channels. Revolution always wakens a high degree of
responsibility. Together with the new atmosphere of liberty and
brotherhood it creates the realization that hard work and severe
self-discipline are necessary to bring production up to the requirements
of consumption.

On the other hand, the new situation will greatly simplify the present
very complex problems of industry. For you must consider that
capitalism, because of its competitive character and contradictory
financial and commercial interests, involves many intricate and
perplexing issues which would be entirely eliminated by the abolition of
the conditions of to-day. Questions of wage scales and selling prices;
the requirements of the existing markets and the hunt for new ones; the
scarcity of capital for large operations and the heavy interest to be
paid on it; new investments, the effects of speculation and monopoly,
and a score of related problems which worry the capitalist and make
industry such a difficult and cumbersome network to-day would all
disappear. At present these require divers departments of study and
highly trained men to keep unraveling the tangled skein of plutocratic
cross purposes, many specialists to calculate the actualities and
possibilities of profit and loss, and a large force of aids to help
steer the industrial ship between the perilous rocks which beset the
chaotic course of capitalist competition, national and international.

All this would be automatically done away with by the socialization of
industry and the termination of the competitive system; and thereby the
problems of production will be immensely lightened. The knotted
complexity of capitalist industry need therefore inspire no undue fear
for the future. Those who talk of labor not being equal to manage
"modern" industry fail to take into account the factors referred to
above. The industrial labyrinth will turn out to be far less formidable
on the day of the social reconstruction.

In passing it may be mentioned that all the other phases of life would
also be very much simplified as a result of the indicated changes:
various present-day habits, customs, compulsory and unwholesome modes of
living will naturally fall into disuse.

Furthermore it must be considered that the task of increased production
would be enormously facilitated by the addition to the ranks of labor of
vast numbers whom the altered economic conditions will liberate for
work.

Recent statistics show that in 1920 there were in the United States over
41 million persons of both sexes engaged in gainful occupations out of a
total population of over 105 millions.[^22] Out of those 41 millions
only 26 millions were actually employed in the industries, including
transportation and agriculture, the balance of 15 millions consisting
mostly of persons engaged in trade, of commercial travelers,
advertisers, and various other middlemen of the present system. In other
words, 15 million[^23] persons would be released for useful work by a
revolution in the United States. A similar situation, proportionate to
population, would develop in other countries.

The greater production necessitated by the social revolution would
therefore have an additional army of many million persons at its
disposal. The systematic incorporation of those millions into industry
and agriculture, aided by modern scientific methods of organization and
production, will go a long way toward helping to solve the problems of
supply.

Capitalist production is for profit; more labor is used today to sell
things than to produce them. The social revolution reorganizes the
industries on the basis of the _needs_ of the populace. Essential needs
come first, naturally. Food, clothing, shelter -- these are the primal
requirements of man. The first step in this direction is the
ascertaining of the available supply of provisions and other
commodities. The labor associations in every city and community take
this work in hand for the purpose of equitable distribution. Workers'
committees in every street and district assume charge, co√∂perating with
similar committees in the city and State, and federating their efforts
throughout the country by means of general councils of producers and
consumers.

Great events and upheavals bring to the fore the most active and
energetic elements. The social revolution will crystallize the
class-conscious labor ranks. By whatever name they will be known -- as
industrial unions, revolutionary syndicalist bodies, co√∂perative
associations, leagues of producers and consumers -- they will represent
the most enlightened and advanced part of labor, the organized workers
aware of their aims and how to attain them. It is they who will be the
moving spirit of the revolution.

With the aid of industrial machinery and by scientific cultivation of
the land freed from monopoly the revolution must first of all supply the
elemental wanes of society. In farming and gardening intensive
cultivation and modern methods have made us practically independent of
natural soil quality and climate. To a very considerable extent man now
makes his own soil and his own climate, thanks to the achievements of
chemistry. Exotic fruits can be raised in the north to be supplied to
the warm south, as is being done in France. Science is the wizard who
enables man to master all difficulties and overcome all obstacles. The
future, liberated from the incubus of the profit system and enriched by
the work of the millions of non-producers of to-day, holds the greatest
welfare for society. That future must be the objective point of the
social revolution; its motto: bread and well-being for all. First bread,
then well-being and luxury. Even luxury, for luxury is a deep-felt need
of man, a need of his physical as of his spiritual being.

Intense application to this purpose must be the continuous effort of the
revolution: not something to be postponed for a distant day but of
immediate practice. The revolution must strive to enable every community
to sustain itself, to become materially independent. No country should
have to rely on outside help or exploit colonies for its support. That
is the way of capitalism. The aim of Anarchism, on the contrary, is
material independence, not only for the individual, but for every
community.

This means gradual decentralization instead of centralization. Even
under capitalism we see the decentralization tendency manifest itself in
spite of the essentially centralistic character of the present-day
industrial system. Countries which were before entirely dependent on
foreign manufactures, as Germany in the last quarter of the nineteenth
century, later Italy and Japan, and now Hungary, Czechoslovakia, etc.,
are gradually emancipating themselves industrially, working their own
natural resources, building their own factories and mills, and attaining
economic independence from other lands. International finance does not
welcome this development and tries its utmost to retard its progress,
because it is more profitable for the Morgans and Rockefellers to keep
such countries as Mexico, China, India, Ireland, or Egypt industrially
backward, in order to exploit their natural resources and at the same
time be assured of foreign markets for "overproduction" at home. The
governments of the great financiers and lords of industry help them
secure those foreign natural resources and markets, even at the point of
the bayonet. Thus Great Britain by force of arms compels China to permit
English opium to poison the Chinese, at a good profit, and exploits
every means to dispose in that country of the greater part of its
textile products. For the same reason Egypt, India, Ireland, and other
dependencies and colonies are not permitted to develop their home
industries.

In short, capitalism seeks centralization. But a free country needs
decentralization, independence not only political but also industrial,
economic.

Russia strikingly illustrates how imperative economic independence is,
particularly to the social revolution. For years following the October
upheaval the Bolshevik Government concentrated its efforts on currying
favor with bourgeois governments for "recognition" and inviting foreign
capitalists to help exploit the resources of Russia. But capital, afraid
to make large investments under the insecure conditions of the
dictatorship, failed to respond with any degree of enthusiasm. Meanwhile
Russia was approaching economic breakdown. The situation finally
compelled the Bolsheviki to understand that the country must depend on
her own efforts for maintenance. Russia began to look around for means
to help herself; and thereby she acquired greater confidence in her own
abilities, learned to exercise self-reliance and initiative, and started
to develop her own industries; a slow and painful process, but a
wholesome necessity which will ultimately make Russia economically
self-supporting and independent.

The social revolution in any given country must from the very first
determine to make itself self-supporting. _It must help itself_. This
principle of self-help is not to be understood as a lack of solidarity
with other lands. On the contrary, mutual aid and co√∂peration between
countries, as among individuals, can exist only on the basis of
equality, among equals. _Dependence_ is the very reverse of it.

Should the social revolution take place in several countries at the same
time -- in France and Germany, for instance -- then joint effort would
be a matter of course and would make the task of revolutionary
reorganization much easier.

Fortunately the workers are learning to understand that their cause is
international: the organization of labor is now developing beyond
national boundaries. It is to be hoped that the time is not far away
when the entire proletariat of Europe may combine in a general strike,
which is to be the prelude to the social revolution. That is
emphatically a consummation to be striven for with the greatest
earnestness. But at the same time the probability is not to be
discounted that the revolution may break out in one country sooner than
in another -- let us say in France earlier than in Germany -- and in
such a case it would become imperative for France not to wait for
possible aid from outside but immediately to exert all her energies to
help herself, to supply the most essential needs of her people by her
own efforts.

Every country in revolution must seek to achieve agricultural
independence no less than political, industrial self-help no less than
agricultural. This process is going on to a certain extent even under
capitalism. It should be one of the main objects of the social
revolution. Modern methods make it possible. The manufacture of watches
and clocks, for example, which was formerly a monopoly of Switzerland,
is now carried on in every country. Production of silk, previously
limited to France, is among the great industries of various countries
to-day. Italy, without sources of coal or iron, constructs steel-clad
ships. Switzerland, no richer, also makes them.

Decentralization will cure society of many evils of the centralized
principle. Politically decentralization means freedom; industrially,
material independence; socially it implies security and well-being for
the small communities; individually it results in manhood and liberty.

Equally important to the social revolution as independence from foreign
lands is decentralization within the country itself. Internal
decentralization means making the larger regions, even every community,
so far as possible, self-supporting. In his very illuminating and
suggestive work, _Fields, Factories, and Workshops_, Peter Kropotkin has
convincingly shown how a city like Paris even, now almost exclusively
commercial, could raise enough food in its own environs to support its
population abundantly. By using modern agricultural machinery and
intensive cultivation London and New York could subsist upon the
products raised in their own immediate vicinity. It is a fact that "our
means of obtaining from the soil whatever we want, under _any_ climate
and upon any _soil_, have lately been improved at such a rate that we
cannot foresee yet what is the limit of productivity of a few acres of
land. The limit vanishes in proportion to our better study of the
subject, and every year makes it vanish further and further from our
sight."

When the social revolution begins in any land, its foreign commerce
stops: the importation of raw materials and finished products is
suspended. The country may even be blockaded by the bourgeois
governments, as was the case with Russia. Thus the revolution is
_compelled_ to become self-supporting and provide for its own wants.
Even various parts of the same country may have to face such an
eventuality. They would have to produce what they need within their own
area, by their own efforts. Only decentralization could solve this
problem. The country would have to reorganize its activities in such a
manner as to be able to feed itself. It would have to revert to
production on a small scale, to home industry, and to intensive
agriculture and horticulture. Man's initiative freed by the revolution
and his wits sharpened by necessity will rise to the situation.

It must therefore be clearly understood that it would be disastrous to
the interests of the revolution to suppress or interfere with the
small-scale industries which are even now practiced to such a great
extent in various European countries. Numerous articles of every-day use
are produced by the peasants of Continental Europe during their leisure
winter hours. Those home manufactures total up tremendous figures and
fill a great need. It would be most harmful to the revolution to destroy
them, as Russia so foolishly did in her mad Bolshevik passion for
centralization. When a country in revolution is attacked by foreign
governments, when it is blockaded and deprived of imports, when its
large-scale industries threaten to break down or the railroads actually
do break down, then it is just the small home industries which become
the vital nerve of economic life: they alone can feed and save the
revolution.

Moreover, such home industries are not only a potent economic factor;
they are also of the greatest social value. They serve to cultivate
friendly intercourse between the farm and the city, bringing the two
into closer and more solidaric contact. In fact, the home industries are
themselves an expression of a most wholesome social spirit which from
earliest times has manifested itself in village gatherings, in communal
efforts, in folk dance and song. This normal and healthy tendency, in
its various aspects, should be encouraged and stimulated by the
revolution for the greater weal of the community.

The r√¥le of industrial decentralization in the revolution is
unfortunately too little appreciated. Even in progressive labor ranks
there is a dangerous tendency to ignore or minimize its importance. Most
people are still in the thraldom of the Marxian dogma that
centralization is "more efficient and economical." They close their eyes
to the fact that the alleged "economy" is achieved at the cost of the
worker's limb and life, that the "efficiency" degrades him to a mere
industrial cog, deadens his soul, and kills his body. Furthermore, in a
system of centralization the administration of industry becomes
constantly merged in fewer hands, producing a powerful bureaucracy of
industrial overlords. It would indeed be the sheerest irony if the
revolution were to aim at such a result. It would mean the creation of a
new master class.

The revolution can accomplish the emancipation of labor only by gradual
decentralization, by developing the individual worker into a more
conscious and determining factor in the processes of industry, by making
him the impulse whence proceeds all industrial and social activity. The
deep significance of the social revolution lies in the abolition of the
mastery of man over man, putting in its place the management of things.
Only thus can be achieved industrial and social freedom.

"Are you sure it would work?" you demand.

I am sure of this: if that will not work, nothing else will. The plan I
have outlined is a free communism, a life of voluntary co√∂peration and
equal sharing. There is no other way of securing economic equality which
alone is liberty. Any other system must lead back to capitalism.

It is likely, of course, that a country in social revolution may try
various economic experiments. A limited capitalism might be introduced
in one part of the land or collectivism in another. But collectivism is
only another form of the wage system and it would speedily tend to
become the capitalism of the present day. For collectivism begins by
abolishing private ownership of the means of production and immediately
reverses itself by returning to the system of remuneration according to
work performed; which means the reintroduction of inequality.

Man learns by doing. The social revolution in different countries and
regions will probably try out various methods, and by practical
experience learn the best way. The revolution is at the same time the
opportunity and justification for it. I am not attempting to prophesy
what this or that country is going to do, what particular course it will
follow. Nor do I presume to dictate to the future, to prescribe its mode
of conduct. My purpose is to suggest, in broad outline, the principles
which must animate the revolution, the general lines of action it should
follow if it is to accomplish its aim -- the reconstruction of society
on a foundation of freedom and equality.

We know that previous revolutions for the most part failed of their
objects; they degenerated into dictatorship and despotism, and thus
re√´stablished the old institutions of oppression and exploitation. We
know it from past and recent history. We therefore draw the conclusion
that the old way will not do. A new way must be cried in the coming
social revolution. What new way? The only one so far known to man: the
way of liberty and equality, the way of free communism, of Anarchy.

### Chapter 31: Defense of the Revolution

"Suppose your system is tried, would you have any means of defending the
revolution?" you ask.

Certainly.

"Even by armed force?"

Yes, if necessary.

"But armed force _is_ organized violence. Didn't you say Anarchism was
against it?"

Anarchism is opposed to any interference with your liberty, be it by
force and violence or by any other means. It is against all invasion and
compulsion. But if any one attacks _you_, then it is _he_ who is
invading you, he who is employing violence against you. You have a right
to defend yourself. More than that, it is your duty, as an Anarchist, to
protect your liberty, to resist coercion and compulsion. Otherwise you
are a slave, not a free man. In other words, the social revolution will
attack no one, but it will defend itself against invasion from any
quarter.

Besides, you must not confuse the social revolution with Anarchy.
Revolution, in some of its stages, is a violent upheaval; Anarchy is a
social condition of freedom and peace. The revolution is the _means_ of
bringing Anarchy about but it is not Anarchy itself. It is to pave the
road for Anarchy, to establish conditions which will make a life of
liberty possible.

But to achieve its purpose the revolution must be imbued with and
directed by the Anarchist spirit and ideas. The end shapes the means,
just as the tool you use must be fit to do the work you want to
accomplish. That is to say, the social revolution must be Anarchistic in
method as in aim.

Revolutionary defense must be in consonance with this spirit.
Self-defense excludes all acts of coercion, of persecution or revenge.
It is concerned only with repelling attack and depriving the enemy of
opportunity to invade you.

"How would you repel foreign invasion?"

By the strength of the revolution. In what does that strength consist?
First and foremost, in the support of the people, in the devotion of the
industrial and agricultural masses. If they feel that they themselves
are making the revolution, that they have become the masters of their
lives, that they have gained freedom and are building up their welfare,
then in that very sentiment you have the greatest strength of the
revolution. The masses fight to-day for king, capitalist, or president
because they believe them worth fighting for. Let them believe in the
revolution, and they will defend it to the death.

They will fight for the revolution with heart and soul, as the
half-starved working men, women, and even children of Petrograd defended
their city, almost with bare hands, against the White army of General
Yudenitch. Take that faith away, deprive the people of power by setting
up some authority over them, be it a political party or military
organization, and you have dealt a fatal blow to the revolution. You
will have robbed it of its main source of strength, the masses. You will
have made it defenseless.

The armed workers and peasants are the only effective defense of the
revolution. By means of their unions and syndicates they must always be
on guard against counter-revolutionary attack. The worker in factory and
mill, in mine and field, is the soldier of the revolution. He is at his
bench and plow or on the battlefield, according to need. But in his
factory as in his regiment he is the soul of the revolution, and it is
_his_ will that decides its fate. In industry the shop committees, in
the barracks the soldiers' committees -- these are the fountain-head of
all revolutionary strength and activity.

It was the _volunteer_ Red Guard, made up of toilers, that successfully
defended the Russian Revolution in its most critical initial stages.
Later on it was again volunteer peasant regiments who defeated the White
armies. The regular Red army, organized later, was powerless without the
volunteer workers' and peasants' divisions. Siberia was freed from
Kolchak and his hordes by such peasant volunteers. In the north of
Russia it was also workers' and peasants detachments that drove out the
foreign armies which came to impose the yoke of native reactionaries
upon the people.[^24] In the Ukraine the volunteer peasant armies --
known as _povstantsi_ -- saved the Revolution from numerous
counter-revolutionary generals and particularly from Denikin when the
latter was already at the very gates of Moscow. It was the revolutionary
_povstantsi_ who freed southern Russia from the invading armies of
Germany, France, Italy, and Greece and subsequently also routed the
White forces of General Wrangel.

The military defense of the revolution may demand a supreme command,
coordination of activities, discipline, and obedience to orders. But
these must proceed from the devotion of the workers and peasants, and
must be based on their voluntary co√∂peration through their own local,
regional, and federal organizations. In the matter of defense against
foreign attack, as in all other problems of the social revolution, the
active interest of the masses, their autonomy and self-determination are
the best guarantee of success.

Understand well that the only really effective defense of the revolution
lies in the attitude of the people. Popular discontent is the worst
enemy of the revolution and its greatest danger. We must always bear in
mind that the strength of the social revolution is organic, not
mechanistic: not in mechanical, military measures lies its might, but
industry, in its ability to reconstruct life, to establish liberty and
justice. Let the people feel that it is indeed their own cause which is
at stake, and the last man of them will fight like a lion in its behalf.

The same applies to internal as to external defense. What chance would
any White general or counter-revolutionist have if he could not exploit
oppression and injustice to incite the people against the revolution?
Counter-revolution can feed only on popular discontent. Where the masses
are conscious that the revolution and all its activities are in their
own hands, that they themselves are managing things and are free to
change their methods when they consider it necessary, counter-revolution
can find no support and is harmless.

"But would you let counter-revolutionists incite the people if they
tried to?"

By all means. Lee them talk all they like. To restrain them would serve
only to create a persecuted class and thereby enlist popular sympathy
for them and their cause. To suppress speech and press is not only a
theoretic offense against liberty: it is a direct blow at the very
foundations of the revolution. It would, first of all, raise problems
where none had existed before. It would introduce methods which must
lead to discontent and opposition, to bitterness and strife, to prison,
Tcheka, and civil war. It would generate fear and distrust, would hatch
conspiracies, and culminate in a reign of terror which has always killed
revolutions in the past.

The social revolution must from the very start be based on entirely
different principles, on a new conception and attitude. Full freedom is
the very breath of its existence; and be it never forgotten that the
cure for evil and disorder is _more_ liberty, not suppression.
Suppression leads only to violence and destruction.

"Will you not defend the revolution then?" your friend demands.

Certainly we will. But not against mere talk, not against an expression
of opinion. The revolution must be big enough to welcome even the
severest criticism, and profit by it if it is justified. The revolution
will defend itself most determinedly against real counter-revolution,
against all active enemies, against any attempt to defeat or sabotage it
by forcible invasion or violence. That is the right of the revolution
and its duty. But it will not persecute the conquered foe, nor wreak
vengeance upon an entire social class because of the fault of individual
members of it. The sins of the fathers shall not be visited upon their
children.

"What will you do with counter-revolutionists?"

Actual combat and armed resistance involve human sacrifices, and the
counter-revolutionists who lose their lives under such circumstances
suffer the unavoidable consequences of their deeds. But the
revolutionary people are not savages. The wounded are not slaughtered
nor those taken prisoners executed. Neither is practiced the barbarous
system of shooting hostages, as the Bolsheviki did.

"How will you treat counter-revolutionists taken prisoners during an
engagement?"

The revolution must find new ways, some sensible method of dealing with
them. The old method is to imprison them, support them in idleness, and
employ numerous men to guard and punish them. And while the culprit
remains in prison, incarceration and brutal treatment still further
embitter him against the revolution, strengthen his opposition, and
nurse thoughts of vengeance and new conspiracies. The revolution will
regard such methods as stupid and detrimental to its best interests. It
will try instead by humane treatment to convince the defeated enemy of
the error and uselessness of his resistance. It will apply liberty
instead of revenge. It will take into consideration that most of the
counter-revolutionists are dupes rather than enemies, deluded victims of
some individuals seeking power and authority. It will know that they
need enlightenment rather than punishment, and that the former will
accomplish more than the latter. Even to-day this perception is gaining
ground. The Bolsheviki defeated the Allied armies in Russia more
effectively by revolutionary propaganda among the enemy soldiers than by
the strength of their artillery. These new methods have been recognized
as practical even by the United States Government which is making use of
them now in its Nicaraguan campaign. American a√´roplanes scatter
proclamations and appeals to the Nicaraguan people to persuade them to
desert Sandino and his cause, and the American army chiefs expect the
best results from these tactics. But the Sandino patriots are fighting
for home and country against a foreign invader, while
counter-revolutionists wage war against their own people. The work of
their enlightenment is much simpler and promises better results.

"Do you think that would really be the best way to deal with
counter-revolution?"

By all means. Humane treatment and kindness are more effective than
cruelty and vengeance. The new attitude in this regard would suggest
also a number of other methods of similar character. Various modes of
dealing with conspirators and active enemies of the revolution would
develop as soon as you begin to practice the new policy. The plan might
be adopted, for instance, of scattering them, individually or in small
groups, over districts removed from their counter-revolutionary
influences, among communities of revolutionary spirit and consciousness.
Consider also that counter-revolutionists must eat; which means that
they would find themselves in a situation that would claim their
thoughts and time for other things than the hatching of conspiracies.
The defeated counter-revolutionist, left at liberty instead of being
imprisoned, would have to seek means of existence. He would not be
denied his livelihood, of course, since the revolution would be generous
enough to feed even its enemies. But the man in question would have to
join some community, secure lodgings, and so forth, in order to enjoy
the hospitality of the distributing center. In other words, the
counter-revolutionary "prisoners in freedom" would depend on the
community and the good will of its members for their means of existence.
They would live in its atmosphere and be influenced by its revolutionary
environment. Surely they will be safer and more contented than in
prison, and presently they would cease to be a danger to the revolution.
We have repeatedly seen such examples in Russia, in cases where
counter-revolutionists had escaped the Tcheka and settled down in some
village or city, where as a result of considerate and decent treatment
they became useful members of the community, often more zealous in
behalf of the public welfare than the average citizen, while hundreds of
their fellow-conspirators, who had not been lucky enough to avoid
arrest, were busy in prison with thoughts of revenge and new plots.

Various plans of treating such "prisoners in freedom" will no doubt be
tried by the revolutionary people. But whatever the methods, they will
be more satisfactory than the present system of revenge and punishment,
the complete failure of which has been demonstrated throughout human
experience. Among the new ways might also be tried that of free
colonization. The revolution will offer its enemies an opportunity to
settle in some part of the country and there establish the form of
social life that will suit them best. It is no vain speculation to
foresee that it would not be long before most of them would prefer the
brotherhood and liberty of the revolutionary community to the
reactionary r√©gime of their colony. But even if they did not, nothing
would be lost. On the contrary, the revolution would itself be the
greatest gainer, spiritually, by forsaking methods of revenge and
persecution and practicing humanity and magnanimity. Revolutionary
self-defense, inspired by such methods, will be the more effective
because of the very freedom it will guarantee even to its enemies. Its
appeal to the masses and to the world at large will thereby be the more
irresistible and universal. In its justice and humanity lies the
invincible strength of the social revolution.

No revolution has yet tried the true way of liberty. None has had
sufficient faith in it. Force and suppression, persecution, revenge, and
terror have characterized all revolutions in the past and have thereby
defeated their original aims. The time has come to try new methods, new
ways. The social revolution is to achieve the emancipation of man
through liberty, but if we have no faith in the latter, revolution
becomes a denial and betrayal of itself. Let us then have the courage of
freedom: let it replace suppression and terror. Let liberty become our
faith and our _deed_ and we shall grow strong therein.

Only liberty can make the social revolution effective and wholesome. It
alone can pave the way to greater heights and prepare a society where
well-being and joy shall be the heritage of all. The day will dawn when
man shall for the first time have full opportunity to grow and expand in
the free and generous sunshine of Anarchy.

[^01]: There never need be any danger of over-populating the earth.
  Nature provides her own checks against it. What we need is a more
  rational distribution of population, intensive agriculture and a more
  intelligent control over our birth rate.

[^02]: Organized under the various names of "Social Democratic Party,"
  "Social Democratic Labor Party," or "Socialist Labor Party."

[^03]: According to the old Russian calendar, in November.

[^04]: Executed by the Bolsheviki in Ekaterinburg, Siberia, in 1918.

[^05]: From the Russian word _bolshe_, meaning "more" or majority;
  _menshe_ signifying "less."

[^06]: Because of the widely believed but false charge against Lenin of
  being in the pay of Germany.

[^07]: July 16, new style.

[^08]: November 7, new style.

[^09]: In the South of Russia (the Ukraine) the bourgeoisie did offer
  some resistance, but only during the rule of the Hetmen Skoropadsky
  and Petlura, aided by the Allied armies. As soon as foreign aid was
  withdrawn, the Ukrainian bourgeoisie also became helpless.

[^10]: Real counter-revolution began much later, when Bolshevik terror
  and dictatorship were in full sway, which alienated the masses and
  resulted in insurrections.

[^11]: _1917_, by Leon Trotsky. Moscow, 1925.

[^12]: See the official protests by Bolsheviki of long standing, such as
  Lodovsky and others, quoted by Trotsky in his work _1917_.

[^13]: The revolt of the Kronstadt sailors in March, 1921. See _The
  Kronstadt Rebellion_, by the author.

[^14]: July 13, 1874.

[^15]: Anarchy refers to the condition. Anarchism is the theory or
  teaching about it.

[^16]: _N. Y. World Almanac_, 1927.

[^17]: The Mutualists, though not calling themselves Anarchists
  (probably because the name is so misunderstood), are nevertheless
  thoroughgoing Anarchists, since they disbelieve in government and
  political authority of any kind.

[^18]: See _Mutual Aid_, by Peter Kropotkin.

[^19]: The official liberation of political prisoners in Russia took
  place subsequently, _after_ the revolutionary masses had wrecked
  prisons in Petrograd, Moscow, and other cities.

[^20]: See _The Kronstadt Rebellion_, by the author.

[^21]: Those special police and military bodies, known as
  _zagriaditelniye otriadi_, were most bitterly hated and popularly
  known as "robber regiments," because of their irresponsible thievery,
  incredible depr√¢vity and cruelty. They were abolished by the
  introduction of the "new economic policy."

[^22]: _N. Y. World Almanac_, 1927.

[^23]: Exclusive of the army, militia, and navy, and the great numbers
  employed in unnecessary and harmful occupations, such as the building
  of warships, the manufacture of ammunition and other military
  equipment, etc.

[^24]: The Tchaikovsky-Miller Government.
