---
title: Theses of the Abstentionist Communist Faction of the Italian Socialist Party
author: Bordiga, Amadeo
date: 1920
description: "Though this is presented as a collective work, Bordiga was apparently the principal author: it is included in _The Science and Passion of Communism: Selected Writings of Amadeo Bordiga_ and sinistra.net lists it in an index of Bordiga's works. The translation below appeared in English in Communist Program, No. 5, June 1979. The theses were originally presented at the national conference of the Communist Abstentionist Faction of the Italian Socialist Party in Florence in May 1920. This group became the core of the new Communist Party of Italy in 1921. For more background, see <https://www.sinistra.net/lib/upt/compro/lipu/lipuhcabie.html>. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/bordiga/works/1920/abstentionists.htm>."
...

## I

1\. Communism is the doctrine of the social and historical preconditions
for the emancipation of the proletariat.

The elaboration of this doctrine began in the period of the first
proletarian movements against the effects of the bourgeois system of
production. It took shape in the Marxist critique of the capitalist
economy, the method of historical materialism, the theory of class
struggle and the conception of the development which will take place in
the historical process of the fall of the capitalist regime and the
proletarian revolution.

2\. It is on the basis of this doctrine -- which found its first and
fundamental systematic expression in the _Communist Manifesto_ of 1848
-- that the Communist Party is constituted.

3\. In the present historical period, the situation created by bourgeois
relations of production, based on the private ownership of the means of
production and exchange, on the private appropriation of the products of
collective labour and on free competition in private trade of all
products, becomes more and more intolerable for the proletariat.

4\. To these economic relations correspond the political institutions
characteristic of capitalism: the state based on democratic and
parliamentary representation. In a society divided into classes, the
state is the organisation of the power of the class which is
economically privileged. Although the bourgeoisie represents a minority
within society, the democratic state represents the system of armed
force organised for the purpose of preserving the capitalist relations
of production.

5\. The struggle of the proletariat against capitalist exploitation
assumes a succession of forms going from the violent destruction of
machines to the organisation on a craft basis to improve working
conditions, to the creation of factory councils, and to attempts to take
possession of enterprises.

In all these individual actions, the proletariat moves in the direction
of the decisive revolutionary struggle against the power of the
bourgeois state, which prevents the present relations of production from
being broken.

6\. This revolutionary struggle is the conflict between the whole
proletarian class and the whole bourgeois class. Its instrument is the
political class party, the communist party, which achieves the conscious
organisation of the proletarian vanguard aware of the necessity of
unifying its action, **in space** -- by transcending the interests of
particular groups, trades or nationalities -- and **in time** -- by
subordinating to the final outcome of the struggle the partial gains and
conquests which do not modify the essence of the bourgeois structure.

Consequently it is only by organising itself into a political party that
the proletariat constitutes itself into a class struggling for its
emancipation.

7\. The objective of the action of the Communist Party is the violent
overthrow of bourgeois rule, the conquest of political power by the
proletariat, and the organisation of the latter into a ruling class.

8\. Parliamentary democracy in which citizens of every class are
represented is the form assumed by the organisation of the bourgeoisie
into a ruling class. The organisation of the proletariat into a ruling
class will instead be achieved through the dictatorship of the
proletariat, that is, through a type of state in which representation
(the system of workers' councils) will be decided only by members of the
working class (the industrial proletariat and the poor peasants), with
the bourgeois being denied the right to vote.

9\. After the old bureaucratic, police and military machine has been
destroyed, the proletarian state will unify the armed forces of the
labouring class into an organisation which will have as its task the
repression of all counter-revolutionary attempts by the dispossessed
class and the execution of measures of intervention into bourgeois
relations of production and property.

10\. The process of transition from the capitalist economy to a
communist one will be extremely complex and its phases will differ
according to differing degrees of economic development. The endpoint of
this process will be the total achievement of the ownership and
management of the means of production by the whole unified collectivity,
together with the central and rational distribution of productive forces
among the different branches of production, and finally the central
administration of the allocation of products by the collectivity.

11\. When capitalist economic relationships have been entirely
eliminated, the abolition of classes will be an accomplished fact and
the state, as a political apparatus of power, will be progressively
replaced by the rational, collective administration of economic and
social activity.

12\. The process of transforming the relations of production will be
accompanied by a wide range of social measures stemming from the
principle that the collectivity takes charge of the physical and
intellectual existence of all its members. In this way, all the birth
marks which the proletariat has inherited from the capitalist world will
be progressively eliminated and, in the words of the _Manifesto_, in
place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class
antagonisms, we shall have an association in which the free development
of each is the condition for the free development of all.

13\. The pre-conditions for the victory of proletarian power in the
struggle for the realization of communism are to be found not so much in
the rational use of skills in technical tasks, as in the fact that
political responsibilities and the control of the state apparatus are
confided to those people who will put the general interest and the final
triumph of communism before the particular and limited interests of
groups.

Precisely because the Communist Party is the organisation of
proletarians who have achieved this class consciousness, the aim of the
party will be, by its propaganda, to win elective posts for its members
within the social organisation. The dictatorship of the proletariat will
therefore be the dictatorship of the Communist Party and the latter will
be a party of government in a sense totally opposed to that of the old
oligarchies, for communists will assume responsibilities which will
demand the maximum of sacrifice and renunciation and they will take upon
their shoulders the heaviest burden of the revolutionary task which
falls on the proletariat in the difficult labour through which a new
world will come to birth.

## II

1\. The critique which communists continuously make on the basis of the
fundamental methods of Marxism, and the propagation of the conclusions
to which it leads, have as their objective the extirpation of those
influences which the ideological systems of other classes and other
parties have over the proletariat.

2\. First of all, communism sweeps away idealist conceptions which
consider the material of the world of thought as the base, and not the
result, of the real relations of human life and of their development.
All religious and philosophical formulations of this type must be
considered as the ideological baggage of classes whose supremacy --
which preceded the bourgeois epoch -- rested on an ecclesiastical,
aristocratic or dynastic organisation receiving its authority only from
a pretended super-human investiture.

One symptom of the decadence of the modern bourgeoisie is the fact that
those old ideologies which it had itself destroyed reappear in its midst
under new forms.

A communism founded on idealist bases would be an unacceptable
absurdity.

3\. In still more characteristic fashion, communism is the demolition of
the conceptions of liberalism and bourgeois democracy by the Marxist
critique. The juridical assertion of freedom of thought and political
equality of citizens, and the idea that institutions founded on the
rights of the majority and on the mechanism of universal electoral
representation are a sufficient base for a gradual and indefinite
progress of human society, are ideologies which correspond to the regime
of private economy and free competition, and to the interests of the
capitalist class.

4\. One of the illusions of bourgeois democracy is the belief that the
living conditions of the masses can be improved through increasing the
education and training provided by the ruling classes and their
institutions. In fact it is the opposite: raising the intellectual
level of the great masses demands, as a pre-condition, a better standard
of material life, something which is incompatible with the bourgeois
regime. Moreover through its schools, the bourgeoisie tries to broadcast
precisely the ideologies which inhibit the masses from perceiving the
present institutions as the very obstacle to their emancipation.

5\. Another fundamental tenet of bourgeois democracy lies in the
principle of nationality. The formation of states on a national basis
corresponds to the class necessities of the bourgeoisie at the moment
when it establishes its own power, in that it can thus avail itself of
national and patriotic ideologies (which correspond to certain interests
common in the initial period of capitalism to people of the same race,
language and customs) and use them to delay and mitigate the conflict
between the capitalist state and the proletarian masses.

National irredentisms are thus born of essentially bourgeois interests.

The bourgeoisie itself does not hesitate to trample on the principle of
nationality as soon as the development of capitalism drives it to the
often violent conquest of foreign markets and to the resulting conflict
among the great states over the latter. Communism transcends the
principle of nationality in that it demonstrates the identical
predicament in which the mass of disinherited workers find themselves
with respect to employers, whatever may be the nationality of either the
former or the latter; it proclaims the international association to be
the type of political organisation which the proletariat will create
when it, in turn, comes to power.

In the perspective of the communist critique, therefore, the recent
world war was brought about by capitalist imperialism. This critique
demolishes those various interpretations which take up the viewpoint of
one or another bourgeois state and try to present the war as a
vindication of the national rights of certain peoples or as a struggle
of democratically more advanced states against those organised on
pre-bourgeois forms, or finally, as a supposed necessity of self-defence
against enemy aggression.

6\. Communism is likewise opposed to the conceptions of bourgeois
pacifism and to Wilsonian illusions on the possibility of a world
association of states, based on disarmament and arbitration and having
as its pre-condition the Utopia of a sub-division of state units by
nationality. For communists, war will become impossible and national
questions will be solved only when the capitalist regime has been
replaced by the International Communist Republic.

7\. In a third area, communism presents itself as the transcendence of
the systems of utopian socialism which seek to eliminate the faults of
social organisation by instituting complete plans for a new organisation
of society whose possibility of realisation was not put in relationship
to the real development of history.

8\. The proletariat's elaboration of its own interpretation of society
and history to guide its action against the social relations of the
capitalist world, continuously gives rise to a multitude of schools or
currents, influenced to a greater or lesser degree by the very
immaturity of the conditions of struggle and by all the various
bourgeois prejudices. From all this arise the errors and setbacks in
proletarian action. But it is due to this material of experience that
the communist movement succeeds in defining with ever greater clarity
the central features of its doctrine and its tactics, differentiating
itself clearly from all the other currents active within the proletariat
itself and openly combating them.

9\. The formation of producers' co-operatives, in which the capital
belongs to the workers who work in them, cannot be a path towards the
suppression of the capitalist system. This is because the acquisition of
raw materials and the distribution of products are effected according to
the laws of private economy and consequently, credit, and therefore
private capital ultimately exercises control over the collective capital
of the co-operative itself.

10\. Communists cannot consider economic trade or craft organisations to
be sufficient for the struggle for the proletarian revolution or as the
basic organs of the communist economy.

The organisation of the class through trade unions serves to neutralise
competition between workers of the same trade and prevents wages falling
to the lowest level. However it cannot lead to the elimination of
capitalist profit, still less to the unification of the workers of all
trades against the privilege of bourgeois power. Further, the simple
transfer of the ownership of the enterprises from the private employer
to the workers' union could not achieve the basic economic features of
communism, for the latter necessitates the transfer of ownership to the
whole proletarian collectively since this is the only way to eliminate
the characteristics of the private economy in the appropriation and
distribution of products.

Communists consider the union as the site of an initial proletarian
experience which permits the workers to go further towards the concept
and the practice of political struggle, which has as its organ the class
party.

11\. In general, it is an error to believe that the revolution is a
question of forms of organisations which proletarians group into
according to their position and interests within the framework of the
capitalist system of production.

It is not a modification of the structure of economic organisations,
then, which can provide the proletariat with an effective instrument for
its emancipation.

Factory unions and factory councils emerge as organs for the defence of
the interests of the proletarians of different enterprises at the point
when it begins to appear possible that capitalist despotism in the
management of the enterprises could be limited. But obtaining the right
of these organisations to supervise (to monitor) production to a more or
less large degree is not incompatible with the capitalist system and
could even be used by it as a means to preserve its domination.

Even the transfer of factory management to factory councils would not
mean (any more than in the case of the unions) the advent of the
communist system. According to the true communist conception, workers'
supervision of production will not be achieved until after the overthrow
of bourgeois power, and it will be a supervision over the running of
every enterprise exercised by the whole proletariat unified in the state
of workers' councils. Communist management of production will be the
direction of every branch and every productive unit by rational
collective organs which will represent the interests of all workers
united in the work of building communism.

12\. Capitalist relations of production cannot be modified by the
intervention of the organs of bourgeois power.

This is why the transfer of private enterprises to the state or to the
local government does not correspond in the slightest to the communist
conception. Such a transfer is invariably accompanied by the payment of
the capital value of the enterprise to the former owners who thus fully
retain their right to exploit. The enterprises themselves continue to
function as private enterprises within the framework of the capitalist
economy, and they often become convenient instruments in the work of
class preservation and defence undertaken by the bourgeois state.

13\. The idea that capitalist exploitation of the proletariat can be
gradually diminished and then eliminated by the legislative and
reformist action of present political institutions, be it elicited by
representatives of the proletarian party inside those institutions or
even by mass agitation, leads only to complicity in the defence of the
privileges of the bourgeoisie. The latter will on occasion pretend to
give up a minimum of its privileges in order to try to appease the anger
of the masses and to divert their revolutionary attempts against the
bases of the capitalist regime.

14\. The conquest of political power by the proletariat, even if such an
objective is considered as the final, total aim of its action, cannot be
achieved by winning a majority within bourgeois elective organs.

Thanks to the executive organs of the state, which are the direct agents
of the bourgeoisie, the latter very easily ensures a majority within the
elective organs for its delegates or for those elements which fall under
its influence or into its game because they want to individually or
collectively win elective posts. Moreover, participation in such
institutions requires the agreement to respect the juridical and
political bases of the bourgeois constitution. This agreement is merely
formal but nevertheless it is sufficient to free the bourgeoisie from
even the slightest embarrassment of an accusation of formal illegality
at the point when it will logically resort to its real means of armed
defence rather than abandon power and permit the proletariat to smash
its bureaucratic and military machine of domination.

15\. To recognise the necessity of insurrectionary struggle for the
seizure of power, while at the same time proposing that the proletariat
exercise its power by conceding representation to the bourgeoisie in new
political organisations (constituent assemblies or combinations of these
with the system of workers' councils) is an unacceptable program and is
opposed to the central communist demand, the dictatorship of the
proletariat. The process of expropriating the bourgeoisie would be
immediately compromised if this class retained a means to influence
somehow the formation of the representative organs of the expropriating
proletarian state. This would permit the bourgeoisie to use the
influence which it will inevitably retain because of its experience and
its intellectual and technical training, in order to deploy its
political activity towards the reestablishment of its power in a
counter-revolution. The same consequences would result if the slightest
democratic prejudice was allowed to survive in regard to an equality of
treatment which is supposedly to be granted to the bourgeois by the
proletarian power in such matters as freedom of association, propaganda
and the press.

16\. The program which proposes an organ of political representation
based on delegates from the various trades and professions of all the
social classes is not even in form a road leading to the system of
workers' councils, since the latter is characterised by the exclusion of
the bourgeois from electoral rights and its central organisation is not
chosen on the basis of trade but by territorial constituency. The form
of representation in question is rather an inferior stage even in
comparison with present parliamentary democracy.

17\. Anarchism is profoundly opposed to the ideas of communism. It aims
at the immediate installation of a society without a state and political
system and advocates, for the economy of the future, the autonomous
functioning of units of production, rejecting any concept of a central
organisation and regulation of human activities in production and
distribution. Such a conception is close to that of the bourgeois
private economy and remains alien to the fundamental essence of
communism. Moreover the immediate elimination of the state as a
machinery of political power would be equivalent to a failure to offer
resistance to the counter-revolution, unless one presupposes that
classes have been immediately abolished, that is to say that there has
been the so-called revolutionary expropriation simultaneous with the
insurrection against bourgeois power.

Not the slightest possibility of this exists, given the complexity of
the proletarian tasks in the substitution of the communist economy for
the present one, and given the necessity that such a process be directed
by a central organisation representing the general interest of the
proletariat and subordinating to this interest all the local and
particular interests which act as the principal conservative force
within capitalism.

## III

1\. The communist doctrine and economic determinism do not see
communists as passive spectators of historical destiny but on the
contrary as indefatigable fighters. Struggle and action, however, would
be ineffective if divorced from the lessons of doctrine and of
experience seen in the light of the communist critique.

2\. The revolutionary work of communists is based on the organisation
into a party of those proletarians who unite a consciousness of
communist principles with the decision to devote all their energy to the
cause of the revolution. The party, organised internationally, functions
on the basis of discipline towards the decisions of the majority and
towards the decisions of the central organs chosen by that majority to
lead the movement.

3\. Propaganda and proselytism -- in which the party accepts new members
only on the basis of the most sure guarantees -- are fundamental
activities of the party. Although it bases the success of its action on
the propagation of its principles and final objectives and although it
struggles in the interest of the immense majority of society, the
communist movement does not make the approval of the majority a
pre-condition for its action. The criterion which determines the
occasion to launch a revolutionary action is the objective evaluation of
our own forces and those of our enemies, taking into consideration all
the complex factors of which the numerical element is not the sole or
even the most important determinant.

4\. The communist party, internally, develops an intense work of study
and political critique intimately linked to the exigencies of action and
to historical experience, and it strives to organise this work on an
international basis. Externally, in all circumstances and with the means
at it disposal, it works to diffuse the lessons of its own critical
experience and to refute enemy schools and parties. Above all, the party
conducts its activity and propaganda among the proletarian masses and
works to polarise them around it, particularly at those times when they
are set in motion in reaction against the conditions capitalism imposes
upon them and especially within the organisations formed by proletarians
to defend their immediate interests.

5\. Communists therefore penetrate proletarian co-operatives, unions,
factory councils, and form groups of communist workers within them.
They strive to win a majority and posts of leadership so that the mass
of proletarians mobilised by these associations subordinate their action
to the highest political and revolutionary ends of the struggle for
communism.

6\. The communist party, on the other hand, remains outside all
institutions and associations in which bourgeois and workers participate
in common, or worse still, which are led and sponsored by members of the
bourgeoisie (societies of mutual assistance, charities, cultural
schools, popular universities, Freemasons' Lodges, etc.). It combats the
action and influence of these institutions and associations and tries to
divert proletarians from them.

7\. Participation in elections to the representative organs of bourgeois
democracy and participation in parliamentary activity, while always
presenting a continuous danger of deviation, may be utilised for
propaganda and for schooling the movement during the period in which
there does not yet exist the possibility of overthrowing bourgeois rule
and in which, as a consequence, the party's task is restricted to
criticism and opposition. In the present period, which began with the
end of the world war, with the first communist revolutions and the
creation of the Third International, communists pose, as the direct
objective of the political action of the proletariat in every country,
the revolutionary conquest of power, to which end all the energy and all
the preparatory work of the party must be devoted.

In this period, it is inadmissible to participate in these organs which
function as a powerful defensive instrument of the bourgeoisie and which
are designed to operate even within the ranks of the proletariat. It is
precisely in opposition to these organs, to their structure as to their
function, that communists call for the system of workers' councils and
the dictatorship of the proletariat.

Because of the great importance which electoral activity assumes in
practice, it is not possible to reconcile this activity with the
assertion that it is not the means of achieving the principal objective
of the party's action, which is the conquest of power. It also is not
possible to prevent it from absorbing all the activity of the movement
and from diverting it from revolutionary preparation.

8\. The electoral conquest of local governmental bodies entails the same
inconveniences as parliamentarism but to an even greater degree. It
cannot be accepted as a means of action against bourgeois power for two
reasons:

1. these local bodies have no real power but are subjected to the state
machine, and

2. although the assertion of the principle of local autonomy can today
cause some embarrassment for the ruling bourgeoisie, such a method would
have the result of providing it with a base of operations in its
struggle against the establishment of proletarian power and is contrary
to the communist principle of centralised action.

9\. In the revolutionary period, all the efforts of the communists
concentrate on enabling the action of the masses to attain a maximum of
intensity and efficiency. Communists combine propaganda and
revolutionary preparation with the organisation of large and frequent
proletarian demonstrations above all in the major centres and strive to
use economic movements in order to organise demonstrations of a
political character in which the proletariat reaffirms and strengthens
its will to overthrow the bourgeois power.

10\. The Communist Party carries its propaganda into the ranks of the
bourgeois army. Communist anti-militarism is not based on a sterile
humanitarianism. Its aim instead is to convince proletarians that the
bourgeoisie arms them to defend its own interests and to use their force
against the cause of the proletariat.

11\. The Communist Party trains itself to act as the general staff of
the proletariat in the revolutionary war. For this reason it prepares
and organises its own network of intelligence and communication. Above
all, it supports and organises the arming of the proletariat.

12\. The Communist Party concludes no agreements or alliances with other
political movements which share with it a specific immediate objective,
but diverge from it in their program of further action. It must equally
refuse the alliance -- otherwise known as the united fronts -- with all
working class tendencies which accept insurrectionary action against the
bourgeoisie but diverge from the communist program in the development of
subsequent action.

Communists have no reason to consider the growth of forces tending to
overthrow bourgeois power as a favourable condition when the forces
working for the constitution of proletarian power on communist
directives remain insufficient, since only a communist leadership can
assure its success.

13\. The soviets or councils of workers, peasants and soldiers,
constitute the organs of proletarian power and can exercise their true
function only after the overthrow of bourgeois rule.

Soviets are not in themselves organs of revolutionary struggle. They
become revolutionary when the Communist Party wins a majority within
them.

Workers' councils can also arise before the revolution, in a period of
acute crisis in which the state power is seriously threatened.

In a revolutionary situation, it may be necessary for the party to take
the initiative in forming soviets, but this cannot be a means of
precipitating such a situation. If the power of the bourgeoisie is
strengthened, the survival of councils can present a serious danger to
the revolutionary struggle -- the danger of a conciliation and a
combination of proletarian organs with the organs of bourgeois
democracy.

14\. What distinguishes communists is not that, in every situation and
in every episode of the class struggle, they call for the immediate
mobilisation of all proletarian forces for a general insurrection. What
distinguishes them is that they clearly say that the phase of
insurrection is an inevitable outcome of the struggle, and that they
prepare the proletariat to face it in conditions favourable to the
success and the further development of the revolution.

Depending on the situation -- which the party can better assess than the
rest of the proletariat -- the party can therefore find itself
confronted with the necessity to act in order to hasten or to delay the
moment of the decisive battle. In any event, the specific task of the
party is to fight both against those who, desiring to hasten
revolutionary action at any price, could drive the proletariat into
disaster, and against the opportunists who exploit every occasion in
which decisive action is undesirable in order to block the revolutionary
movement by diverting the action of the masses towards other objectives.
The Communist Party, on the contrary, must lead the action of the masses
always further in an effective preparation for the final and inevitable
armed struggle against the defensive forces of bourgeois rule.
