---
title: Nature and Function of the Proletarian Party
author: Gauche Communiste de France
date: 1947
description: Written in French in October 1948 for Internationalisme 38. This version is based on a translation, with introduction and footnotes, that the ICC published in International Review 153, which can found on the ICC website at <https://en.internationalism.org/internationalreview/2014/10329/september/international-review-2nd-semester-2014>.
...

## ICC Introduction

The document we are publishing below first appeared in 1947 in the pages
of _Internationalisme_, the press of the small group "Gauche Communiste
de France" (Communist Left of France), to which (amongst others) the ICC
has traced its origins since its foundation in 1975. It was reprinted at
the beginning of the 1970s in the _Bulletin d'études et de discussion_
published by the French group "Révolution Internationale", later to
become the section in France of the newly formed International Communist
Current. The _Bulletin_ was itself the precursor of the ICC's
theoretical organ, the _International Review_, and its aim was to give
the young group -- and its very young militants -- a more solid
anchorage, through theoretical reflection and a better knowledge of the
workers' movement, including the history of the movement's confrontation
with new theoretical questions posed by history^[Today we share all the
key ideas presented in this text and in most cases can support them to
the letter. This is especially true for its insistence on the
fundamental and irreplaceable role of the political party of the
proletariat for the victory of the revolution. However, the following
expression in the text does not provide the best way of understanding
the dynamic of the development of the class struggle and the relations
between party and class: "_Left to their own internal development, the
workers' struggles against the conditions of capitalist exploitation can
lead at most to the explosion of revolts_". In fact, historical
experience has shown the revolutionary capacities of the class, in
particular the fact that the combination of the economic with the
political dimensions of the struggle can mutually dynamise each other.
To be more precise about the role of revolutionaries, it is not to bring
consciousness to the workers but to accelerate, to extend and deepen,
the development of consciousness within the class. For more elements
relating to our position on this subject, we refer readers to the
following articles: "The mass strike opens the door to the proletarian
revolution", _International Review_ 90 (part of the series on
communism), and "Questions of organisation: have we become 'Leninists'?"
in _IR_ 96 and 97.].

The text's main object is to examine the historical conditions which
determine the formation and the activity of revolutionary organisations.
The very idea of such determination is fundamental. Although the
creation and survival of a revolutionary organisation is the fruit of a
militant will, aiming to be an active factor in history, the form that
this will takes does not come out of the blue, independently of social
reality and independently above all of the consciousness and fighting
spirit present in the broad masses of the working class. The conception
that the creation of a class party depended only on the "will" of the
militants has been characteristic of Trotskyism since the 1930s, but
also -- at the end of World War II -- of the newly formed "Partito
Comunista Internazionalista", the precursor of the various Bordigist
groups and of today's International Communist Tendency (ex-IBRP).
_Internationalisme_'s article insists, rightly in our view, that we have
here two fundamentally different conceptions of political organisation:
the one, voluntarist and idealist; the other, materialist and marxist.
At best, the voluntarist conception could only engender congenital
opportunism -- as was the case for the PCInt and its descendants; at
worst, as with the Trotskyists, it led to conciliation with the
bourgeoisie and going over to the enemy camp.

For the young post-68 generation, the importance of historical and
theoretical reflection on this issue is obvious. It was to preserve the
ICC (though it did not immunise us, far from it) from the worst effects
of the frenzied activism and impatience which were typical of this
period, and were to lead so many groups and militants to abandon
political activity.

We are deeply convinced that this text remains wholly relevant to this
day for a new generation of militants, and especially in its insistence
that the working class is not just a sociological category, but a class
with a specific role to play in history: to overthrow capitalism and
build a communist society^[The same theoretical reflection underlies
another article, "The tasks of the hour", published in
_Internationalisme_ in 1946 and re-published in _IR_ 32.]. The role of
revolutionaries is equally dependent on the historical period: when the
situation of the working class means that it is impossible to influence
the course of events, the role of revolutionaries is not to ignore
reality and pretend that their immediate intervention can change things,
but to get down to an apparently much less spectacular task: preparing
the theoretical and political conditions for an intervention which will
be determinant for the class struggle of the future.

## Introduction

Our group has taken on the task of re-examining the major problems posed
by the need to re-constitute a new revolutionary workers' movement. It
has had to consider the evolution of capitalist society towards state
capitalism, and of the old workers' movement which for some time has
served to support the capitalist class and help drag the proletariat
behind the latter; it has also had to look at what, in this old workers'
movement, provided material which the capitalist class could use to this
end, and how. Then we have been led to reconsider what, within the
workers' movement, remains given and what has become outdated since the
_Communist Manifesto_.

Finally, it was quite normal for us to have studied the problems posed
by the revolution and socialism. It was with this in mind that we
presented a study on the state after the revolution^[Republished, with a
new introduction, under the title "In the aftermath of World War II..."
(see recommended links)], and that we are now presenting for discussion
a study of the problem of the revolutionary party of the proletariat. We
should remember that this is one of the most important questions in the
revolutionary workers' movement. This question opposed Marx and the
marxists to the anarchists, to certain social democratic tendencies and,
finally to the revolutionary syndicalist tendencies. It was at the
centre of Marx's concerns, and he always retained a critical attitude
towards the different organisms which called themselves 'workers'' or
'socialist' parties, Internationals and so on. Marx, although at given
moments he participated actively in the life of certain of these organs,
always saw them as political groups within which, following the
expression of the _Communist Manifesto_, communists could express
themselves as the "vanguard of the proletariat". The goal of the
communists was to push forward the activity of these organisations while
maintaining the capacity for autonomous criticism and activity. Then
came the split within the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party between
the Menshevik tendency and the Bolsheviks around the ideas developed by
Lenin in _What is to be done?_ Amongst the marxist groups which had
broken from Social-Democracy to form the Communist International, the
same problem was at the basis of the opposition between the council
communists and the KAPD, and the Third International. It was also in
this order of thinking that you have the divergence between the Bordiga
group and Lenin around the subject of the 'United Front' advocated by
Lenin and Trotsky and adopted by the Communist International. The same
problem remains one of the major disagreements among the different
oppositional groups: between 'Trotskyists' and 'Bordigists', and indeed
it was a subject of discussion among all the groups of the time.

Today, we must critically re-examine all these expressions of the
revolutionary workers' movement. We hope to draw out of this process --
i.e. in the expression of different currents of thought on this question
-- a current which, in our view, will best express the revolutionary
standpoint, and thus try to pose the problem for the future
revolutionary workers' movement.

We also need to reconsider critically the points of view which have been
brought to bear on this problem, to determine what remains constant in
the revolutionary expression of the proletariat, but also what has
become obsolete and what new problems have been posed.

It is evident that such work can only bear fruit if it is the object of
discussion between and within the groups that aim to reconstitute a new
revolutionary workers' movement.

The study presented here is thus a means to participate in this
discussion; it has no other pretension, even though it is presented in
the form of theses. Its goal is above all to stimulate discussion and
criticism and not to provide definitive solutions. It is a work of
research which aims less at acceptance or rejection pure and simple than
at stimulating other works of this kind.

The essential focus of this study is the expression of revolutionary
consciousness in the proletariat. But there are a number of programmatic
questions related to the party which are only touched on here;
organisational problems, problems of the relationship between the party
and organisms like the workers' councils, problems relating to the
attitude of revolutionaries faced with the formation of several groups
claiming to be THE revolutionary party and trying to build it, the
problems posed by the pre- and post-revolutionary tasks, etc.

Therefore militants who understand that the task of the hour is to
examine these various problems should intervene actively in this
discussion, either through their own papers or bulletins, or in this
bulletin, for those who for the time being don't have such a possibility
of expressing themselves.

_Internationalisme_

## Socialism and consciousness

**1:** The idea of the necessity for a political organism acting inside
the proletariat for the social revolution seemed to be a given in the
socialist workers' movement.

It is true that the anarchists have always protested against the term
"political" which is given to this organism. But this anarchist protest
comes from the fact that they understand the term political action in a
very narrow sense, since it is synonymous for them with action for
legislative reforms: participation in elections and bourgeois
parliaments, etc. But neither the anarchists nor any other current in
the workers' movement deny the necessity for the regroupment of
revolutionary socialists in associations which, through action and
propaganda, take on the task of intervening in and orienting workers'
struggles. And any grouping which gives itself the task of orientating
social struggles in a certain direction is a political regroupment.

In this sense, the struggle of ideas around the political or
non-political character given to these organisations is only a debate
about words, hiding at root, under general phrases, concrete divergences
on the orientation and on the aims and the means to achieve them. In
other words, precise political divergences.

If new tendencies are emerging today that call into question the
necessity for a political organisation of the proletariat, this is a
consequence of the degeneration of the parties which were once
organisations of the proletariat and of their passage into the service
of capitalism: the Socialist and Communist parties. Political terms and
political parties are today suffering from discredit, even within the
bourgeois milieu. However, what has led to these resounding weaknesses
is not politics but SPECIFIC KINDS of politics. Politics is nothing
other than the orientation that men adopt in the organisation of social
life; to turn away from this action means renouncing any determination
to give a direction to social life and, consequently, to transform it.
It means accepting and submitting to society as it stands.

**2:** The idea of class is essentially historico-political, not merely
an economic classification. Economically, all humans are part of one and
the same system of production in a given historical period. The division
based upon the distinct positions that men occupy in the same system of
production and distribution, and which doesn't go beyond the framework
of this system, cannot become the basis of the historic necessity for
overcoming it. Division into economic categories is thus only a moment
in the constant internal contradictions that develop with the system but
remain circumscribed by its own limitations. Historic opposition is, so
to speak, external, in the sense that it is opposed to all of the system
taken as a whole, and this opposition is manifested in the destruction
of the existing social system and its replacement by another based on a
new mode of production. Class is the personification of this historic
opposition at the same time as being the social-human force for its
realisation.

The proletariat exists as a class in the full sense of the term only in
the orientation that it gives to its struggles, not with a view to
improving its conditions of life within the capitalist system but in its
opposition to the existing social order. The passage from category to
class, from the economic struggle to the political, is not an
evolutionary process, a continual and inherent development, so that a
historic class opposition emerges automatically and naturally after
being contained for a long time in the economic position of the workers.
There is a dialectical leap one to the other. It consists in the coming
to consciousness of the historical necessity for the disappearance of
the capitalist system. This historic necessity coincides with the
aspiration of the proletariat for liberation from its condition of
exploitation and is contained within it.

**3:** All social transformations in history have, as a fundamentally
determining condition, the fact that the development of the productive
forces has become incompatible with the restricted structures of the old
society. Capitalism's demise, and the reason for its collapse, lies in
its inability to dominate any longer the productive forces that it has
developed. This is also the historic justification of its transcendence
by socialism.

Apart from this condition, however, the differences between previous
revolutions (including the bourgeois revolution) and the socialist
revolution remain decisive and demand a profound study on the part of
the revolutionary class.

For the bourgeois revolution for example, the condition for the
development of productive forces incompatible with those of feudalism
still lay within a system based on the property of a possessing class.
As a result, capitalism developed its economic foundation slowly and
over a long period inside the feudal world. The political revolution
followed the economic fact and consecrated it. Also as a result, the
bourgeoisie has no imperious necessity to acquire an awareness of
economic and social movement. Its actions are directly propelled by the
pressures of the laws of economic development which act upon it as blind
forces of nature and determine its will. Its consciousness remains a
secondary factor. It comes after the fact. It records events rather than
giving direction to them. The bourgeois revolution is situated in this
prehistory of humanity where the still undeveloped productive forces
dominate man.

Socialism, on the contrary, is based upon the development of productive
forces which are incompatible with all individual or social property of
a class. From this, socialism cannot be based upon the economic
foundations within capitalist society. The political revolution is the
condition of a socialist orientation of the economy and of society. And
from this, socialism can only be realised through the consciousness of
the movement's final goals, the consciousness of the means for realising
them and the conscious will for action. Socialist consciousness
**precedes and conditions** revolutionary class action. The socialist
revolution is the beginning of history where man is called upon to
dominate the productive forces which have already been strongly
developed, and this domination is precisely the purpose adopted by the
socialist revolution.

**4:** For this reason, all attempts to establish socialism on
realisations achieved within capitalist society are by their very nature
destined to fail. Socialism demands, in terms of time, an advanced
development of the productive forces, and in terms of space, the entire
earth: its precondition is the conscious will of men. In the best of
cases, the experimental demonstration of socialism within capitalist
society cannot go beyond the level of a utopia. And persisting along
this route leads to a position of conservation and the strengthening of
capitalism^[This is what happened to all the currents of utopian
socialism which, having become schools, lost their revolutionary aspect
and were transformed into actively conservative forces. Consider the
examples of Proudhonism, Fourierism, the co-operatives, reformism and
state socialism.]. Socialism within a capitalist regime can only be a
theoretical demonstration, its materialisation can only take the form of
an ideological force, and its realisation can only take place by the
revolutionary struggle of the proletariat against the existing social
order.

And since the existence of socialism can only find expression first of
all in socialist consciousness, the class which bears it and personifies
it has a historic existence only through this consciousness. The
formation of the proletariat as a historic class is nothing other than
the formation of its socialist consciousness. These are the two aspects
of the same historic process, inconceivable separately because one
cannot exist without the other.

Socialist consciousness does not flow from the economic position of the
workers, it is not a reflection of their condition as wage-earners. For
this reason, socialist consciousness is not simply and spontaneously
formed in the head of every worker, or in the heads of workers alone.
Socialism as an ideology appears separately from and in parallel with
the economic struggles of the workers. They do not engender each other
although they influence each other, and the development of each
conditions that of the other; both are rooted in the historic
development of capitalist society.

## The formation of the class party in history

**5:** If the workers only become "a class in itself and for itself"
(according to the expression of Marx and Engels) through socialist
consciousness, one can say that the process of the constitution of the
class is identified with the process of the formation of groups of
revolutionary socialist militants. The party of the proletariat is not a
selection or a "delegation" of the class, it is the mode of existence
and life of the class itself. No more than one can understand matter
apart from its movement, one cannot understand the class apart from its
tendency to constitute itself into political organisms: "_The
organisation of the proletariat into a class and thus into a political
party_" (_Communist Manifesto_) is no chance formula, but expresses the
profound thought of Marx and Engels. A century of experience has
masterfully confirmed the validity of this way of seeing the notion of
class.

**6:** Socialist consciousness is not **produced** by spontaneous
generation but is constantly **reproduced**; once it has appeared it
becomes, in its opposition to the existing capitalist world, the active
principle determining and accelerating its own development in and
through action. However this development is conditioned and limited by
the development of the contradictions of capitalism. In this sense,
Lenin's thesis of 'socialist consciousness injected into the workers by
the Party' is certainly more precise than Rosa's thesis of the
'spontaneity' of the development of consciousness, engendered during the
course of a movement that starts with the economic struggle and
culminates in a revolutionary socialist struggle. The thesis of
'spontaneity', despite its democratic appearances, reveals at root a
mechanistic tendency, a rigorous economic determinism. It is based on a
cause and effect relationship, with consciousness as merely an effect,
the result of an initial movement, i.e., the economic struggle of the
workers which gives rise to it. In this view, consciousness is seen as
fundamentally passive in relation to the economic struggles which are
the active factor. Lenin's conception restores to socialist
consciousness and the party which materialises it the character of an
essentially active factor and principle. It does not detach itself from
life and the movement but is included within it.

**7:** The fundamental difficulty of the socialist revolution lies in
this complex and contradictory situation: on the one hand the revolution
can only be made through the **conscious** action of the **great
majority** of the working class; on the other hand the development of
this consciousness comes up against the conditions to which all workers
in capitalist society are subjected, and which endlessly hinder and
destroy the workers' consciousness of their revolutionary historic
mission. This difficulty can absolutely not be overcome solely through
theoretical propaganda independent of the historic conjuncture. But
still less than through pure propaganda will the solution be found in
the economic struggles of the workers. Left to their own internal
development, the workers' struggles against the conditions of capitalist
exploitation can lead at most to the explosion of revolts, in other
words negative reactions which are absolutely insufficient for the
positive action of social transformation; the latter is made possible
only through a consciousness of the aims of the movement. This factor
can only be this political element of the class which draws its
theoretical substance, not from the contingencies and particularities of
the economic position of the workers, but from the unfolding of historic
possibilities and necessities. Only the intervention of this factor will
make it possible for the class to rise from the level of purely negative
reaction to that of positive action, from revolt to revolution.

**8:** But it would be entirely wrong to want to substitute these
organisms, which are expressions of the consciousness and existence of
the class, for the class itself and to consider the class as merely a
shapeless mass destined to serve as material for these political
organisms. That would be to substitute a militarist conception for a
revolutionary one in relations between being and consciousness and
between the party and the class. The historic function of the party is
not to be a General Staff leading the action of a class which is seen as
an army ignorant both of the final aim and the immediate objective of
operations. That would be to see its movement as a sum total of
manoeuvres.

The socialist revolution is not at all comparable to military action.
Its realisation is conditioned by the workers' consciousness that
dictates their decisions and actions.

The party does not, then, act in place of the class. It does not demand
"confidence" in the bourgeois sense of the word, in other words to have
delegated to it the fate and destiny of society. Its sole historic
function is to act with a view to allowing the class itself to acquire
the consciousness of its mission, of its aims and of the means which are
the foundations of its revolutionary action.

**9:** Just as we must combat this conception of the party as General
Staff, acting on behalf of the working class, we must with equal vigour
reject the other conception which, on the basis that "_the emancipation
of the workers is the work of the workers themselves_" (Inaugural
Address of the First International) denies any role to the militant and
the revolutionary party. Under the very praiseworthy pretext of not
imposing their will on the workers, these militants shirk their tasks,
run from their responsibility and leave revolutionaries tailing the
workers' movement.

The former puts itself outside the class by denying it and substituting
for it, the latter similarly puts itself outside the class by denying
the specific function of the class organisation, i.e., the party, by
denying their own existence as a factor of revolution and excluding
themselves by forbidding themselves any action of their own.

**10:** A correct understanding of the conditions of the socialist
revolution must start from and embody the following elements:

>**a.** Socialism is a necessity only because the development reached by
>the productive forces is no longer compatible with a society divided
>into classes.
>
>**b.** This necessity can only become a reality through the will and
>conscious action of the oppressed class whose social liberation is tied
>up with the liberation of humanity from its alienation from the forces
>of production, to which it has hitherto been subjected.
>
>**c.** Socialism, being both an objective necessity and a subjective
>will, can only be expressed in revolutionary **action** that is
>conscious of its aims.
>
>**d.** Revolutionary action is inconceivable without a revolutionary
>programme. Similarly, the elaboration of the programme is inseparable
>from action. It is because the revolutionary party is a "_body of
>doctrine and a will to action_" (Bordiga) that it is the most thorough
>concretisation of socialist consciousness and the fundamental element
>for its realisation.

**11:** The tendency towards the constitution of the party of the
proletariat appears right from the birth of capitalist society. But as
long as the historic conditions for socialism are not sufficiently
developed, the ideology of the proletariat regarding the construction of
the party can only remain at an embryonic stage. It is only with the
"Communist League" that this accomplished form of the political
organisation of the proletariat appears for the first time.

When one looks closely at the development of the formation of class
parties, it is immediately obvious that the organisation into parties
does not follow a constant progression, but on the contrary happens in
periods of major development, alternating with others during which the
party disappears. Thus the organic existence of the party does not
appear to depend solely on the will of the individuals who compose it.
Objective conditions determine its existence. The party, being
essentially an instrument of revolutionary class action, can only exist
in situations where the action of the class comes to the surface. In the
absence of the conditions for workers' class action (such as in periods
of the economic and political stability of capitalism or following
decisive defeats of the workers' struggles) the party cannot continue to
exist. Organically it breaks up or else if it wants to exist, in other
words to continue to exercise an influence, then it must adapt to the
new conditions which deny revolutionary action; inevitably, the party
takes on a new content. It becomes conformist, that is to say it ceases
to be a party of the revolution.

Marx understood the conditions of the existence of the party better than
most. Twice he undertook the dissolution of a great organisation: first
in 1851, following the defeat of the revolution and the triumph of the
reaction in Europe, and secondly in 1873 after the defeat of the Paris
Commune, he was quite openly for the dissolution of the party. The first
time it was the Communist League, and the second, the First
International.

## The task of the hour for revolutionary militants

**12:** The experience of the Second International confirms the
impossibility of maintaining the party of the proletariat during a
prolonged period marked by a non-revolutionary situation. The
participation of the parties of the Second International in the
imperialist war of 1914 only revealed the long corruption of the
organisation. The permeability and penetrability of the political
organisation of the proletariat to the ideology of the reigning
capitalist class, which is always possible, can in long periods of
stagnation and reflux of the class struggle assume such an extent that
the ideology of the bourgeoisie ends up substituting itself for that of
the proletariat, so that inevitably the party is emptied of all its
original class content and becomes instead an instrument of the enemy
class.

The history of the Communist Parties of the Third International has
again shown the impossibility of safeguarding the party in a period of
revolutionary reflux and its inevitable degeneration during such a
period.

**13:** For these reasons, the formation of parties, such as the
Trotskyist International from 1935, or more recently the
Internationalist Communist Party in Italy, is not merely artificial:
these can only be enterprises of confusion and opportunism. Instead of
being moments in the constitution of the future class party, these
formations are obstacles and discredit it by the caricature that they
present. Far from expressing a maturation of consciousness and an
advance on the old programme that they have transformed into dogmas,
they only reproduce the old programme and are imprisoned by these
dogmas. Nothing surprising about the fact that these formations take up
out of date and backward positions of the old party and worsen them
still further, as with the tactics of parliamentarism, trade unionism,
etc.

**14:** But the break in the party's organisational existence does not
mean a break in the development of class ideology. In the first place
the revolutionary reflux signifies the immaturity of the revolutionary
programme. Defeat is a signal for the necessity to critically re-examine
previous programmatic positions and the obligation to go beyond them on
the basis of the living experience of the struggle.

This positive critical work of programmatic elaboration is pursued
through the organisms coming from the old party. They constitute, in the
period of retreat, the active element for the constitution of the future
party in a new period of revolutionary upsurge. These organisms are the
left groups or fractions coming out of the party after its
organisational dissolution or its ideological alienation. Such were: the
fraction of Marx in the period between the dissolution of the League and
the formation of the First International, the left currents in the
Second International (during the First World War) which gave birth to
the new Parties and International in 1919; also the Left Fractions and
groups who continued their revolutionary work following the degeneration
of the Third International. Their existence and their development is the
condition which has enriched the programme of the revolution and the
reconstruction of the party of tomorrow.

**15:** The old party, once it has passed into the service of the enemy
class, definitively ceases being a milieu in which revolutionary thought
can be elaborated and in which militants of the proletariat can be
formed. Expecting currents coming from social democracy or Stalinism to
serve as material for the construction of a new class party thus means
ignoring the very foundation of the idea of the party. The Trotskyists'
adherence to the parties of the Second International, or their pursuit
of the hypocritical practice of burrowing within these parties with the
idea of cultivating, inside this anti-proletarian milieu,
"revolutionary" currents with whom they could set up the new party of
the proletariat, merely demonstrates that they themselves are a dead
current, an expression of the past movement and not that of the future.

Just as the new party of the revolution cannot be set up on the basis of
a programme which has been overtaken by events, neither can it be built
with elements who remain organically attached to organisms which have
forever ceased to be working class.

**16:** The history of the workers' movement has never known a period
which is more sombre and more marked by such a profound retreat in
revolutionary consciousness than the present. If the economic
exploitation of the workers appears as an absolutely insufficient
condition for assuming a consciousness of their historic mission, it
turns out that the development of this consciousness is infinitely more
difficult than revolutionary militants had previously thought. Perhaps,
for the proletariat to recover, humanity will have to undergo the
nightmare of a Third World War with the horror of a world in chaos, and
the proletariat will have to face a very tangible dilemma: die or save
yourself by revolution before it can find the conditions for recovering
both itself and its consciousness.

**17:** It is not for us here in the framework of this thesis to look
for the precise conditions that will allow the re-emergence of
proletarian consciousness, nor what will be the conditions for the
formation of the unitary organisation that the proletariat will adopt
for its revolutionary combat. What we can say categorically, based on
the experience of the last thirty years, is that neither economic
demands, nor the whole range of so-called "democratic" demands
(parliament, rights of peoples to self-determination, etc...) can be of
use to the historic action of the proletariat. Concerning forms of
organisation, it appears as still more evident that it cannot be the
unions with their vertical and professional, corporatist structures. All
these forms of organisation belong to a past workers' movement and will
have to be relegated to the museum of history. But they will have to be
abandoned and overtaken in practice. The new organisations will have to
be unitary, that is to say inclusive of the great majority of the
workers, and go beyond the particular divisions of professional
interests. Their basis will be on the social level, their structure the
locality. Workers' councils, like those that appeared in 1917 in Russia
and 1918 in Germany, were a new type of unitary organisation of the
class. It is in these types of workers' councils, and not in the
rejuvenation of the unions, that the workers will find the most
appropriate form of their organisation.

But whatever the new unitary forms of organisation of the class it
changes nothing regarding the problem of the necessity for the political
organism which is the party, nor regarding the decisive role that it has
to play. The party remains the conscious factor in the action of the
class. It is the ideologically vital motor force of the proletariat's
revolutionary action. In social action it plays a role similar to that
of energy in production. The reconstruction of this organism of the
class is conditioned by the appearance of a tendency within the class to
break with capitalist ideology as it engages in practice in the struggle
against the existing regime, while at the same time this reconstruction
is a condition for the acceleration and deepening of this struggle and
the decisive condition for its triumph.

**18:** The absence of the conditions required for the construction of
the party should not lead to the conclusion that any immediate activity
by revolutionary militants is useless or impossible. The militant has
not to choose between the hollow "activism" of the party builders and
individual isolation, between adventurism and an impotent pessimism:
both must be fought, as being equally foreign to the revolutionary
spirit and harmful to the cause of the revolution. We must reject both
the voluntarist idea of militant action presented as the sole factor
determining the movement of the class, and the mechanical conception of
the party as a mere passive reflection of the movement. Militants must
consider their action as one of the factors which, in interaction with
others, conditions and determines the action of the class. This
conception provides the foundation for the necessity and value of the
militant's activity, while at the same time setting the limits of its
possibilities and impact. Adapting one's activity to the conditions of
the present conjuncture is the only means of making this activity
efficient and fruitful.

**19:** The attempt to construct the new class party in all haste and at
any cost, despite unfavourable objective conditions springs from both an
infantile and adventurist voluntarism and a false appreciation of the
situation and its immediate perspectives, as well as, moreover, a
totally wrong appreciation of the idea of the party and the relationship
between party and class. Thus all such attempts are fatally destined to
fail and only manage, in the best of cases, to create opportunist
groupings trailing in the wake of the big parties of the Second and
Third Internationals. Their existence is henceforth justified solely by
the development within them of the spirit of the chapel and the sect.

Thus all these organisations are not only caught up, in their
positivity, in the cogs of opportunism through their immediate
"activism", they also, in their negativity, produce a narrow spirit
typical of the sect, a parochial patriotism, as well as a fearful and
superstitious attachment to "leaders", a caricature of the bigger
organisations, a deification of organisational rules and submission to a
"freely consented" discipline that becomes all the more tyrannical and
intolerable in inverse proportion to the numbers involved in them.

In this dual outcome, the artificial and premature construction of the
party leads to the negation of the construction of the political
organism of the class, to the destruction of cadres and the more or less
rapid, but still inevitable, loss of militants, used up, exhausted, in
the void, and completely demoralised.

**20:** The disappearance of the party, either through its contraction
and its organisational dislocation as was the case in the First
International, or, through its passage into the service of capitalism,
as was the case for the parties of the Second and Third Internationals,
expresses in both cases the end of a period of the revolutionary
struggle of the proletariat. The disappearance of the party is thus
inevitable and neither voluntarism nor the presence of a more or less
brilliant leader is able to prevent it.

Marx and Engels twice saw the organisation of the proletariat, in whose
life they both played a major part, break up and die. Lenin and
Luxemburg looked on powerlessly at the betrayal of the great parties of
social democracy. Trotsky and Bordiga could do nothing to alter the
degeneration of the Communist parties and their transformation into the
monstrous capitalist machines that we have been faced with ever since.

These examples tell us not that the party is futile, as a fatalist and
superficial analysis would have it, but only that the necessary party of
the class has no existence along a uniformly continuous and rising line,
that its very existence is not always possible, that its existence and
development are in correspondence with and closely linked to the class
struggle of the proletariat which gives birth to it and which it
expresses. That's why the struggle of revolutionary militants within the
party during the course of its degeneration and before its death as a
workers' party has a revolutionary meaning, but not the vulgar meaning
given to it by various Trotskyist oppositions. For the latter, it is a
matter of setting the party right, and to this end it is above all
necessary that the organisation and its unity is not put in peril. For
them it is a question of maintaining the organisation in its past
splendour, when in fact this is impossible precisely because of the
objective conditions, so that the organisation's original splendour
could only be maintained at the price of a constant and growing
alteration of its revolutionary and class nature. They look to
organisational measures and remedies in order to save the organisation
without understanding that organisational collapse is always the
reflection of a period of revolutionary reflux and is often a far better
solution than its survival; and in any case what revolutionaries have to
save is not the organisation but its class ideology which is at risk of
going down with the organisation.

Without understanding the objective causes of the inevitable loss of the
old party, one cannot understand the task of militants in this period.
Some came to the conclusion that, because they had failed to preserve
the old party of the class, it was necessary to construct a new one
straight away. This incomprehension can only result in adventurism, the
whole being based on a voluntarist conception of the party.

A correct study of reality makes clear that the death of the old party
clearly implies the immediate impossibility of constructing a new one;
it means that the necessary conditions for the existence of any party,
old or new, do not exist in the present.

In such a period only small revolutionary groups can survive, assuring a
continuity which is less organisational than ideological. These groups
concentrate within themselves the past experience of the class struggle,
providing a link between the party of yesterday and that of tomorrow,
between the culminating point of the struggle and the maturation of
class consciousness in a period of past upsurge and its re-emergence on
a higher level in a new period of upsurge in the future. In these groups
the ideological life of the class carries on through the self-criticism
of its struggles, the critical re-examination of its past ideas, the
elaboration of its programme, the maturation of its consciousness and
the formation of new cadres, new militants for the next stage of the
revolutionary assault.

**21:** The present period that we are living in is on the one hand the
product of the defeat of the first great revolutionary wave of the
international proletariat which put an end to the First World War and
which reached its high point in the October 1917 revolution in Russia
and in the Spartacist movement of 1918-19 and, on the other, of the
profound transformation that has taken place in the politico-economic
structure of capitalism, which has been evolving towards its ultimate
and decadent form: state capitalism. What is more, a dialectical
relationship exists between this evolution of capitalism and the defeat
of the revolution.

Despite their heroic fighting spirit, despite the permanent and
insurmountable crisis of the capitalist system and the unprecedented
aggravation of the conditions of the working class, the proletariat and
its vanguard have not been able to hold out against the
counter-offensive of capitalism. They were not confronted with classic
capitalism and were surprised by its transformations, which have posed
problems for which they were unprepared, either theoretically or
politically. The proletariat and its vanguard, which had for a long time
generally identified capitalism with private property of the means of
production and socialism with statification, were baffled and
disorientated by modern capitalism's tendencies towards the statified
concentration of the economy and planning. The great majority of workers
were left with the idea that this evolution presented a new
transformation of society from capitalism towards socialism. They
associated themselves with this idea, abandoned their historic mission
and became the most staunch partisans of the conservation of capitalist
society.

It is these historic reasons that give the proletariat its present
physiognomy. As long as these conditions prevail, as long as state
capitalist ideology dominates the heads of workers, there can be no
question of the reconstruction of the class party. Only through the
course of the bloody cataclysms which mark out the phase of state
capitalism will the proletariat grasp the abyss which separates
socialist liberation from the present monstrous state capitalist regime,
only thus will it develop a growing capacity to detach itself from this
ideology which currently imprisons and annihilates it. Only then will
the way again be opened for "_the organisation of the proletariat into a
class and thus into a political party_". This stage will be reached all
the more quickly if its revolutionary nuclei have made the theoretical
effort needed to respond to the new problems posed by state capitalism
and to help the proletariat recover its class solution and the means for
its realisation.

**22:** In the present period, revolutionary militants can only survive
by forming small groups undertaking a patient work of propaganda, of
necessity limited in scope, at the same time as making strenuous efforts
of research and theoretical clarification.

These groups will only be able to fulfil their tasks through looking for
contact with other groups on the national and international levels on
the basis of criteria demarcated by class frontiers. Only such contacts
and their multiplication, with the aim of confronting positions and the
clarification of problems, can allow these groups and militants to
physically and politically resist the terrible pressure of capitalism in
the present period and allow all these efforts to be a real contribution
to the struggle for the emancipation of the proletariat.

## The party of tomorrow

**23:** The party will not be a simple reproduction of that of
yesterday. It cannot be rebuilt on an old model drawn from the past. As
well as its programme, its structure and the relations it has
established between itself and the whole of the class are founded on a
synthesis of past experience and the new, more advanced conditions of
the present stage. The party follows the evolution of the class struggle
and at each stage of the latter's history corresponds to a particular
form of the political organism of the proletariat.

At the dawn of modern capitalism, in the first half of the 19th century,
a working class still in its phase of constitution undertook local and
sporadic struggles and could only give birth to doctrinal schools, sects
and leagues. The Communist League was the most advanced expression of
this period, while at the same time its _Manifesto_ with its call
"proletarians of all countries -- unite" heralded the period to come.

The First International corresponded to the proletariat's effective
entry onto the stage of social and political struggle in the principal
countries of Europe. It thus grouped together all the organised forces
of the working class, its diverse ideological tendencies. The First
International brought together both all the currents and all the
contingent aspects of the workers' struggles: economic, educational,
political and theoretical. It was the highest point of the working
class' **unitary organisation** in all its diversity.

The Second International marked a stage of differentiation between the
economic struggle of wage labour and the social, political struggle. In
this period of the full flourishing of capitalist society, the Second
International was the organisation of the struggle for reforms and of
political conquests, for the political affirmation of the proletariat,
and at the same time it marked a higher stage in the ideological
demarcation of the proletariat by clarifying and elaborating the
theoretical foundations of its historic revolutionary mission.

The First World War revealed the historic crisis of capitalism and
opened up the period of its decline. The socialist revolution evolved
from the theoretical level to one of practical demonstration. In the
heat of events the proletariat in some ways found itself forced to
hastily construct its revolutionary organisation of combat. The immense
programmatic contribution of the first years of the Third International
nonetheless proved inadequate faced with the huge problems posed by this
ultimate phase of capitalism and by the tasks of revolutionary
transformation. At the same time, living experience quickly demonstrated
the general ideological immaturity of the class as a whole. Faced with
these two dangers and under the pressure of events, piled on in rapid
succession, the Third International was left to respond through
organisational measures: iron discipline of militants, etc.

The organisational aspect had to compensate for the inadequacy of the
programme, and the party for the immaturity of the class. As a result,
the party ended up substituting itself for the action of the class
itself, with a resulting alteration of the idea of the party and its
relations with the class.

**24:** On the basis of this experience, the future party will be
founded on the re-establishment of this truth: although the revolution
contains a problem of organisation, it is not however a problem of
organisation. Above all, the revolution is an ideological problem of the
maturation of consciousness among the broad masses of the proletariat.

No organisation, no party can substitute for the class itself and it
remains true more than ever that "_the emancipation of the workers will
be the task of the workers themselves_". The party, which is the
crystallisation of class consciousness, is neither different from nor
synonymous with the class. The party necessarily remains a small
minority; it has no ambition to be a great numerical force. At no moment
can it separate from nor replace the living action of the class. Its
function remains that of ideological inspiration within the movement and
action of the class.

**25:** During the insurrectionary period of the revolution, the role of
the party is not to demand power for itself, nor to call on the masses
to "have confidence" in it. It intervenes and develops its activity in
favour of the self-mobilisation of the class, within which it aims for
the triumph of its principles and the means for revolutionary action.

The mobilisation of the class around the party to which it "entrusts" or
rather abandons leadership is a conception reflecting a state of
immaturity in the class. Experience has shown that in such conditions
the revolution will find it impossible to triumph and will degenerate
quickly, resulting in a divorce between the class and the party. The
latter finds itself forced to resort to more and more coercive methods
in order to impose itself on the class, and this ends up as a serious
obstacle to the forward march of the revolution.

The party is not an organisation of direction and execution; these
functions belong to the unitary organisation of the class. If militants
of the party take part in these functions they do so as members of the
greater community of the proletariat.

**26:** In the post-revolutionary period, the period of the dictatorship
of the proletariat, the party is not the Single Party that is the
classic hallmark of totalitarian regimes. The latter are characterised
by their identification and assimilation with the state power of which
they hold the monopoly. On the contrary, the class party of the
proletariat characterises itself by being distinguished from the state,
which is its historic antithesis. The Totalitarian Single Party tends to
bloat and incorporate millions of individuals, making this a physical
element of its domination and oppression. The party of the proletariat,
on the contrary, by its nature, remains a strict ideological selection
whose militants have no advantages to gain or defend. Their privilege is
only to be the clearest combatants and the most devoted to the
revolutionary cause. Thus the party doesn't aim to incorporate large
numbers, because as its ideology becomes that of greater masses, the
necessity for its existence tends to disappear and the hour of its
dissolution will begin to sound.

## The internal regime of the Party

**27:** The problem of the organisational rules which constitute the
internal regime of the party is just as decisive as that of its
programmatic content. Past experience, and most particularly that of the
parties of the Third International, has shown that the conception of the
party makes up a unitary whole. Organisational rules are an aspect and
an expression of this conception. The question of organisation is not
separate from the idea that one has of the party's role and function and
of its relationship with the class. None of these questions exist in
themselves, rather they make up elements that are constitutive and
expressive of the whole.

The parties of the Third International had the rules or the internal
regimes they had because they were set up in a period of evident
immaturity of the class which led to the substitution of party for
class, organisation for consciousness, discipline for conviction.

The organisational rules of the future party will thus have to be based
on a very different conception of the role of the party in a much more
advanced stage of the struggle, resting on a much greater ideological
maturity of the class.

**28:** The questions of democratic or organic centralism which occupied
a major place in the Third International have lost their sharpness for
the future party. When the action of the class relies on the action of
the party, the question of the maximum practical efficacy came to
dominate the party which, moreover, could only provide partial
solutions.

The effectiveness of the party's action does not consist in its
practical action of leadership and execution, but in its ideological
action. Thus the strength of the party lies not in the submission of its
militants to discipline, but in their knowledge, their greater
ideological development and their solid conviction.

The rules of the organisation do not come from abstract notions raised
to the level of immanent or immutable principles, democratic or
centralist. Such principles are empty of meaning. If the settlement of
decisions taken by the (democratic) majority has to be maintained in the
absence of a more appropriate method, that doesn't in any way mean that
by definition the majority has the monopoly on truth and correct
positions. Correct positions flow from the greatest knowledge of the
object, from the closest grip on reality.

Thus the organisation's internal rules must correspond to its objectives
and so to the role of the party. Whatever the importance of the
efficiency of its practical immediate action, which can provide it with
the basis for exercising a wider discipline, it still remains less
important than the maximum flourishing of the thinking of its militants,
and as a consequence is subordinate to it.

As long as the party remains the crucible where class ideology is
elaborated and deepened, its guiding principle must not only be the
greatest freedom of ideas and disagreement in the framework of its
programmatic principles: an even more fundamental concern must be to
ceaselessly maintain and facilitate the combustion of thought, by
providing the means for discussion and the confrontation of ideas and of
tendencies inside the organisation.

**29:** Looking at the conception of the party from this angle, nothing
is more foreign to it than the monstrous idea of a homogeneous,
monolithic and monopolist party.

The existence of tendencies and fractions within the party is not just
something to be tolerated, a right to be accorded and thus subject to
discussion.

On the contrary, the existence of currents in the party -- in the
framework of acquired and verified principles -- is one of the
manifestations of a healthy conception of the idea of the party.

Marco. June 1948.
