---
title: "Communism is the Material Human Community: Amadeo Bordiga Today"
author: Goldner, Loren
date: 1991
description: This red texts version is based on what is available on Goldner's website at <http://breaktheirhaughtypower.org/communism-is-the-material-human-community-amadeo-bordiga-today/>. It has been proofread against the text as it appears in the journal Critique, a PDF of which can be found at <https://libcom.org/files/goldner1995(1).pdf>.
...

For many decades, revolutionary Marxists have understood the social
realities of the Soviet Union, China and other so-called "socialist"
societies to be the negation of Marx's project of working-class and
human emancipation. Many theoreticians, beginning with Rosa Luxemburg in
her 1918 _The Russian Revolution_, and followed by Mattick, Korsch,
Bordiga, Trotsky, Shachtman or CLR James (to name only a few), have
devoted major energies to settling the famous "Russian question": the
specific meaning, for Marxists, of the defeat of the Russian revolution
and the international success of Stalinism. The variety of views
developed in this debate seems to confirm above all the characterization
of Winston Churchill, very far from Marxism and the left, for whom the
Soviet system was a "riddle wrapped in a mystery within an enigma". The
contemporary heirs of the theories of the "degenerated workers' state",
"state socialism", "bureaucratic collectivism", "state capitalism" or
the "transitional society" all have their analyses and explanations --
many of them self-consoling -- of the post-1989 devolution of the
Eastern bloc. With the tempered optimism characteristic of the Marxian
tradition, most of these currents tended to assume (as did this author)
that the moribund Stalinist bureaucracy's immediate major contender for
power would be the revolutionary working class, fighting at last for
real socialism. Few foresaw -- most particularly, but not only, the
Trotskyists, for whom the Eastern bloc ostensibly rested on foundations
socially superior to the West -- that the main contenders for the
post-Stalinist succession would not be revolutionary Marxism but a
blindly pro-Western neo-liberalism inspired by von Hayek and Milton
Friedman, and resurgent authoritarian rightist currents of interwar
vintage (with ex-Stalinists prominent in both currents). Even fewer
foresaw that the demise of the social foundations of Stalinism would
entail a profound crisis of Marxism itself. As the crisis of the Eastern
bloc calls forth not soviets and workers' councils but blood-and-soil
populism, murderous nationalism, regionalism, religious fundamentalism
and anti-Semitism (authoritarian currents that are far ahead of any
remaining left opposition in channeling anti-IMF, anti-market
sentiments), it becomes clearer than ever before that most conceptual
frameworks available to revolutionary Marxists, East and West, for
understanding world history since 1917 are profoundly in need of
re-examination.

The following article is written as a modest contribution to that
re-examination. It presents, for consideration, the little-known views
of the Italian Marxist Amadeo Bordiga (best remembered, when remembered
at all, as one of the "ultra-lefts" denounced by Lenin in _Left Wing
Communism, An Infantile Disorder_), on the nature of the Soviet Union,
and more generally considers the thesis that the **agrarian question**,
fundamental for Bordiga in the characterization of capitalism, is the
actual, little discussed key to the history of both Social Democracy and
Stalinism, the two deformations of Marxism that have dominated the 20th
century. It puts forward the thesis that European (and above all German)
Social Democracy itself, even when it spoke an ostensibly Marxist
language, was a statist distortion of the Marxian project, and more a
school for a higher stage of capitalism, the emergent Keynesian welfare
state. It argues that what is disappearing today is the long statist
detour in working-class emancipation, which was actually much more about
a substitute bourgeois revolution for the industrialization of backward
societies than about socialism or communism. It contends, finally, that
any maintenance of the traditional rose-tinted view of historical German
Social Democracy prior to the triumph of "revisionism" must lead to a
complete impasse and absence of vision for the contemporary period.
History, ever in advance of theory, is clearing away the debris of the
statist legacy of Social Democracy and Stalinism. Today, the question of
how the Marxian project became entwined, from the 1860's onward, with
the statist project of Enlightened absolutism and its version of
_Aufklärung_ is more pressing than ever. Even more pressing, of course,
is the question of how it can extricate itself.

Attempts to focus on the centrality of the agrarian question in the
Soviet experience are, in themselves, hardly new. Figures like
Barrington Moore, within academia, developed such a focus long ago^[B.
Moore, _Social Origins of Democracy and Dictatorship_, (Boston, 1966).].
But the mood of the 1960's, when Moore's book appeared, was still very
much focused on industrial development as the essence of capitalism, and
because Moore otherwise seemed to echo a more pallid version of
Trotsky's theories of permanent revolution and combined and uneven
development, his work made no particular impact on the Marxist
discussion. Adam Ulam, even farther from Marxism, had written, in the
Cold War, about the real content of the Marxist movement being the
agrarian question ^[A. Ulam, _The Unfinished Revolution_, (New York,
1960).]; his objective was to discredit "Marxism" (which he equated with
Soviet ideology) by showing that it was the product of underdevelopment,
not of capitalism. Gerschenkron, historically much richer than Ulam,
also seemed to be a shadow of Trotsky ^[A. Gerschenkron. _Economic
Backwardness in Historical Perspective_, (Boston, 1962).].

Undoubtedly the most important 20th century book influencing Marxist
views on the agrarian question, within the revolutionary anti-Stalinist
milieu, is Preobrazhensky's _New Economics_, which, whatever its flaws,
is essential to understanding the fate of the international left
opposition^[E. Preobrazhensky, _The New Economics_, (Oxford, 1965), Ch.
II.]. Preobrazhensky's concept of "socialist accumulation" off the
peasantry is in turn heavily indebted to Rosa Luxemburg's _Accumulation
of Capital_; Preobrazhensky posits that the "workers' state" can
consciously and humanely realize what, historically, the capitalist
state had realized blindly and bloodily -- the transformation of the
agrarian petty producers into factory workers. (It was left to Stalin to
realize this transformation consciously and bloodily.)

On the margins of this discussion, where most of the Western left is
concerned, have been the ideas of the fascinating character of Amadeo
Bordiga. First General Secretary of the PCI, and, with Gramsci, its most
important founder, Bordiga was the last Western revolutionary who told
off Stalin to his face (in 1926) as the gravedigger of the revolution
and lived to tell the tale. He was ousted from the PCI in the same year
and took several thousand "Bordigists" with him. In 1928 the "Italian
Communist Left" (as they called themselves) voted Trotsky the "head of
the international left opposition" and there ensued a lengthy exchange
between Bordiga and Trotsky, which ended in a generally complete failing
out circa 1931-32. But Bordiga is one of the most original, brilliant
and utterly neglected Marxists of the century. (His legacy could never
be made palatable by the postwar PCI in the way that Gramsci's was.) He
remained in Italy through the war (once he had been ousted and calumnied
by the Comintern in the usual fashion, he was left alone by Mussolini
and pursued a career as an engineer). But it is in some sense after
World War 2 that Bordiga's work, where the present is concerned, becomes
truly interesting. He lived in virtual obscurity until 1970, and even
wrote a couple of articles on the upsurge of 1968. His mission after the
war was, in his view, to salvage the "theoretical lessons" of the
worldwide revolutionary surge of the 1917-1921 period. He felt, like
almost all anti-Stalinist revolutionaries in 1945, that this required a
settling of accounts with the "Russian enigma", and he wrote three books
(never translated into English but they are in French) on the Russian
revolution and the Soviet economy^[Cf. bibliographical notes above.]. He
also wrote a 3-volume history of the Italian Communist Left (a term
designating his own faction; the history unfortunately ends in 1921) and
many little pamphlets and tracts ^[Ibid.]. Much of his stuff is turgid
and unreadable, but also well worth the trouble. What is unusual, and
strangely contemporary, about Bordiga's view was, quite simply, his
theory that capitalism equals the agrarian revolution. He probably
developed this view in the pre-1914 period; some of his earliest
articles are about the French and Italian Socialists' positions on the
agrarian question ^[The mature statement on the link between the
agrarian question and capitalism is in A. Bordiga, _Mai la merce..._,
1979.]. It is not always easy to follow Bordiga's trajectory; he
believed in "revolutionary anonymity", abhorred the cult of personality,
and often did not sign his written work, including his books. A
Bordigist assessment of the Russian Revolution was published under the
title _On the Margins of the 50th Anniversary of October 1917_ in 1967
^[Cf. _Bilan d'une révolution_, _Programme communiste_, Nos 40-41-42,
Oct. 1967-June 1968, cited in bibliographical notes.]. It is something
outside the universe of discourse of the conventional
Stalin-Trotsky-(state capitalist) polemics in the U.S., Britain, France
and Germany. (For example, Bordiga never uses the term "state
capitalism", and rarely uses the term "Soviet Union" in recognition that
the soviets were destroyed there long ago). For him, it was just Russian
capitalism, not notably different from any other. Bordiga had a
refreshing desire to want to "de-Russify" the preoccupations of the
international revolutionary movement. He said that the workers' movement
had been rocked by counter-revolutions before in history (i.e. after
1848 with Louis Napoleon) and that there was nothing special about
Russia. On the other hand, his 25-year preoccupation with the Russian
economy belies that _sang froid_. (Of further interest is the fact that,
in 1945, he had predicted a long period of capitalist expansion and
workers' reformism, due to end in the next world crisis, beginning in
1975) ^[The evolution of Bordiga's prediction of a major world crisis in
1975 is presented in F. Livorsi, op. cit. pp. 426-444.]. Bordiga's
analysis of Russia (as developed after 1945) is as follows. While his
faction had totally supported Trotsky in the faction fight of the 20's,
largely for reasons related to Soviet/Comintern foreign policy, the
Bordigist analysis took its distance from the super-industrialization
strategy of the Left Opposition, for ultimately "Bukharinist" reasons.
He felt after 1945 that only something like Bukharin's strategy had any
hope of preserving the international revolutionary character of the
regime (which to Bordiga was more important than Russian
industrialization), because it would not destroy the Bolshevik party.
Bukharin said in the 1924-28 faction fights that the implementation of
Trotsky's leftist "super-industrialization" strategy could only be
carried out by the most elephantine state bureaucracy history had ever
seen ^[For a distilled discussion of Bukharin's critique of
Preobrazhensky, cf. _Bilan d'une révolution_, pp. 139-140. Against the
super-industrializers of the left, Bukharin said that the working class
would be "obliged to construct a colossal administrative apparatus ...
The attempt to replace all the petty producers and small peasants by
bureaucrats produces an apparatus so colossal that the expense of
maintaining it is incomparably greater than the unproductive
expenditures resulting from the anarchic conditions of petty production:
in sum, the whole economic apparatus of the proletarian state not only
does not facilitate but actually hinders the development of the
productive forces. It leads directly to the opposite of what it is
supposed to do." (ibid)]. When Stalin stole the left's program and
put it into practice, he completely confirmed Bukharin, as Trotsky
himself acknowledged in a backhanded way after most of his faction
in Russia had capitulated to Stalin ^[The "Bukharinist" aspect of
Trotsky's assessment of the Stalinist "left" turn after 1928 is noted
in _Bilan d'une révolution_, op. cit., p, 148.]. Bordiga took more
seriously perhaps than even Trotsky the idea of the international
character of the revolution and of the Soviet regime; to him the
idea of "socialism in one country" was a grotesque abomination of
everything Marxism stood for, which it of course was. In his final
confrontation with Stalin in Moscow in 1926, Bordiga proposed that
all the Communist Parties of the world should jointly rule the Soviet
Union, as a demonstration of the supra-national reality of the workers'
movement ^[This intervention was made at the Sixth Enlarged Executive
Committee Plenum of the Comintern in 1926. ibid. p. 38.]. This proposal
was, needless to say, coolly received by Stalin and his friends.

But this is just the beginning. Bordiga's writings on the capitalist
nature of the Soviet economy, in contrast to those produced by the
Trotskyists, focus to a great extent on the agrarian sector. He wanted
to show how capitalist social relations existed in the _kolkhoz_ and in
the _sovkhoz_, one a cooperative farm and the other the straight
wage-labor state farm^[On the capitalist nature of the kolkhoz, cf.
_Bilan d'une révolution_, pp. 172-179.]. He emphasized how much of
agrarian production depended on the small privately owned plots (he was
writing in 1950) and predicted quite accurately the rates at which the
Soviet Union would start importing wheat after Russia had been such a
large exporter from the 1880's to 1914.

The reasons leading Bordiga to downplay the industrial sector and to
emphasize agriculture, as I said, came from theoretical and strategic
concerns that pre-dated the Russian revolution. Once again, for Bordiga,
capitalism was first of all the agrarian revolution, the capitalization
of agriculture. Bordiga had a different appraisal of Bukharin from the
typical revolutionary opponent of Stalinism because of these concerns.
He introduced a novel distinction between Lenin and Trotsky. Most people
who distinguish between Lenin and Trotsky are Stalinists and Maoists.
But, Bordiga totally turns the tables on the Stalinists. Bordiga, using
a formulation of Lenin's, called the Russian Revolution "a dual
revolution"^[Bordiga's notion of the "dual revolution" is scattered
through his writings. For one example cf. A. Bordiga, _Russie et
révolution..._, p. 192 and ff.] in which the political seizure of power
by the proletariat made possible the completion of the tasks of the
bourgeois revolution, above all the destruction of pre-capitalist social
relations in agriculture. The great prototype of the latter was
undoubtedly August 1789 in France. Trotskyists had always said that in
April 1917 "Lenin became a Trotskyist" by accepting the theses of
permanent revolution. But Lenin had actually disagreed with Trotsky on
nuances, and this showed up in his 1920-1922 formulations on the nature
of the new regime, above all his remarkable speeches to the 1921 party
congress, in his polemics against the First Workers' Opposition and
their charge that the Soviet state was "state capitalism". In reply,
Lenin said that state capitalism would be a tremendous step forward from
what Russia actually was, which was a petty producer capitalism with a
working-class political party controlling the state ^[V.I. Lenin, _The
Tax in Kind (The Significance of the New Policy and Its Conditions)_ in
_Collected Works_, Vol. 32, pp. 329-369, presents Lenin's analysis of
the relationship between petty-producer capitalism and state capitalism
in 1921.]. For Bordiga, once this **political** expression of the
working class was destroyed by Stalinism, **all that was left** was
petty producer capitalism. Lenin's use of the term "workers' state with
bureaucratic deformations", in the early 20's was quite different from
Trotsky's use of the same term in 1936. It is not possible or necessary
here to recapitulate the whole evolution of who said what on this
question. What lurks behind these differing strategic and tactical
judgments are two opposed conceptions of Marxism. What is important is
that for Trotsky and the Trotskyists, the permanent character of the
revolution was congealed in "property forms" and later was expressed in
the growth of the productive forces ^[Trotsky, _The Revolution
Betrayed_, (New York, 1972), p. 8.]. For Bordiga, the growth of the
productive forces was merely proof of the bourgeois character of the
Soviet phenomenon. He turned the Stalinists on their head by saying that
Trotsky's problem was not his "underestimation" of the peasantry, but
his **overestimation** of the possibility that the peasants, and the
agrarian revolution of petty producers, could have anything to do with a
proletarian revolution ^[This is the formulation of _Bilan d'une
révolution_, p. 95.].

In Bordiga's conception, Stalin, and later Mao, Ho, etc. were "great
romantic revolutionaries" in the 19th century sense, i.e. **bourgeois**
revolutionaries. He felt that the Stalinist regimes that came into
existence after 1945 were just extending the bourgeois revolution, i.e.
the expropriation of the Prussian Junker class by the Red Army, through
their agrarian policies and through the development of the productive
forces. To the theses of the French ultra-left group "Socialism or
Barbarism" who denounced the regime, after 1945, as state capitalist,
Bordiga replied with an article _"Avanti Barbati!"_ ("Onward
Barbarians!") that hailed the bourgeois revolutionary side of Stalinism
as its sole real content^[Cited in Grilli, op. cit., p. 282.]. (One does
not have to agree with Bordiga to acknowledge that this was a more
coherent viewpoint than the stupidity of the Trotskyists' analysis after
1945 that saw the Stalinists in Eastern Europe, China or Indochina as
quavering "reformists" eager to sell out to imperialism.)

The advance of Bordiga's framework over Trotsky's is above all his
critique of the assumption, smuggled into Trotskyism and the work of
those who work off Trotskyism, that Stalin and Stalinism represents a
"center" between the Bukharinist right and a Trotskyist left. One can
only imagine how the victory of the Bukharinist "right" in the
industrialization debate could have done more damage to the
international workers' movement than the triumph of the Stalinist
"center" actually did. Yet anyone who wishes to draw an uncritical line
of Marxist continuity through Trotsky after 1924 tacitly accepts this
"left to right" spectrum and its consequences.

Trotsky wrote in 1936 "Socialism has demonstrated its right to victory,
not on the pages of _Das Kapital_, ... but in the languages of steel,
concrete and electricity" ^[Trotsky, _The Revolution Betrayed_, (New
York, 1972), p. 8.]. Extending the theory of permanent revolution from
the formation of soviets (1905, 1917) to state property forms to the
development of the productive forces themselves (i.e. the proof of the
deformed socialist character of the regime being its ability to develop
industry in the "era of imperialist decay"), Trotsky culminated what I
call the "substitute bourgeois revolution" character of Second and Third
International Marxism.

Postwar Trotskyists (for whom Trotsky is of course not responsible) saw
the industrialization of the Stalinist regimes during the period when
the Third World was showing no signs of development anywhere as the
definitive proof of their deformed socialist character. Against this
attitude, Bordiga said: "One does not **build** communism". The task of
the "development of the productive forces" is not the task of
communists. He also added: "It is exactly right that the 'foundations of
socialism' are being built in the Soviet Union"; for him, this was
precisely the proof of the bourgeois character of the regime.

One important example of a current which broke from the pro-Stalinist
bias of Trotskyism without examining the legacy of the 1920s faction
fight was the Shachtmanite tradition and its "bureaucratic collectivist"
analysis. Their 1940's version at least, sees a world-conquering
dynamism for Stalinism^[Cf. Shachtman, Max. _The Bureaucratic
Revolution_ (New York, 1962), for the most thorough statement of this
view.], socialism's rival to succeed capitalism for an epoch, which
history has more recently shown to be false. For the Shachtmanite
critique, moreover, the whole emphasis is placed on the question of
"democracy", which for them is essentially everything. Socialism is
effectively conceived as "democratic collectivism", so its absence, and
the absence of the surface of capitalism [sic] forms, must be
"**bureaucratic** collectivism". In other words, this tradition's whole
disagreement with Stalinism and then Trotskyism revolved around the fact
that what happened in Russia after 1917 or 1921 was **anti-democratic**.
Of course that was tremendously important, but its influence is to
tacitly accept the whole "line of continuity" through Trotsky and
**Trotsky's** Lenin, and ignore the insight of Bukharin and his
prediction about the state. In other words, the whole perspective (the
Shachtmanite tradition is deeply oblivious to the Marxian critique of
political economy) revolved the counterposition bureaucracy/democracy
and therefore, like Trotsky, smuggled in a whole notion of "tasks" of
the bourgeois revolution that had crept into Second and Third
International Marxism. Except for Bordiga, no one in the anti-Stalinist
revolutionary left cited the drive to "develop the productive forces"
themselves as proof that the Soviet Union was not a workers' state of
some kind; with the Trotskyists, of course, it's the definitive proof,
in the framework of nationalizations and planning, that it is.

But Bordiga added even more. Engineer that he was, Bordiga displayed a
kind of theoretical rigidity which was both exasperating and effective
in allowing him to see things differently. He essentially believed that
the "communist program" had been set down once and for all by Marx and
Engels in 1847 in the Manifesto and confirmed in the following year by
the appearance of the communist current in the French and other workers'
movements. He essentially thought that Marx and Engels had worked out an
"invariant" methodology and that "innovators" were always sooner or
later, clever bourgeois philistines on the road to Bernsteinism or
something like that. But this touching stand on principles set down in
1848 led him to astounding conclusions about a whole dimension of the
Marxist tradition that, once again, has largely been lost. Bordiga
believed that everything important had been said about the Russian
question by Marx's death in 1883^[Cf. Bordiga, _Russie et révolution
dans la théorie marxist_, pp. 226-297, for a discussion of the evolution
of Marx's thought on the Russian commune and Russia's lost "historical
chance" to skip the capitalist phase.]. To wit: Marx's correspondence
with the Populists in the 1870's, the two cubic meters of notes on
Russian agriculture he left at his death (he didn't finish _Capital_
because in the last decade of his life he became fascinated by the
agrarian question in Russia), and the various new prefaces to the
Manifesto and other writings from the 1878-1883 period that reflected
his involvement with Russia. (He had even concealed the extent of this
from Engels, who became furious when he read that work on the Russian
question had been the real reason for the incompleteness of _Capital_)
^[On Marx's deep involvement with the problem of Russian agriculture in
the last decade of his life, cf. Teodor Shanin's essay "Late Marx" in T.
Shanin, ed. _Late Marx and the Russian Road_, New York, 1983. Also J.
Camatte, _Bordiga et la révolution russe..._, pp. 15-23.]. The important
things for Bordiga were Marx's discovery of the Russian commune, and the
belief Marx entertained between 1878 and 1881 that on the basis of the
commune Russia might literally skip the capitalist phase of history,
might even do so in the absence of a revolution in the West, and that
the peasants, **prior** to the capitalization of agriculture, might be
central to the process. Marx wrote (in the famous letter to Vera
Zasulich) that "If Russia follows the path that it took after 1861 it
will miss the greatest chance to leap over all the fatal alternatives of
the capitalist regime that history has ever offered to a people. Like
all other countries, it will have to submit to the inexorable laws of
that system" ^[Marx's letter of November 1877 is published in German in
Maximilien Rubel, ed. _Marx-Engels: Die russische Kommune_ (1972), pp.
49-53. (Our translation in text).] By his death, Marx had decided that
Russia had missed the chance, and told the Russian Populists so. For
Bordiga, the preceding quote was the Marxist legacy on the "Russian
question", and "the whole bloody process of capitalist accumulation" a
prophecy fulfilled by Stalin. This whole side of Marx's relation to
Russia largely slipped into dusty archives and footnotes for 80 or 90
years though it has been revived in recent years by figures such as
Jacques Camatte and Teodor Shanin ^[Cf. note 22.].

One can hardly portray Bordiga honestly without mentioning his attitude
toward democracy. He proudly defined himself as "anti-democratic" and
believed himself at one with Marx and Engels on this. (Its relation to
the agrarian question will become clear.) Bordiga's hostility toward
democracy had nothing to do with Stalinist gangsterism. Indeed, he saw
fascism and Stalinism as the culmination of bourgeois democracy^[The
analyses of Italian fascism in 1921-24 by Bordiga's faction, undoubtedly
authored in part by Bordiga himself, are available, in _Communisme et
fascisme_, (Ed. Programme communiste, 1970).]! Democracy to Bordiga
meant above all the manipulation of society as a formless mass. To this
he counterposed the "dictatorship of the proletariat", implemented by
the communist party founded in 1847, based on the principles and
**program** enunciated in the manifesto. He often referred to the spirit
of Engels' remark that "on the eve of the revolution all the forces of
reaction will be against us under the banner of 'pure democracy'". (As,
indeed, every factional opponent of the Bolsheviks in 1921 from the
monarchists to the anarchists called for "soviets without Bolsheviks".)
Bordiga absolutely opposed the idea of revolutionary content being the
product of a democratic process of pluralist views; whatever its
problems, in light of the history of the past 70 years, this perspective
has the merit of underscoring the fact that communism (like all social
formations) is above all about **programmatic content** expressed
through forms. It underscores the fact that for Marx, communism is not
an ideal to be achieved but a "real movement" born from the old society
with a set of programmatic tasks ^[As Marx said in the Manifesto,
communism is not an ideal to be realized; it is on the contrary "nothing
but the real movement unfolding before our eyes". For a discussion of
communism as the "real movement", cf. Jean Barrot, _Le mouvement
communiste_, (Ed. Champ Libre, 1972).]. In the New Left atmosphere of
the 1960s, in which "economic questions" were virtually assumed to have
been obviated by the "affluent society", the debate revolved around the
almost exclusive counterposition bureaucracy/democracy and "forms of
organization" ^[For a critique of the formalism which flows from seeing
the problem of socialism as a problem of "forms of organization", cf.
the essay of Jean Barrot _Contribution a la critique de l'ideologie
ultra-gauche (Leninisme et ultragauche)_, in his _Communisme et question
russe_ (Ed. de la Tête de feuilles, 1972), pp. 139-178.], leading to a
methodological formalism that was of little use when, after 1973, world
economic crisis changed all the rules of struggle. In another context,
Bordiga, when pressed to identify the capitalist class in his Russian
capitalism said that it existed in the interstices of the Russian
economy, as a class **in formation**. For him, the idea of "state
capitalism" was nonsensical because the state could only be a medium for
the interests of a class; for "the state" to do anything like establish
a mode of production was an abandonment of Marxism. For Bordiga, the
Soviet Union was a society **in transition to capitalism** ^[This is
elaborated by L. Grilli, op. cit. p. 38.].

This critique of formalism again had political consequences. It was tied
to Bordiga's notion of the role of the communist party. Bordiga
resolutely opposed the Comintern's turn to the right in 1921; as General
Secretary of the PCI, he refused to implement the "united front"
strategy of the Third Congress. He refused, in other words, to fuse the
newly formed PCI, dominated by "Bordigism", with the left wing of the
PSI from which it had just broken away. Bordiga had a completely
different view of the party from the Comintern, which was adapting to
the revolutionary ebb announced, in 1921, by the Anglo-Russian trade
agreement, Kronstadt, the implementation of the NEP, the banning of
factions and the defeat of the March action in Germany. For Bordiga, the
Western European CPs' strategy of fighting this ebb by absorbing a mass
of left-wing Social Democrats through the "united front" was a complete
capitulation to the period of counter-revolutionary ebb he saw setting
in. This was the nub of his critique of democracy. For it was in the
name of "conquering the masses" that the Comintern seemed to be making
all kinds of programmatic concessions to left-wing Social Democrats. For
Bordiga, program was everything, a gate-receipt notion of numbers was
nothing. The role of the party in the period of ebb was to preserve the
program and to carry on the agitational and propaganda work possible
until the next turn of the tide, not to dilute it while chasing
ephemeral popularity. One can argue with this conception, which can lead
to the closed world of the sect, as the Bordigists indisputably became.
But it has the merit of underscoring another truth to which the
Trotskyist wing of the international left opposition and its heirs have
been blind: when the "mass" parties outside Russia swallowed Stalinism
whole in the mid-1920s, the foundations had been laid by the 1921 turn.
It is hardly necessary to accept Bordiga's anti-democratic viewpoint to
see this: he completely missed, and dismissed, the role of soviets and
workers' councils in Russia, Germany, and Italy. But on the
"sociological" consequences of the 1921 united front for the future of
the Western CPs -- their "Bolshevization" after 1924 -- Bordiga was
right and the Comintern was wrong. **Because historically, the social
base of much post-1924 Stalinism had entered the Western CPs through the
"united front" tactic of 1921**^[A parallel in Russia itself was the
"Lenin levy", whereby the party was flooded with malleable,
inexperienced or simply careerist members easily manipulated by the
Stalinists against the remnants of the Old Guard. The international
counterparts of this transformation of the Communist International were
figures such as Cachin in the PCF or Thälmann in the KPD.]. Bordiga
provided a way of seeing a fundamental degeneration in the world
communist movement in 1921 (instead of in 1927 with the defeat of
Trotsky) without sinking into mere empty calls for "more democracy". The
abstract formal perspective of bureaucracy/democracy, with which the
Trotskyist tradition treats this crucial period in Comintern history,
became separated from any content. Bordiga throughout his life called
himself a Leninist and never polemicized against Lenin directly, but his
totally different appreciation of the 1921 conjuncture, its consequences
for the Comintern, and his opposition to Lenin and Trotsky on the united
front issue illuminates a turning point that is generally obscured by
the heirs of the Trotskyist wing of the international left opposition of
the 1920's.

Bordiga's idea that capitalism equals the agrarian revolution is the key
to the 20th century; it's certainly the key to almost everything the
left has called "revolutionary" in the 20th century, and it is the key
to rethinking the history of Marxism and its entanglement with
ideologies of industrializing backward regions of the world economy.

Bordiga obviously does not provide the key to the "de-Russification" of
the "lenses" through which the international revolutionary movement sees
the world. But developed further, his focus on the agrarian question
does. Into the mid-1970's, the "Russian question" and its implications
was the inescapable "paradigm" of political perspectives on the left, in
Europe and the U.S., and yet 15 years later seems like such ancient
history. This was a political milieu where the minute study of the
month-to-month history of the Russian revolution and the Comintern from
1917 to 1928 seemed the key to the universe as a whole. If someone said
they believed that the Russian Revolution had been defeated in 1919,
1921, 1923, 1927, or 1936, or 1953, one had a pretty good sense of what
they would think on just about every other political question in the
world: the nature of the Soviet Union, of China, the nature of the world
CPs, the nature of Social Democracy, the nature of trade unions, the
United Front, the Popular Front, national liberation movements,
aesthetics and philosophy, the relationship of party and class, the
significance of soviets and workers' councils, and whether Luxemburg or
Bukharin was right about imperialism.

To merely enumerate the major events of world history since 1975 is to
see how profoundly the way we see the world has changed; we need only
conjure up the 1980's realities of Thatcher's Britain, Reagan's America,
Mitterrand's France, Gorbachev's Russia, Teng's China, i.e. the
"neo-liberal" (in the von Hayek/von Mises sense of that term) tidal wave
that has overwhelmed the statism of Social Democracy, Stalinism,
Keynesianism and Third World Bonapartism. A thorough knowledge of the
Russian Revolution from 1917 to 1928 and the "world view" derived from
it seems a poor guide to China's post 76-evolution, Russia under
Gorbachev, the appearance of the NICS, the China/Vietnam/Cambodia war,
the collapse of the Western European CPs, the utter containment of the
British Labour Party, the American Democratic Party and the German SPD
by the right, the evolution of Mitterrand to neo-liberalism, or the
appearance of significant "anti-statist" currents even in mercantilist
regimes like Mexico or India. One might well add to this list a workers'
movement in Poland with a heavy dose of clericalist nationalism and the
revival of fundamentalism in Islam, Judaism and Christianity,
de-industrialization, high tech and gentrification. None of these events
discredit Marxism, but they do discredit the virtually universal
penchant of the Western left, into the 1970's, to view reality through
lenses inherited from the Russian Revolution and its fate.

The best of the heroic phases of German Social Democracy and Russian
Bolshevism was not enough to serve as a guide to this new reality, even
though, on the face of things, a consequential "Third Camper" had never
had any illusions about the statist political formations in demise from
the mid-1970's onward. Yet such a "Third Camper", accepting Lenin's
_Imperialism_ and a nexus of other prognoses from the first three
congresses of the Comintern, shared with the Stalinists subterranean
assumptions about the inability of the capitalist world market to
industrialize any part of the Third World, and was equally thrown into
disarray by the emergence of the NICs^[On the rise of the New Industrial
Countries and their impact on ideology worldwide, cf. Nigel Harris, _The
End of the Third World_, (London, 1986).]. But there is disarray on a
deeper level, one that strikes at the heart of a revolutionary identity
derived from the 2nd and 3rd Internationals. For if one "maps" the
militant mass communist parties or regimes existing in Europe between
1920 and 1975, they coincide almost exactly with a map of enlightened
despotic states between 1648 and 1789. That is: France, Germany, Russia,
Spain, Portugal, Sweden (the most important Scandinavian CP, the only
one to survive World War II as anything more than a sect). Mass CPs are
absent in Britain, the U.S., Holland, Switzerland, (and the Anglophone
"settler states" like Australia, New Zealand, Canada). The apparent
exception is the PCI. But Italy spawned the prototypes of enlightened
absolutist statecraft with its important local mercantilist city states,
and regionally the PCI's bases of strength seem to correlate with
different regional experiences during the historical phase of the
_ancien regime_. Finally, the PCI was and is the most "social
democratic" of the big Western CPs after 1956; that is of course the
reason it is the only one left.

The connection between the presence of an enlightened despotic state in
1648 and a mass CP or Stalinist state in 1945 is **the agrarian
question.** These states, with France as the prototype, were created to
accelerate the **capitalization of agriculture**. Consciously or not,
they were doing to their peasantries something like what the Soviet
state was doing to the Russian peasants from 1928 onward, and what
liberal capitalist regimes did in the 19th century. The enlightened
absolutist states looted the peasants, through taxation, as a source of
accumulation. These methods were a response to the successful civil
societies already brought into existence in the "Calvinist" countries,
whose success rested on the earlier capitalization of agriculture, above
all and first of all in England. **Capitalism is first of all the
agrarian revolution.** Before it is possible to have industry and cities
and urban workers, it is necessary to revolutionize agricultural
productivity to have the surplus to free labor power from the land.
Where this had not been accomplished by 1648 (the end of the Thirty
Years' War and hence of the wars of religion), it had to be done by
top-down statism. This created the continental mercantile tradition
that, after the French Revolution, persisted into the 20th century as a
more mature mercantilism. This characterized Louis Napoleon's Second
Empire (1852-1870) and above all Bismarck's Prussia and
Prussia-dominated Germany^[On the mercantile tradition and its impact,
cf. Roman Szporluk, _Communism and Nationalism: Karl Marx versus
Friedrich List_, (Oxford UP, 1988).]. The latter, in particular, was
copied by all the "late developers" all over the world after German
unification in 1870, starting with Russia.

Here, Barrington Moore's framework (now put into perspective), comes
into focus: the decade of the 1860's was a fundamental conjuncture. It
saw the U.S. Civil War, the unification of Germany, the unification of
Italy, the Russian serf emancipation, and the Meiji Restoration in
Japan. One can add for good measure the Second Empire industrial
development of France and the creation of the Third Republic, but it is
secondary. It seems that if a country was not "internally reorganized"
by 1870, it had no chance of being in the "inner circle" of
significantly industrialized countries in 1914. Second, of the five
countries mentioned (once again setting France aside) four by 1933 had
totalitarian/authoritarian mercantile states. Of the major countries,
only those which participated significantly in the **first** North
Atlantic capitalist economy (Britain, France, the U.S.) escaped
authoritarian mercantile solutions in the 1930's, and **only** the U.S.
of the five that reorganized in the 1860's. (This is an important clue
to the centrality of the pre-industrial historical experience.) Why were
the 1860's such an apparent cut off point? The answer seemed to be: the
1873 world depression, and particularly **agrarian** depression^[For a
discussion of the post-1873 impact of the agrarian depression, cf. Hans
Rosenberg, _Grosse Depression und Bismarckzeit_, (Berlin, 1967).]. When
the U.S., Canada, Argentina, Australia and Russia came onto the world
grain market as major exporters, it essentially recreated the
counterposition of 1648 all over again: the continental states, reacting
to the agrarian depression of 1873-1896, all had to move to
protectionism to preserve their national agricultures. The most
important case was Germany's "Iron and Rye" alliance of industrialists
and Junkers of 1879 which finalized the subjugation of German capitalism
and liberalism to the Junker dominated Prussian/German state. But
comparable scenarios were acted out in France, Iberia, Italy, and in the
Austro-Hungarian empire. The emergence onto the world agricultural
market of the U.S., Canada, Argentina and Australia drew a line around
the existing core of advanced capitalist development for over a century.
By 1890 it was cheaper to ship wheat from Buenos Aires to Barcelona than
to ship it 100 miles over inland transport. The agricultural sectors of
the continental mercantilist states became internationally unviable. The
impact of this state of affairs on the development of the workers'
movement has not merited the attention it deserves.

The revolutionary tradition saw socialism/communism as growing
essentially out of the explosion of the Third Estate after the French
Revolution: in Babeuf, the Enrages and other radical elements who
appeared to the left of the Jacobins; above all, in the revolution of
1848 in France and the rest of Europe (including the Chartists who
peaked in England in 1848). History seems persuasive: the line from
1793-1794 to 1917-1921 passes from France to Germany to Russia in the
French revolutions of 1830, 1848 and the Commune; in the rise of the SPD
up to 1914; in the Russian 1905 and 1917; climaxing in the failed world
revolutionary upsurge of 1917-21 with near revolutionary situations in
Germany, Italy, England, Spain, and insurrectionary strikes in almost
every other part of the world. This latter is the peak of the "classical
workers' movement". CLR James has talked in terms of the need to
reconstitute the historical moment of the breakdown of the
German-Russian front in 1917-1918; i.e. that in the failure of the
German revolution and the defeat of the world revolutionary wave, the
world revolution had its finest hour to date. This trajectory is the
framework of Lenin-Trotsky orthodoxy. If the German revolution had saved
Russia from isolation, the 20th century would have taken a completely
different course. That view of history was a very useful "heuristic
device" to avoid all the pitfalls of Social Democracy, Stalinism,
Maoism, and Third Worldism. To live within that tradition, whether as a
Trotskyist, a Third Camper, or an ultra-leftist, is to measure history
from the vantage point of the German and Russian soviets of 1917-1921.
It is not at all a bad benchmark for historical judgment; it is
certainly superior to the Keynesian welfare state, the Stalinist
successes in the first Five Year Plan, or labor-intensive agrarian
communes in China as a notion of socialist society. But it leads to an
impasse. It leads one to viewing history as a strategist for the
Comintern in 1920, of taking up where the Central and Eastern European
revolutions against the Hohenzollerns, Hapsburgs and Romanovs left off.
Yet an historical chasm separates those revolutions, and their dual
character, from the present^[The Dutch ultra-leftist Herman Gorter
confusedly, but correctly, already in 1921 grasped the absence of an
agrarian question for Western workers as the essence of the difference
between the Russian revolution and any possible revolution in the West,
a difference minimized by Lenin in _Left-Wing Communism, an Infantile
Disorder_. Cf. H. Gorter, _Offener Brief an den Genossen Lenin_, Berlin
1921.]. The **dual** nature of the October revolution was that of a
revolution in which historical tasks of the bourgeois revolution were
realized under the leadership of the working class, after which the
proletarian political content was completely snuffed out by Stalinist
counter-revolution. To draw the line of "continuity" uncritically
through Lenin and Trotsky, as the exact extensions of Marx in the early
twentieth century, to make the Russian Revolution the touchstone of the
20th century ("the turning point of history where history failed to
turn", as someone put it) is to "buy into" a whole view of history,
before and since 1917. It is above all to accept a mythology about
German Social Democracy as a revolutionary Marxist formation prior to
some date, whether 1890, or 1898, or 1914, when the SPD was taken over
by "revisionism". If there is one single myth at the bottom of the
outlook informed by "the best of German Social Democracy and Russian
Bolshevism" which has now become problematic, it is that rose tinted
view of the early SPD. It is through that view that the international
left was colonized by the lenses of _Aufklärung_ which originated in
the civil service of the enlightened despotic states.

One can see this impasse on several levels. Let us begin with the
"vulgar", non-Marxist materialism that was the bread and butter of the
classical workers' movement, originally centered in the SPD, later in
the Bolshevik Party, of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Internationals.

As many people asked themselves after discovering the _1844
Manuscripts_, the _Grundrisse_, the Hegelian "fingerprints" in
_Capital_, the "Theses on Feuerbach", Lukacs, Korsch, etc., how could
the classical workers' movement have been taken over by "vulgar
Marxism"? Why does pre-Kantian materialism (i.e. materialism that,
unlike Marx's, has not passed through the dialogue with German idealism
and Feuerbach) seem so similar to the 18th century materialism of the
Anglo-French Enlightenment, i.e. the ideology of the bourgeois
revolution? How does one arrive at a **Marxist** explanation of the
historical hegemony of vulgar Marxism, since Marxism rejects out of hand
the psychological/moralistic judgment that "they had the wrong ideas"?
The answer did not seem so complicated: if the materialism of the
classical workers' movement centered in the SPD from 1860 to 1914, and
extended by the Russian Revolution, was epistemologically little
different from revolutionary materialism of a bourgeois character, it
must be that the **classical workers' movement in Central and Eastern
Europe was an extension of the bourgeois revolution.** Placing oneself
in the position of the admirers of the heroic early SPD, it is hard to
think of any other explanation that makes sense. This is, after all, not
so very far from Trotsky's theory of combined and uneven development:
where the bourgeoisie is weak and unable to take on the _ancien regime_,
the task falls to the working class. (Trotsky's effort was to believe
that the working class was making the socialist revolution.) This
"vulgar Marxism" provided the "world view" expressed in the popular
pamphlets of the late Engels, and the writings of Bebel, Kautsky,
William Liebknecht, the pre-revisionist Bernstein, and Plekhanov -- the
grey eminences of the Second International, who educated Lenin and the
Bolsheviks. It should never be forgotten that Lenin did not begin to see
through Kautsky and the SPD "center" of orthodoxy until 1910-1912, and
in 1914 could not believe the newspaper reports that the SPD had voted
for war credits. He was that close to these influences. He wrote
_Imperialism_ to explain the collapse of the SPD; Trotsky later added
the "absence of revolutionary leadership" to explain the defeat in
Western Europe after the war. Raya Dunayevskaya's portrait of Lenin
rushing to the Zurich library in September 1914 to read Hegel's
_Logic_^[Raya Dunayevskaya, _Philosophy and Revolution_, (New York,
1975), Ch. 3.] to understand the debacle of the SPD may or may not be
apocryphal; nevertheless, the "late Lenin" had no impact on official
Marxism after 1917, including in the Fourth International. The
philosophical views of Lukacs and Korsch were laughed out of the
Comintern in 1923. In the more intellectually astute milieus in the US
left of the mid-1960's, (prior to the wave of translations from French,
German and Italian after 1968) perhaps the most sophisticated
English-language text available on the question of the philosophical
background of Marxism was Sidney Hook's _Towards an Understanding of
Karl Marx_. This was not anyone's fault; it merely reflects the fact
that the impact of the discovery of the early writings of Marx, of the
real extent of his debt to Hegel, of the critique of vulgar materialism
in the "Theses on Feuerbach", and of works like the _Grundrisse_ really
only got beyond small circles of specialists in the 1950's and 1960's.
But there had to be a historical **reason** for that; it wasn't just a
question of what was published when and where (the _Grundrisse_, for
example, was first published in only 200 copies in German in Moscow in
1941).

But the key to this ideological anachronism in Marxist and working-class
history clearly cannot be, as we said above, that "they had the wrong
ideas". The answer has to lie at deeper levels of the history of
accumulation and how it shaped class struggle internationally. Once
again the Bordigist tradition unearthed perspectives quite marginal to
the general debates of the 1960's and 1970's, perspectives that I think
tie together the agrarian question, the periodization of capitalist
accumulation, the real historical role of Social Democracy and
Bolshevism, and the historic link between enlightened absolutism in the
17th century and mass-based Communist Parties in the 20th.

The most interesting perspective developed to illuminate these questions
was that of the "neo-Bordigists", French currents influenced by Bordiga,
but not slavishly; the best of them attempted to synthesize Bordiga, who
was oblivious to the historical significance of soviets, workers'
councils, and workers' democracy, and who placed everything in the
party, with the German and Dutch ultra-left who glorified workers'
councils and explained everything that had gone wrong after 1917 in
terms of "Leninism".

All of the French currents put at center stage a text of Marx which, in
the long run, may be more important than all the other new material that
started to come to light in the 1950's and 1960's: the so-called
"Unpublished Sixth Chapter" of Vol. I of _Capital_^[The _Unpublished
Sixth Chapter_ is the appendix of the new English translation of
_Capital_, Vol I (New York, 1976), published by Penguin.]. It is not
known why Marx removed it from the original version of Vol. I. But it is
a materialist "Phenomenology of Mind". Ten pages suffice to refute the
Althusserian claims that Marx forgot Hegel in his "late period". But the
affirmation of the continuity with Hegel's method is the least of it;
the fundamental categories elaborated in the text are the distinctions
between absolute and relative surplus value and what Marx calls the
"extensive" and "intensive" phases of accumulation, corresponding to the
"formal" and "real" domination of capital over labor. These are
introduced in a very theoretical way; Marx doesn't attempt to apply them
to history generally. But the French ultra-left started to periodize
capitalist history around exactly these distinctions. "Extensive" and
"intensive" phases of capitalist history are not unique to Marxists;
they have also been used by bourgeois economic historians as descriptive
devices. One current summarized the distinction in its essence as "the
phase which de-substantiates the **worker** to leave only the
**proletarian**" ^[Cf. the pamphlet of the French group Negation _LIP
and the Self-Managed Counter-Revolution_ (English trans. by Black and
Red, Detroit, 1975).]. In that sentence is the condemnation of the whole
Gutman school of the new labor history. The transition to "intensive"
accumulation in the 6th chapter, is presented to the "reduction of labor
to the most general capitalist form of abstract labor", the concise
definition of the mass production labor process of the 20th century in
the advanced capitalist world. The new labor history is one long
nostalgia song for the phase of formal domination.

The "Unpublished Sixth Chapter" also sheds light on the "Hegel
renaissance" in Marxism, and why serious interest in the Hegelian
background of Marx had appeared first in Germany in the 1920's (Lukacs,
Korsch, the Frankfurt School) and had only taken hold in France in the
1950's. In fact, **vulgar** Marxism had only became a fashionable
ideology in France -- in the intelligentsia -- in the 1930's and 1940's,
i.e. during the Popular Front and Resistance. What could explain this
30-year gap between France and Germany? The obvious answer had to be the
great superiority of Germany in industrial development in the 1920's,
which France began to rival in the 1950's. There seems to be some
connection between "Hegelianized" Marxism and the conditions of what we
called "intensive accumulation" and "real domination". It is also
curious that Italy had a sophisticated, much more "Germanized" Marxist
culture well before France. This must also be related in some way to
Italy's status as a political "late comer", in contrast to France's
participation in the first North Atlantic capitalist economy and the
bourgeois revolutionary wave of 1770-1815. The Jacobin tradition in
France, expressed through the rationalism associated with Comte, Saint
Simon, and Guesde, the Kantian idealism of Jaures, or the rationalism of
even the anarchist tradition (with its belief in anti-clericalist
science) or finally the "positivisme laique et republicain" of the Third
Republic remained **beneath** the level of post-Kantian German thought.
Italy was "Germanized" in the 1890's; France only in the 1930's and
1940's.

The Lenin-Trotsky tradition divides the history of capitalism into two
phases, separated by World War I, inaugurating the "epoch of imperialist
decay". The theoretical sources of this theory come from the "monopoly
capital" discussion prior to World War I: Hobson, Hilferding, Lenin. It
was popularized for an epoch by Lenin's _Imperialism_. Capitalism in the
heyday of the Second International looked different from the system
described in Marx (it is important to remember that Vols. 2 and 3 only
became available in the 1880's and 1890's; most socialist militants'
relation to "Marxist economics" has come from Vol. I and more
realistically from popular pamphlets like "Wages, Prices and Profits".)
Capitalism seemed to be moving away from a "competitive" or
"laissez-faire" phase to a phase of cartels, monopolies, imperialism,
state guidance, the emergence of finance capital, arms races, colonial
land grabs: all the elements Hilferding called "organized capitalism"
circa 1910. World War I marked the turning point. The Russian
Revolution showed that, in Lenin's phrase, "the proletarian revolution
lurks behind every strike", and the 1917-1921 period very nearly seemed
to confirm that. Then came, after an ephemeral stabilization, 1929,
world depression, fascism, Stalinism, and World War II, followed in turn
by incessant wars of national liberation. Who, in 1950, could deny that
this was the "epoch of imperialist decay"? These very real phenomenon
cemented a whole world view, first codified in the early years of the
Comintern: the continuity with the Kautskyian vulgar Marxism of the
pre-1914 period, the "monopoly capital" characterization of the epoch,
most ably expressed by Bukharin, Trotsky's theories of permanent
revolution and combined and uneven development, and the Congress'
characterization of the epoch as that of "imperialist decay". This, at
least, was condensed expression of that heritage as it was recaptured in
the best attempts of the late 60's and early 70's to relink with the
revolutionary potential of the German-Polish-Russian corridor of 1905
and 1917-1921. This periodization of modern history allowed one to see
the world "from Moscow in 1920" and this, again, made the unraveling of
the history of the Russian Revolution and of the Comintern from 1917 to
1928 so central and so apparently full of implications. In that history
was the philosopher's stone, whether Trotskyist, Shachtmanite, or
ultra-leftist. This was the viewpoint of those who, into the mid-1970's,
had no illusions about Social Democracy, Stalinism, or Third World
Bonapartism, i.e who opposed them from the vantage point of
revolutionary workers' democracy of the soviet/worker council variety.
On one level, this seemed a perfectly coherent explanation of the world
into the mid-1970's. Had not the highest expression of the revolutionary
workers' movement taken place in Germany and Russia? Had not everything
since been disaster and bureaucratic nightmare? Bordiga anticipated this
attitude when he wrote, sometime in the 1950's, that "just because
social evolution in one zone (by which he meant Europe and the U.S.) has
come to the next to the last phase does not mean that what happens on
the rest of the planet is socially of no interest". For this world view,
(shared in that period by the author) what was happening on the rest of
the planet was precisely **socially** of no interest. Who could
seriously propose China or North Korea or Albania, or the national
liberation movements and their states, as models for American or
European workers? But such a view, while correct, was not adequate.

## Why not?

Because it ignored two realities already well underway in the
mid-1970's: the double movement of Third World industrialization and
technology-intensive ("high tech") development in the advanced sector
that were about to crash down around the Western working class movement,
upon which the whole earlier perspective rested. In 1970, in the midst
of Stalinist, Maoist and Third World euphoria over peasant-bureaucratic
revolutions, it was right and revolutionary to look to the Western
working class as the only class that could actually end class society.
It was necessary to reject that Third Worldist hogwash then, as it is
necessary to reject its (quite enfeebled) remnants today. But what has
changed since then is of course that de-industrialization in the West
and industrialization in the Third World (two sides of the same coin)
have created real workers' movements in the Third World itself, South
Korea being the most recent important instance. Into the mid-70's the
world looked pretty much like what could be extrapolated from the early,
heroic Comintern view sketched above. The countries that were the core
of world industry in 1914 (Western Europe, the U.S. and Japan), were
still the core. In terms of the earlier discussion, if a country had not
been "internally reorganized" by the 1860's it wasn't going to be in the
"industrial club" in 1914 and still wouldn't be circa 1975. Further, the
percentage of workers in manufacture in the advanced industrial
counties, which had peaked at circa 45% in Germany and England circa
1900-1914, was still close to that figure for the advanced capitalist
zone as a whole in the early 70's. What had changed in the interim?
Clearly, the advanced capitalist world had gone from a (very rough)
breakdown of its work force, in 1900-1914 of 45% in industry, 45% in
agriculture, 10% in white-collar services, to 40-45% in industry, 5-10%
in agriculture, and 40-45% in white-collar services (not to mention the
creation of a large arms sector that had only barely come into existence
around the turn of the century). What did this indicate? It indicated
that the "story" of capitalist development was as follows. In 1815-1914
the phase of "classic" or "competitive" capitalism, the system had
primarily transformed peasants into workers, at least in England, the
U.S., France and Germany. In the post-1914 period (in reality beginning
circa 1890) the new phase of "organized" capitalism, "monopoly"
capitalism, the "epoch of imperialist decay" continued to deplete the
rural populations of the Western world (and Latin America, the
Caribbean, southern Europe and Africa), but to accomplish what? Instead
of continuing to expand the industrial work force, it used the greatly
increased productivity of a stagnant percentage of the work force to
support an ever-growing white collar "service sector" (and arms
production). But to return to the basic theme, Communist Parties start
to erode and be superceded by integrated Social Democratic type parties
precisely when the agrarian population of the country in question is
reduced to a trivial (5-10%) of the work force. This is what has
happened, for example, in France and Spain in the last 15 years.

This is what has not happened in Portugal, precisely because small
producer agriculture remains a very significant percentage of the
Portuguese work force. This is the backdrop to the transformation of the
PCI. It is what happened long ago in northern Europe and the United
States. It is, finally, the strict parallel to the problems encountered
in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union when the "extensive" phase of
accumulation is completed and it is time to move to the intensive phase
which the West arrived at through the crisis of 1914-1945. In short,
from enlightened absolutism in the 17th century to Communist Parties in
the 20th century, the problematic is that of the extensive phase of
accumulation -- the transformation of peasants into workers. The
ultimate implication of this is that a society is only fully capitalist
when a trivial percentage of the work force is employed in agriculture,
i.e. that a society is only fully capitalist when it has moved from the
extensive/formal to the intensive/real phase of accumulation. This
means, in short, that neither Europe nor the United States in 1900 were
as capitalist as the socialist movement thought they were, **and that
the classical workers' movement, in its mainstream, was first and
foremost a movement to propel capitalism into its intensive phase.**

In sum, capitalism means first of all the agrarian revolution.

The agrarian question has had multiple meanings in the history of the
international left. It has arisen in connection with the peasant
revolutions that accompanied the French and Russian revolutions; the
capitalization of agriculture in the U.S. South through the Civil War;
the agrarian depression after 1873; the emptying of the European
countrysides after World War II. Undoubtedly, these are seriously
distinct phenomena that should not be lumped together cavalierly. But
let us focus on intensive accumulation linked to the reduction of the
agrarian workforce to 5-10% percent of the population as the definition
of a "fully capitalist" society. A fully capitalist agriculture is an
American-style mechanized agriculture. The "agrarian question" in this
sense, was not solved in France in 1789 but in 1945-1973. The connection
between agriculture and intensive accumulation in industry is the
reduction of the cost of food as a percentage of the worker's bill of
consumption, creating buying power for the consumer durables (such as
the automobile) at the center of 20th century mass production.

Let us summarize, and then return, one more time to Bordiga and the
neo-Bordigists. Vulgar Marxism was an ideology of the Central and
Eastern European intelligentsia linked to the workers' movement in a
battle to complete the bourgeois revolution (Second and Third
International Marxism). Its parallel to pre-Kantian, pre-1789 bourgeois
materialism is not the result of an "error" ("they had the wrong ideas")
but a precise expression of the real content of the movement that
developed it. That content makes sense ultimately in the framework of a
periodization of capitalist history that complements the Lenin/Trotsky
"epoch of imperialist decay" with the concepts of extensive/formal
domination and intensive/real accumulation. The whole Lenin/Hilferding
2nd International theory of "organized capitalism" and "monopoly
capitalism" is then, an occultation of the transition from extensive to
intensive. The "official Marxist" outlook, therefore is the outlook of a
nascent state elite, in or out of power, whose movement results in
another form of capitalism (real domination) and calls it "socialism".
What is compelling about such an analysis is that it avoids moralizing
and offers a "sociological" explanation for an "epistemology". Once
again it means that this social stratum that held an _Aufklärung_ form
of materialism because it was a proto-state civil service in a
development regime, and that its **economics**, codified in the Leninist
theory of imperialism, were also the economics of that stratum. It is
not real Marxism, because it tends to replace analyses of relations and
forces of production with (ultimately Dühringian) analyses of "force".
From Lenin and Bukharin via Baran and Sweezy to Bettelheim and Amin to
Pol Pot (recognizing tremendous discontinuity and degeneration but also
continuity) the "monopoly capital" theory is the theory of state
bureaucrats. It is fundamentally anti-working class. It sees the Western
working class's reformism as the expression of super profits' from
imperialism, and it obscures the difference of interests between the
state bureaucratic elite and the peasant and working classes in the
underdeveloped countries where it holds power.

The French neo-Bordigists, specifically Camatte, showed that it was in
Russia above all that Marxism, in phases, was transformed from a theory
of the "material human community", **a real movement** that is "born"
from mature capitalism **into something that is "built"** in backward
proto-capitalism. This is seen by the contrast between the "Marxist
position" on the Russian question developed by Marx in 1878-1883 and the
Bolshevik polemic with the last phase of Populism in the 1890's.
Whatever Marx may have entertained in his study of the Russian commune
as the possible base for an immediate "leap" to communism, he never
would have written, as Trotsky wrote in 1936, that "socialism now
confronts capitalism in tons of steel and concrete". This is not to say
that there is no basis for this productivist discourse in Marx's work;
it is simply to say that the gulf that separates Marx from all 2nd, 3rd
(and 4th) International Marxism is precisely that he is beyond
"pre-Kantian" materialism and way beyond "monopoly capital" economics
that both express a state civil service view of the world. In the battle
between Lenin and the Populists in the 1890's, the battle to introduce
this truncated 2nd International "Marxism" into Russia, the whole
pre-1883 dimension of the Marxist analysis of the "Russian question",
unearthed by Bordiga, was totally lost in a productivist chorus. The
linear, mechanistic affirmation of "progress" that is the core of
Enlightenment historical thought, which was taken over into a "stage"
theory of history by vulgar Marxism, has no feel for the Russian
agrarian commune, as Marx did. The _Gemeinwesen_ (material human
community) telos of communism is suppressed for productivism. Once in
power, the Bolsheviks took the reproduction schema and categories of
Vol. I of _Capital_ and translated them into their manuals for economic
planning without noticing that this was a "Ricardian" description of
capitalism which Marx undermines in Vol. III. This paved the way for the
"steeleater" ideology of the Stalinist planners after 1928. There is
already a world between Marx and the 2nd International, and later the
Bolsheviks, expressed in "philosophy" and in "economics", and these
differences express different "social epistemologies" rooted in the
outlooks of two different classes, the working class and the state civil
service. It is in this sense that it is meaningful to say that the best
of German Social Democracy and Russian Bolshevism are hopelessly
entwined with the state. A renewal of revolutionary vision can no longer
identify them as direct heirs, but as a detour whereby Marxism fused
with a statist discourse foreign to itself.

We, in the West today, unlike the revolutionaries of 1910, live in a
totally capitalist world. There is no capitalization of agriculture to
accomplish, no peasant question for the workers' movement. At the same
time, in the midst of a deepening world economic crisis of 1930's
proportions, all the old revolutionary visions have evaporated, and the
sense of what a positive world beyond capitalism would look like is less
clear than ever. (Recent history provides many examples of negative
alternatives.) Yet, when we understand that much of what is collapsing
today is ultimately the legacy of the Enlightened absolutist state and
its modern extensions, we can see that many of the conceptual tools in
use until quite recently were tools for the completion of the bourgeois
revolution, developed by movements ultimately headed by state civil
servants, real or potential. By freeing Marxism of this statist legacy
we can at last start to understand the world from the vantage point of
"the real movement unfolding before our eyes" (_Communist Manifesto_).

## Bibliography

One objective of this article was to make the person and ideas of
Bordiga better known in the English-speaking world. Unfortunately, many
of the sources upon which the article draws were published only in
Italian or French, by obscure left-wing publishers, many of which no
longer exist. They are thus, aside from the writings of Bordiga himself,
virtually impossible to obtain. Readers who wish to acquire the
available writings of Bordiga, in various languages, can contact the
Partito Comunista Internazionale, Via Mazzini 30, Schio, Italy.

The important writings of Bordiga are as follows. _Struttura economica e
sociale della Russia d'oggi_ (Edizioni il programma comunista, 1976) is
his major work on the Russian economy. A large part of it was published
in French under the title _Russie et révolution dans la théorie marxist_
(Ed. Spartacus, 1975).

This was followed by a complete translation, _Structure economique et
sociale de la Russie d'aujourd'hui_ (Editions de l'oubli, 1976, 2 vols.)
The _Storia della sinistra comunista_ (Ed. il programma comunista), the
history of Bordiga's faction from 1912 to 1921, appeared in 3 successive
volumes beginning in 1964. Shorter but fundamental theoretical
statements are _Proprieta e capitale_ (Ed. Iskra, Florence 1980) and
_Mai la merce sfamera l'uomo: la questione agraria e la teoria della
rendita fondiaria secondo marx_ (Ed. Iskra, 1979) A French collection of
some of Bordiga's shorter texts, including his commentaries of Marx's
_1844 Manuscripts_, were edited with a preface by Jacques Camatte in
_Bordiga et la passion du communisme_ (Ed. Spartacus, 1974).

There is, to my knowledge, no adequate comprehensive study of Bordiga.
Two works which avoid the worst errors and earlier calumnies are A. de
Clementi, _Bordiga_ (Turin, 1971) and a biography by a PCI intellectual,
Franco Livorsi, _Amadeo Bordiga_ (Rome, 1976). A presentation of
Bordiga's views on the Soviet phenomenon is Liliana Grilli, _Amadeo
Bordiga: capitalismo sovietico e comunismo_ (Milan, 1982). The best
overall presentation of Bordiga and his theories as they influence the
present article are in Jacques Camatte, _Bordiga et la révolution russe.
Russie et nécessité du communisme_ in the journal _Invariance_, Annee
VII, Serie II, No. 4. A critical appreciation of the Bordigist faction
is _La Gauche Communiste d'Italie_, published in 1981 by the Courant
Communiste International. An overall "Bordigist" view of the Russian
revolution and its aftermath is a special triple issue of Programme
communiste, _Bilan d'une révolution_ (Nos. 40-41-42, Oct. 1967-June
1968), the theoretical journal of one of the then-contending Bordigist
parties. I have not been able to ascertain if the views expressed in
this issue were written or approved by Bordiga himself.

Two further works of interest which draw critically on Bordiga are Jean
Barrot, _Le mouvement communiste_ (Ed. Champ Libre, Paris, 1972), and
Jacques Camatte, _Capital et Gemeinwesen: Le 6e chapitre inédit du
capital et l'oeuvre économique de Marx_ (Ed. Spartacus, Paris 1978).

Much information on Bordiga in his period of greatest mass influence is
in the quasi-official history of the Italian Communist Party by Paolo
Spriano, _Storia del Partito Comunista Italiano, Vol. I, Da Bordiga a
Gramsci_ (Turin, 1967). This work, like that of Livorsi, is to be used
with caution.
