---
title: Historical Materialism
author: Gorter, Herman
date: 1920
description: The Collective Action Notes website gives this text a date of 1908 and the title "Historical Materialism Explained to Workers," while the Marxists Internet Archive says it was translated from German to English in 1920 and simply titles it "Historical Materialism." <https://www.aaap.be> notes "source not very clear." From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/gorter/1920/historical-materialism.htm>.
...

## Preface by Karl Kautsky

This booklet by my friend Herman Gorter is being read by Dutch workers
and will also be read by German-speaking workers as well, without the
need for any other recommendation.

If I have inserted a few introductory remarks this is because, in a
certain sense, I am responsible for the fact that one of his critics
could express doubt concerning Gorter's understanding of historical
materialism.

In 1903, in an article in _Die Neue Zeit_, I expressed the view that,
throughout the entire course of social evolution, the precepts of
social morality have had absolutely no application outside of the
social organization, the nation or the class to which one belongs, and
that they are by no means extended to the enemy of the class or the
nation. My verification of this reality has been zealously exploited
ever since, especially by Catholic priests, against both me and my
party. With their well-known love of truth, they distort the
_confirmation_ of a reality which has been observed for many thousands
of years, since the beginning of human evolution, with respect to _all
classes and all nations_, into an _invitation_ to my _party comrades_ to
ignore the prevailing moral points of view and to lie shamefacedly to
the _masses of the people_ when the interests of the party require it.
The irony of this affair resides in the fact that my argument was part
of an article which was a polemic against the old revisionist, now
former social democrat, G. Bernhardt, who claimed for the party
comrades, "who are situated on a higher plane", the right to deceive the
masses.

Gorter, as it turns out, has subsequently re-confirmed this same point,
but he has put it to a more serious use than I did. For this he has
been attacked not by his political adversaries, but by his party
comrades. He was accused of not understanding Marxism, and it was said
that Marx himself held very different positions than Gorter.

As proof, they have referred to the statutes of the International,
which contain this statement:

>"The International Workingmen's Association, as well as the
individuals and groups of which it is composed, acknowledge truth,
justice and morality as the rules governing their mutual affairs as well
as their dealings with others, without consideration of color, creed or
nationality."

This sentence would appear to be in total disagreement with Gorter's
position. And these are Marx's own words, since Marx was the author of
the International's statutes.

First of all, it must be pointed out that this sentence has nothing to
do with Gorter's position. The latter reiterates a fact which has
prevailed everywhere from time immemorial. It is not historical fact
which the statutes set forth, but requirements for membership in the
International.

It cannot be maintained that these requirements were formulated in an
especially clear and felicitous manner. What, after all, are truth,
justice and morality? Is it not true that each class has its own point
of view on justice and morality? Is it not true that solidarity, for
example, belongs to proletarian morality? And do we want to
comprehensively apply proletarian solidarity to the capitalists? There
are undoubtedly many situations where capitalists and proletarians have
the same interests. In such cases, the proletariat will much more
rapidly practice the solidarity required by their morality than the
capitalists. After the Messina earthquake, the proletarians who rushed
to the aid of buried victims did not ask if they were rich or poor;
they did what they could to save human beings. It was not proletarian
considerations which obstructed the rescue efforts, but capitalist
concerns, because they placed the highest priority on salvaging
property.

Wherever it is not _human beings_ who are confronting _nature_, but
_capitalists_ who are confronting _proletarians_, within the framework
of _society_, it is impossible to speak of solidarity between them; one
group tries to reduce wages, the other tries to increase them. Each can
only gain at the expense of the other.

And wherever proletarians enter into conflict with capitalists, they
are not obliged to assume an attitude of absolute sincerity towards
them. Who would want to require striking workers to communicate to the
capitalists the whole truth concerning the size of their strike fund?
To deceive the capitalist enemy concerning this figure could in some
circumstances literally become a _moral duty_ for a proletarian endowed
with class consciousness.

That sentence in the statutes of the International does, of course,
contain a kernel of truth. We must acknowledge truth, justice and
morality as rules for our behavior in relations among ourselves. Truth
must rule among all the combatants of an army; therefore, we do not
have the right to tell a lie to the comrades when we believe it is in
the interest of the party. This is why, in the article I wrote in 1903
for _Die Neue Zeit_, I said:

>"Just as there are economic laws which are valid for every form of
society, there are also moral principles from which no one can be
exempt. One of the most important of these principles is the _duty of
sincerity_ towards comrades. This duty has never been recognized
towards the enemy; on the other hand, without it there can be no
lasting cooperation between comrades who are on the same side. It is
valid for all _societies without class contradictions_; and it is valid
within a society full of class contradictions for every party
specifically composed of class comrades. Lying to party comrades has
always been permitted in those parties in which two parties acted in
concert, each associating with the other for the purpose of exploiting
their joint power in the interest of each. This is the morality of the
_jesuitical_ party and of clericalism generally" [^fn-01].

It is perfectly legitimate for the statutes of the International to
expressly reject this jesuit morality.

To the best of my knowledge, the only time Marx invoked this statutory
principle, he did so in connection with his revulsion at the idea of
lying to comrades. He attacked the Bakuninists for forming a secret
organization within the International; this organization had
"prescribed as the highest duty of its adepts the task of deceiving the
profane internationals concerning the existence of the secret
organization, concerning its motives and even concerning the purposes of
its words and deeds" [^fn-02].

Without mutual sincerity, without reciprocal trust among its members,
it is impossible for a democratic party to conduct an energetic
struggle.

It is, however, inconceivable that a duty of sincerity should be
established towards _all_ men, in _every_ circumstance; towards the
police who are persecuting our friends, for example.

Therefore, if the passage from the statutes of the International was
indeed written by Marx, it cannot be maintained that he was
particularly successful in his choice of words or that an idea worthy
of consideration was provided with an opportune form. This is certainly
surprising, coming from Marx. But Marx did not write this passage. This
was first proven, to the best of my knowledge, by JÃ¤ckh in his history
of the International. I came to the same conclusion and this has
received further confirmation from Marx's daughter, comrade Laura
Lafargue.

One must not forget that Marx was not an autocrat in the International.
He was obliged, in the interests of the unity of the proletarian class
struggle, to accept many decisions with which he was not at all pleased.

He did not write the statutes of the International all by himself. The
supporters of Proudhon and Mazzini also participated in the drafting of
the statutes. If one wants to make Marx responsible for the passage in
question because it is in the statutes of the International, then he
would also share responsibility for the following passage, which, from
the points of view of both style and logic, is of a piece with the
former, which immediately precedes it:

>"The International Workingmen's Association, as well as the
individuals and groups of which it is composed, acknowledge truth,
justice and morality as the rules governing their mutual affairs as well
as their dealing with all others, without consideration of color, creed
or nationality."
>
>"It is considered to be each man's duty to demand civil rights and
human rights not just for himself but also for all those who do their
duty. No rights without duties, no duties without rights."

Any remaining doubts about whether or not Marx was responsible for the
passage about truth and morality will be dispelled as soon as the close
relation between that passage and this other one which demands civil
rights for those who "do their duty" is recognized. Here we find a
provision which is simply ridiculous, since its interpretation is
elastic. What authority will decide upon the question of who is doing
their duty and, consequently, who is worthy of enjoying civil rights?
It was not just the bourgeoisie and the workers who had very different
opinions about the rights of the citizen, as there have been even
greater differences among the workers during the era of the
International. For they still followed in the footsteps of the
bourgeoisie in many ways. Among Proudhon's supporters the strike was
considered to be an act of dereliction of duty. Thus, away with the
strikers' right to vote! It never would have occurred to Marx, for
example, to demand universal suffrage only for those "who do their
duty".

Naturally, Marx was incapable of opposing the two sentences of the
statutes which he helped to draft and which he accepted in their
entirety. I have been informed however, by a trustworthy source, that
he privately expressed his discontent with these two paragraphs. But
evidence of his discontent is also publicly available.

The provisional statutes were first published in 1864 in London as an
appendix to the English edition of Marx's _Inaugural Address_. They
were published in German in April 1866 in the Geneva _Vorbote_ by
Johann Phillip Becker. _The two paragraphs in question were completely
omitted from that edition_. It would be idle to speculate that Johann
Phillip Becker was opposed to them. He hardly ever concerned himself
with theoretical questions.

Could it have been Marx who was behind the excision of these paragraphs
from the provisional statutes? It was the absence of these two
paragraphs in the German edition of the statutes which, even before I
read JÃ¤ckh, first called my attention to the fact that there were
differences of opinion among those who drafted them and that these two
paragraphs brought the contradiction to a head.

The idea that various sentences which horrified Marx were inserted into
the statutes by the Proudhonians can be deduced from the following
facts. The draft provisional statutes contained this resolution in
Section 9:

>"Every member of the International Workingmen's Association will
receive, in case of emigration to another country, the fraternal
assistance of the associated workers."

This was not good enough for the Program Committee and for the plenary
session of the Geneva Congress which approved the final draft of the
statutes, which added the following:

>"This assistance consists of:
a) the right to be informed of everything concerning his trade in his
new home;
b) the right to credit under circumstances determined by the
regulations of his section and to the full amount guaranteed by the
same."

Here the undeniable source of these insertions is clear; it is
petit-bourgeois Proudhonism, which sought to emancipate the proletariat
with its exchange banks and with free mutual credit, just as it dreamed
of an eternal justice which would transform private property from a
motive for egoism into an ideal institution.

Proudhonism dominated the entire 1866 Congress. The resolution on the
trade unions which had been proposed by the general council and which
remains exemplary to this day, hardly interested the delegates at all.
The debate on this topic was perfunctory. The following resolution,
which was proposed by the Parisian delegation, was most passionately
debated and unanimously adopted:

>"1. The Congress recommends to all sections that they undertake
studies of _international credit_ and send the results thereof to the
general council, and that they publicize these studies for the benefit
of all comrades in their 'bulletins', so that, at the next congress,
the comrades will be able to pass resolutions in connection therewith."
>
>"2. The Congress recommends the immediate study of the idea of the
cooperative fusion of all the present and future workers credit
institutions into a future _central bank_ of the International
Workingmen's Association."

Just one more resolution to give an idea of the character of the Geneva
Congress; it concerns _female labor_.

Varlin and Bourdon proposed the following resolution:

>"The lack of training, the degree of overwork, an exceedingly low rate
of pay and unhygienic conditions in the factories are the causes, for
the women who work in them today, of physical and moral decline. These
causes can be eliminated by a better organization of labor, that is, by
cooperation. The task is not to remove woman from labor that she needs
in order to live, but to adapt it to her capacities."

This excellent resolution was _defeated_; the following resolution,
proposed by the Proudhonians Chemale, Tolain and Fribourg, was adopted
instead:

>"From the physical, moral and social perspectives, female labor must
be rejected, as it is a cause of degeneration and is one of the sources
of the moral decline of the working class."
>
>"Woman has received certain tasks from nature, and her place is in the
family; her duty consists in raising children, bringing order to man's
life, accustoming him to family life and improving his habits. These
are the services which woman must provide, the jobs she must do; to
impose other tasks upon her is a bad thing."

This limited concept of female labor is also truly Proudhonian.

One therefore arrives at the most false conclusions by simply
attributing all the declarations of the International to Marx. Many of
them were inspired precisely by anti-Marxist elements. Whoever seeks to
invoke the declarations of the International in order to characterize
Marxist thought, must first have a clear grasp of that theory and its
differences with respect to the spirit of the other socialist schools
of thought which flourished during the era of the International.

One can be a very good Marxist and have a very good understanding of
historical materialism yet nonetheless disagree with numerous
resolutions of the International and with many passages in its statutes.

This applies, first of all, to the passages Marx did not compose. But
it would not be very Marxist to want to stop at Marx's words and bow
down before them without demonstrating a critical mind. From the first
moment of coming into contact with his method, it is natural that no one
would want to unnecessarily disagree with a giant of thought like Marx.
Nor, in the present case, is this necessary.

So, as far as I know, his divergence from the statutes of the
International is the sole objection which has been offered against
Gorter's understanding of historical materialism. Now, readers of the
German language will be able to judge his pamphlet for themselves.

## 1. The Theme of this Pamphlet

Social democracy embraces not merely the aspiration to transform
private property in the means of production, that is, natural forces
and instruments of labor, as well as the soil, into common property, and
to achieve this thanks to the political struggle, to the conquest of
State power; social democracy embraces not just a political and
economic struggle; it is more: it also embraces a struggle of _ideas_
over a conception of the world, a struggle fought against the
possessing classes.

The worker who wants to help defeat the bourgeoisie and bring his class
to power must eliminate from his mind the bourgeois ideas which have
been inculcated in him since his childhood by the State and the Church.
It is not enough to join the trade union and the political party. He
will never be able to be victorious with them if he does not transform
himself internally into a different human being than the one molded by
his rulers. There is a certain conception, a conviction, a philosophy,
one might say, which the bourgeoisie rejects but which the worker must
embrace if he wants to defeat the bourgeoisie.

The bourgeoisie want to convince the workers that mind is above
material social existence, that mind alone rules and forms matter. They
have been using mind as a means of domination: they have science, law,
politics, art and the Church behind them and their rule incorporates all
of these things. Now they want to make the workers believe that this is
an expression of the natural order; that mind by its nature rules over
material social existence, that it rules over the workers in the
factory, the mine, the farm, the railroad and the ship. The worker who
believes this, who believes that mind creates production, labor and
social classes by itself, this worker submits to the bourgeoisie and
their accomplices, the priests, the experts, etc., because the
bourgeoisie controls the majority of the sciences, it controls the
Church, and thus mind, and, if this is true, it must rule.

To preserve its power, the possessing class is trying to convince the
workers to accept this as true.

But the worker who wants to become a free being, who wants to place the
State under the power of _his class_ and seize the means of production
from the possessing classes, this worker must understand that the
bourgeoisie, with its way of depicting things, turns them on their head
and that it is not mind which determines existence, but social
existence which determines mind.

If the worker understands this, then he will free himself from the
mental rule of the possessing classes and will oppose their way of
thinking with his own more just and more resilient way of thinking.

Furthermore, because social evolution and social existence itself are
moving in the direction of socialism, because they are paving the way
for socialism, the worker who understands this and who understands that
his socialist thinking comes from social existence, will recognize that
what is happening all around him in human society is the cause of what
is produced in his head, that socialism is born in his head because it
is growing outside, in society. He will recognize and will feel that he
possesses the _truth_ about reality; this will give him the courage and
the confidence that are necessary for the social revolution.

This understanding is therefore just as indispensable for proletarian
combat as the trade union and the political struggle; one could say
that without this knowledge the economic and political struggles could
not be carried through to the end. Mental slavery prevents the worker
from correctly prosecuting the material struggle; a poor proletarian,
his consciousness of being mentally stronger than his masters raises
him above them and also confers upon him the power to defeat them in
reality.

Historical materialism is the doctrine which explains that it is social
existence which determines mind, and which obliges thought to take
particular paths and which thus determines the will and the acts of
individuals and classes.

In this pamphlet we shall attempt to prove to the workers, as simply
and as clearly as possible, the truth of this doctrine.

## 2. What Historical Materialism Is Not

However, before we proceed to a clear statement of what historical
materialism is, in anticipation of encountering certain prejudices and
foreseeable misunderstandings, we would like to first of all say what
historical materialism is not. For besides the historical materialism
that is the doctrine of social democracy, a particular doctrine
established by Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx, there is also
philosophical materialism, and various systems of that kind. And these
systems, unlike historical materialism, do not address the question of
how the mind is compelled by social existence, by the mode of
production, technology, and labor, to proceed by way of determined
paths, but rather the question of the relation between body and mind,
matter and soul, God and the world, etc. These other systems, which are
not historical but merely philosophical, attempt to find an answer to
the question: what is the nature of the relationship between thinking
in general and matter, or, how did thinking arise? Historical
materialism, on the other hand, asks: _why is it that, in any particular
era, thought takes on one form or another?_ General philosophical
materialism will say, for example: matter is eternal, and mind is born
from it under certain conditions; it then disappears when its conditions
no longer exist; while historical materialism will say: the fact that
proletarians think in a different way than the possessing classes is a
consequence of such-and-such causes.

General philosophical materialism asks about the _nature_ of thought.
Historical materialism asks about the causes of changes in thought. The
former tries to explain the origin of thought, the latter its
evolution. The former is philosophical, the latter historical. The
former assumes a context in which there is no thought, no mind; the
latter assumes the existence of mind. The big difference is apparent.

Those who want to examine and learn to understand the doctrine of
social democracy must begin by paying particular attention to this
difference. For their opponents, and especially all the religious
believers, want at all costs to confound the two systems and, as a
result of the revulsion expressed by the religious workers for the
former doctrine, to banish the other system as well. The pastors of the
church-goers say: materialism proclaims that the entire world is nothing
but matter in mechanical motion, that matter and force are the only
things that absolutely and eternally exist, that thought is simply a
secretion of the brain, just as bile is a secretion of the liver; they
say that the materialists are worshippers of matter and that historical
materialism is the same thing as philosophical materialism. Many
workers, especially in the Catholic regions, which still cling to the
servile adoration of the spirit and where those who are acquainted with
the true ideas of social democracy concerning the nature of mind, as
they have been presented by Joseph Dietzgen, are few and far between,
heed these warnings and are afraid to listen to social democratic
speakers who want to lead them to the worship of matter and thus to
eternal damnation.

These claims are false. We shall show, by means of a series of
examples, that historical materialism does not address the general
relationship between mind and matter, soul and body, God and the world,
thought and existence, but only explains the changes which thought
undergoes and which are produced by social transformations.

But if we prove that historical materialism is not the same thing as
philosophical materialism, we do not thereby intend to imply that
historical materialism cannot lead to a general conception of the
world. To the contrary, historical materialism is, like every empirical
science, a means to reach a general philosophical conception of the
world. This is an especially important aspect of its meaning for the
proletariat. It brings us closer to a general representation of the
world. This representation is not, however, that of the
mechanical-material view, any more than it is that of the
catholic-christian, evangelical or liberal view; it is another
conception altogether, a new conception, a new vision of the world
which is particular to social democracy. Historical materialism is not
a conception of the world strictly speaking; it is a path, a means, one
of many means to reach such a conception, like Darwinism, all the
sciences, Marx's doctrine of capital and Dietzgen's doctrine of mind, or
the knowledge of such means. Any one of these means alone is not enough
to attain this conception of the world but all of them together lead to
it.

Since we shall only be discussing historical materialism in this
pamphlet, we shall obviously not speak in any detail about the general
philosophical conception of social democracy. In relation to some of
the examples which shall help shed light on our topic, we shall
nevertheless encounter opportunities to display a glimpse of this
general conception of the world, so that the reader may acquire some
understanding of this totality of which historical materialism
constitutes one part alongside so many other sciences.

## 3. The Content of the Doctrine

What, then, is the general content of our doctrine? Before we start to
demonstrate its accuracy and its truth, we shall first provide the
reader with a clear general outline of what we intend to prove.

For anyone who observes the social life which surrounds him it is
obvious that society's members live in certain mutual relations. They
are not social equals but occupy higher or lower ranks and are opposed
to one another in groups or classes. The superficial observer might
think that these relations are nothing but property relations: some
possess the land, others the factories, the means of transport or
commodities destined for sale, while others possess nothing. Or he
might think that the difference is principally a political difference;
certain groups have the power of the State at their disposal, others
have little or no influence over the State. But the more penetrating
observer sees that, behind property and political relations, there are
_production relations_, that is, relations in which men confront one
another in the production of society's needs.

Workers, businessmen, ship-owners, rentiers, big landowners, farmers,
wholesalers and shopkeepers are what they are due to the place they
occupy in the _production process, in the transformation and
circulation of products_. This difference is even more profound than the
distinction between someone with money and someone without money. The
transformation of the wealth of nature is the basis of society. We are
reciprocally involved in relations of labor and production.

On what, then, are these labor relations based? Are all men, as
capitalists and workers, big landowners, farmers and day laborers,
somehow simply floating in the air, so they can all call each other
members of society?

No, labor relations are based on technology, on the instruments with
which the land and nature are transformed. Industrialists and
proletarians rely upon machinery, they are dependent on machinery. If
there were no machines, there would be no industrialists or
proletarians, or at least not the kind we know today.

The occupation of the artisan weaver gave birth to work at home for the
whole family; the occupation of weaver in a small workshop engendered a
society of small masters and clerks; large-scale steel weaving
machinery powered by steam or electricity led to a society of great
industrialists, stock brokers, directors, bankers and wage workers.

Production relations are not suspended in the air like clouds of smoke
or steam; they form solid boundaries within which men are enclosed. The
production process is a material process; its instruments are the walls
and foundations of the space we occupy.

Technology, the instruments of production and the productive forces
comprise society's infrastructure, the real basis upon which the whole
gigantic highly-developed organism of society is raised. But the same
men who establish their social relations on the basis of their mode of
production also form their ideas, representations, concepts and
principles on the basis of these relations. The capitalists, the
workers and the other classes who, as a result of the technology of the
society in which they live, are obliged to confront one another in
specific relations -- as master and servant, property owner and the
propertyless, landowner, farmer, and day laborer -- these same
capitalists, workers, etc., also think as capitalists, workers, etc.
They form their ideas and representations not as abstract beings, but as
real, living, quite concrete men; they are social men who live in a
specific society.

Therefore, it is not just our material relations which depend on
technology, and are based on labor and the productive forces, but also,
since we think within these material relations and under these
relations, our thoughts depend directly on these relations and thus
indirectly on the productive forces.

The modern social existence of the proletariat was created by the
machine. The proletariat's social thoughts, which result from the
relation in which the proletariat as such finds itself, are then
indirectly based on the modern replacement of labor by machinery, they
indirectly depend on it. _And the same is true of all the classes of
capitalist society_. For the relations within which individual men
confront one another are not just applicable to each man individually.
Socially, each man is not situated in a unique relation which applies
to him as a personal fact as opposed to other men; he has many fellow
men who are in exactly the same relation with each other. A worker --
to continue with this example -- is not _alone_ as a wage worker in
relation to other men, he is one of numerous wage workers, he is a
member of a class of millions of wage workers who, as wage workers,
find themselves in the same situation. And the same is true of all men
in the civilized world; everyone belongs to a group, a class whose
members are involved in the same way in the production process.
Therefore, not only is it true that a worker, a capitalist, a peasant,
etc., will think socially as the work relations make them think, but
their ideas and representations will coincide in their principle
characteristics with those of hundreds of thousands of other people who
find themselves in the same situation as them. There is a class thought,
just as there is a class position in the labor process.

The form -- here we continue to occupy ourselves with the general
outline of our doctrine -- in which the work relations of the different
classes (capitalists, businessmen, workers, etc.) are revealed is at
the same time a property relation in capitalist society and, in general,
in any society divided into classes. The capitalists, the wage workers,
the shopkeepers and the peasants not only occupy their own positions
within production, but also in terms of possession, of property. The
shareholder who pockets the dividends plays in the production process
not just the role of supplier of money and parasite, but also the role
of co-owner of the business, the means of production, the land, the
tools, the raw materials and the products. The shopkeeper is not only
someone who participates in exchange, an intermediary, but is also an
owner of commodities and of commercial profit. The worker is not merely
the person who makes the goods, but is also the owner of his labor
power, which he sells in each instance, and of the price which his
labor power fetches. In these terms, work relations, in a society which
is divided into classes, are at the same time property relations.

It has not always been so. In primitive communist society, the land,
the communally-built dwelling, the herds, in a word, the principal means
of production, were common property. Essential social labor was carried
out jointly; setting aside gender and age distinctions, there was
equality in the production process and there was little or no difference
in the control of property.

But after the division of labor advanced so far that all kinds of
special jobs were created, and, thanks to an improved technology and a
more developed division of labor, after a surplus above and beyond what
was immediately needed for survival was produced, certain eminent
professions -- distinguished by knowledge or valor -- such as those of
priest and warrior, succeeded in appropriating this surplus and,
ultimately, the means of production as well. This is how classes were
born and this is how private property became the form in which labor
relations have been manifested.

>"Thanks to the development of technology and the division of labor,
classes were created. Class relations and property relations rest upon
labor. Thanks to the development of technology, which has placed
certain professions in a position to take possession of the means of
production, the propertied and propertyless were born and the vast
majority of the people were transformed into slaves, serfs and wage
workers."

And the surplus which technology and labor produce beyond what is
immediately needed has become increasingly important, and so has the
wealth of the owners, and all the more stark is the class contrast for
those who have no property. And, therefore, the _class struggle_ has
grown proportionately, the struggle waged by the classes for the
possession of the products and means of production, and has thus become
the general form of the struggle for existence of men in society. Labor
relations are property relations, and property relations are relations
between classes which are engaged in struggle with one another; and all
these relations, taken as a whole, rest upon the development of labor,
they result from the labor process and technology.

But technology does not stand still. It is part of a faster or slower
development and movement, the forces of production grow, the mode of
production changes. And when the mode of production changes, the
relations in which men face one another must necessarily change as
well. The relations of the old small-scale master craftsmen among
themselves and with their apprentices are completely different from the
present-day relations of the big business owners among themselves and
with the wage-earning proletariat. Mechanized production has resulted in
a modification of the old relations. And since, in a class society,
production relations are at the same time property relations, the
latter are revolutionized along with the former. And since conceptions,
representations, ideas, etc. are formed within the framework and as
functions of the relations in which men live, consciousness is also
modified when labor, production and property undergo changes.

Labor and thought are parts of a continuous process of change and
development. "By transforming nature by means of his labor, man
simultaneously transforms his own nature." The mode of production of
material life conditions _all_ of social life. "It is not man's
consciousness which determines his existence, but his social existence
which determines his consciousness."

At a certain stage of development, however, the material productive
forces of society enter into conflict with the existing relations of
production and property. The new productive forces cannot develop
within the old relations; they cannot fully unfold within them. A
struggle then begins between those who have an interest in preserving
the old relations of production and property and those who have an
interest in the development of the new productive forces. An era of
social revolution ensues and lasts until the new productive forces are
victorious and new relations of production and property arise in which
the new productive forces can flourish.

And, by way of this revolution, man's thought changes as well; it is
modified with and within this revolution.

I have briefly summarized the content of our doctrine. It can be
recapitulated in an outline form as follows:

>1. Technology, the _productive forces_, forms the basis of society.
The productive forces determine the _relations of production_, the
relations in which men confront one another in the production process.
The relations of production are at the same time _property relations_.
 The relations of production and property are not only relations
between persons, but between _classes_.
These relations of class, property and production (in other words,
social existence) determine man's consciousness, that is, his
conceptions of rights, politics, morality, religion, philosophy, art,
etc.
>
>2. Technology is undergoing continuous development.
Consequently, the productive forces, the mode of production, property
and class relations, are also undergoing constant modification.
 Therefore, man's consciousness, his conceptions and representations of
rights, politics, morality, religion, philosophy, art, etc., are also
modified along with the relations of production and the productive
forces.
>
>3. The _new_ technology, at a certain stage of development, enters
into conflict with the old relations of production and property.
 Finally, the new technology prevails.

The economic struggle between the conservative sectors which have an
interest in the preservation of the old forms and the progressive
sectors which have an interest in the rise of the new forces enters
into consciousness under juridical, political, religious, philosophical
and artistic forms.

Now we shall attempt to prove that our theory is correct. By means of a
series of examples we shall demonstrate the causal relation between
changes in human technology and changes in human thought. If we succeed
in doing so, then we shall have toppled an important pillar upon which
the power of the capitalists over the workers rests. We shall thus have
proven that no divine providence or human mental superiority can
prevent the workers form ruling the world when technology transforms
them into intellectual and material masters.

## 4. Our Examples

The examples we shall provide below, first of all, must be very simple.
They must be understood by workers who have little historical
knowledge. They must thus possess a persuasive force as a result of
their clarity. We shall therefore choose large-scale, wide-ranging
phenomena, whose effects are visible everywhere.

If our doctrine is correct, it must obviously be valid for all of
history.

It must be able to explain all class struggles, all radical changes in
the thought of classes and society.

A great deal of historical knowledge, however, is required to explain,
on the basis of our doctrine, examples drawn from previous centuries.
We shall show how dangerous it is to want to apply our doctrine to eras
or situations concerning which we have little or no knowledge. Neither
the reader nor the author of this pamphlet possesses such extensive
historical knowledge. We shall therefore only provide very simple
examples, but we shall seek them primarily in our own era; large-scale
phenomena which every worker knows or could know from his environment,
changes in social relations and social thought which must be noticed by
every living man. Questions, in short, which are of the greatest
interest for the existence of the working class and which can only be
satisfactorily resolved for that class by social democracy.

Furthermore, we shall have in this manner simultaneously conducted good
propaganda work.

But very important and seemingly powerful arguments will be presented
against our doctrine.

This is why, when we are discussing all kinds of mental phenomena, such
as changes in political ideas, religious representations and other
similar facts, we shall pause to consider and to combat on each
occasion one of the most significant arguments of our opponents, so that
our doctrine can be progressively approached from every angle and a
good view of the whole can be obtained.

The material modifications brought about by technological change can
quite easily be distinguished. In every industrial sector, in the means
of transportation and in agriculture, too, everywhere technology is
changing, the productive forces are changing. We see this taking place
every day before our eyes.

Typesetting and the manufacture of printed materials were until
recently still generally done by hand. But technological progress has
brought the linotype machine, which selects the letters in obedience to
the hand of the typographer and puts them in their place.

Glass-blowing was done by mouth. Technology has invented tools which
manufacture glass vases, bottles, etc.

Butter was made by hand. A machine has been invented which churns vast
quantities of milk in a much shorter period of time; this machine is
now universally employed.

Dough is kneaded by hand in the little baker's shop; the machine does
it in a bread factory.

Light was produced by the mother of the family in the old-fashioned
household. She cleaned and filled the lamp, taking care to trim the
wick. In the modern home, gas or electricity is supplied from afar by
machinery.

Everywhere you look, you see changes in the productive forces in every
sector of industry, as well as increasingly more rapid transformation
and faster-paced evolution. The machine executes operations that were
once thought to be impossible for machines.

Along with the productive forces, the relations of production and the
mode of production also change. We have already mentioned weaving
machinery and how it introduced new relations among the business
owners, and between the business owners and the workers. Previously,
there were numerous artisans with adjoining little workshops, and
proportionally few wage workers. Now there are hundreds of thousands of
wage workers and proportionally few factory owners, few entrepreneurs in
this industry. The manufacturers conduct themselves in their relations
with one another like great lords while they act like Asiatic despots
towards the workers. How these relations have changed! All of this,
furthermore, was determined by the machine alone.

For it is the machine that has enriched those who could afford to buy
one, the machine put them into a position to overcome their
competitors, to obtain an enormous amount of capital on credit and,
perhaps, to form a trust. And it is the machine, the force of
production, which has caused the small business owners to lose their
property and has compelled thousands of them to enter the ranks of wage
labor.

And what consequences have resulted from the new productive forces
employed in the production of butter? The machine, which transforms
thousands of liters of milk into butter, was too expensive for the
average peasant, who furthermore did not produce enough milk to use it.
That is why a hundred peasants join together to buy one, and now they
process their milk collectively. The productive force has been
modified, but so too have the relations of production, as well as the
whole way the product is produced; where formerly one hundred people
worked separately, where the wives and children of the peasants made
butter under conditions of agricultural exploitation, now one hundred
people cooperate to make wage workers labor on behalf of their
collective. The peasants, their wives, their children and a certain
number of proletarians have entered into new relations of production
with each other and with society as a whole.

It used to be the woman of the house who took care of the gas or oil
lamp; hundreds of thousands of women were kept busy providing lighting
for the home. But if the municipality builds a manufactured gas plant
or an electric power station, then the relations of production are
modified. It is not a particular human being who produces, but a vast
social organism: the municipality. A new type of worker, previously
rare, makes its appearance by the thousands: municipal employees, who
have a totally different relation to society than the old producers of
illumination.

Long ago, wagons were used to transport commodities and mail from one
place to another. Technology has invented the locomotive and the
telegraph and has thus made it possible for the capitalist State to
attract the transport of goods, men and information. Hundreds of
thousands of workers and employees have entered into new relations of
production. The human masses in the municipality, the State or the
Empire, are in a direct relation of production with the collectivity,
and are much more numerous than the armed hordes of the past.

There is no activity which has not seen technology introduce a new way
of production. From top to bottom, from scientific research in
chemistry, from the inventor's laboratory to the most humble labor and
sewage disposal in a modern big city, technology and work routines are
constantly changing. Every activity has been revolutionized, so that
inventions are no longer the work of chance or of genius but are the
work of people who are trained for the purpose of discovering
inventions, and who consciously pursue certain paths towards that end.

One after another, production sectors are transformed or even totally
eliminated. The economic life of a modern capitalist country is like a
modern city where new construction replaces whole neighborhoods.

The new technology engenders big capital, and thus also gives rise to
the modern banking and credit system which multiplies yet further the
powers of big capital.

It gives rise to modern trade, it gives rise to the export of goods and
capital, and that is why the seas are covered with fleets and whole
regions of the world are subjected to capitalism for the production of
minerals and agricultural products.

It gives rise to such huge capitalist interests that only the State is
powerful enough to defend them. It therefore gives rise to the modern
capitalist State itself, with its militarism, its taste for naval
flotillas, its colonialism and imperialism, with its army of
functionaries and its bureaucracy.

Is it necessary for us to use such examples to draw the attention of
the workers to the fact that the new production relations are also
property relations? The number of owners of means of production in the
German Empire decreased by 84,000 in industry and 68,000 in agriculture
between 1895 and 1907, at the same time that the population
dramatically increased; on the other hand, the number of men who live
from the sale of their labor power increased by three million in
industry and 1,660,000 in agriculture. This change, which affected not
just production relations but also property relations, was provoked by
the new technology, which has smothered small business and has
transformed hundreds of thousands of the children of the
petit-bourgeoisie and peasantry into wage workers. And what else is the
so-called new middle class but a class with new property relations?
Functionaries, whose numbers are rapidly increasing, officials,
scientists, the intelligentsia, the higher-paid professors, the
engineers, chemists, lawyers, doctors, artists, managers, traveling
salesmen, the small shopkeepers dependent on big capital, everyone who
receives remuneration for services to the bourgeoisie directly or
indirectly by way of the State, this new middle class exists in a
property relation distinct from that of the old autonomous middle class.
And the modern big capitalists who rule the world and world politics
with their banks, their syndicates, their trusts and their cartels,
exist in property relations vis-Ã -vis society which are totally
different from those of the Florentines, the Venetians, or the
Hanseatic, Flemish, Dutch or English traders and industrialists of
centuries past.

Production and property relations are therefore not personal, but class
relations.

The new technology creates, on the one hand, propertyless people whose
numbers are increasing at a faster rate than the general population,
who are slowly becoming the majority of the population, and who receive
almost none of the social wealth, as well as a very large number of
petit-bourgeois and peasants, employees and practitioners of the most
diverse trades, who get very little of the social wealth. On the other
hand, however, technology creates a proportionally small number of
capitalists who, by way of their political and economic domination, get
the greater part by far of the social wealth.

And the surplus they amass each year is once again used to exploit
those who have little or nothing, the workers, peasants and
petit-bourgeois, and foreign peoples in countries which have not yet
undergone capitalist development, so that accumulation takes place, at
compound interest, progressively growing, and deprivation is aggravated
on the one hand, and a surplus of social wealth comes into being on the
other hand.

The constant progress of technology therefore creates not only new
relations of production and property, but also new class relations and,
in our case, a sharper class divide and more widespread class struggle.

Is it not true that the whole world sees this? It is really not hard to
see. The classes have turned on each other; the contemporary class
struggle is sharper, more extensive and more profound than it has been
for fifty years. With each passing year the abyss has grown wider and
deeper and is getting bigger every day. It is absolutely clear that the
cause of this is technology.

It is easy to understand the material side of this issue. Does it take
many words to explain to the son of a Saxon or Westphalian peasant, who
has become a factory worker, that it was technology which made this
happen, that it was a result of the new methods of production? That
there was no future for him in a small business, that today's
competition is too fierce, that too much capital is required, that only
a few people can succeed in small business, but that the great majority
must labor fruitlessly? Big capital is big technology; who can amass
such capital with big technology? The modern worker knows full well
that the _material_ situation, bad food, bad housing, and bad clothing
for him and his class, are the consequences of the new production
relations which have arisen from the old production relations thanks to
technology. It is not hard to discern the _material_ existence of _all_
the classes in clearly-defined relation to the relations of production
and of property and, therefore, to the productive forces. Now no one
can point to the expensive clothes, the excellent food, and the
luxurious home of the manufacturer as a gift from God, because it is
clear that he obtained his well-being and his fortune thanks to
exploitation. No one can see "predestination" at work in the downfall of
the wholesaler or the speculator, because the cause of their downfall
must be sought in value or commodity exchange. No one can speak of
heaven's wrath when a worker is struck down by unemployment for months,
by illness and enduring poverty, because the _natural_ causes, or, more
properly speaking, the _social_ causes of all these things, all of which
have their roots in the new technologies, are sufficiently well-known,
at least by the worker. Nor can one any longer stand for making
personal intellectual faculties or individual character responsible for
one's prosperity or misfortune, because in the big business which is
replacing everything, millions of people with excellent talents _cannot_
advance.

Society has reached such a level of development that the _material_
causes of our _material_ existence openly reside, for all to see, in
society as well as in nature.

Just as we know that the sun is the source of all _material_ life on
earth, so too do we know that the labor process and the relations of
production are the causes of the way things are in _social_ material
life.

If the worker would look calmly and steadily at his material existence,
that of his comrades and of the classes above him, he would discover
that what has been said above is correct. This would free him from many
prejudices and superstitions.

At first sight, the question becomes more difficult when it is a matter
of recognizing the relation between material labor, the relations of
production and property, and _mental_ existence. The soul, the spirit,
the heart, reason; these have been presented to us for a long time, to
us and our predecessors, as what is our own, as what is best, as the
all-powerful (and even, from time to time, as all that exists)!

Nonetheless ... when we say: "Social existence determines
consciousness," this thesis is, undoubtedly, in its universal
significance, a great new truth but, even before Marx and Engels, that
which pointed in this direction and paved the way for the higher truth
which they discovered, had already been explained, proven and
acknowledged.

Does not every educated man believe, does he not know, for example,
that before Marx and Engels had clearly proven so much, men's customs,
experience, education and environment _also_ shaped them mentally? And
our customs -- are they not products of society? The men who educate us
-- have they not been educated themselves by society, and do they not
give us a social education? Our experience -- is it not social
experience? We do not live alone like Robinson Crusoe! Our environment
is, then, society first of all; we can only live in nature with our
society. All of this is true, and it has also been acknowledged by
people who are neither Marxists nor social democrats.

But materialism does not stop there; it summarizes all previous
science, but goes deeper by saying: social experience, social customs,
education and environment are _themselves_ determined in turn by social
labor and social _relations of production_. The latter determine all
mental existence. Labor is the root of the human mind. The mind is born
from that root.

## 5. Social Existence Determines Mental Existence

### A. Science, Knowledge and Learning

Science is an important domain of the mind, although it does not
constitute all of it. How can its contents be determined?

The worker must first of all, while reading this, observe himself.
Where does the extent and type of knowledge which fills his mind come
from?

He has some knowledge of reading, writing and arithmetic -- we are
speaking generally, since here we are discussing an ordinary member of
the working class who is not in an exceptional situation. In his youth,
he may have learned some other things: a little geography, a little
history, but remembers nothing of these subjects. Why did he have
precisely this miserable education and nothing more?

This is determined by the process of production, with its relations of
production. The class of capitalists, which rules in the so-called
civilized countries, needs, for its workshops, workers who are not
totally ignorant. This is why it introduced elementary schools for the
children of proletarians and set the maximum age for receiving this
education at 12 to 14 years. The bourgeoisie needed, in the process of
production, workers who were neither more ignorant, nor more educated.
If they were more ignorant, they would not have been profitable enough,
while if they were more educated, they would have been too expensive
and too demanding. In the same way that the process of production needs
certain machines which run faster and supply more products, it also
needs a certain kind of worker, the modern proletarian, unlike the
workers of the past. The process of production imposes this need on
society; it creates this need as a result of its own nature. In the
eighteenth century, for example, there was no need for workers of this
kind.

The same thing also took place with the knowledge of the other classes.

Big capitalist industry, communications and agriculture increasingly
rely upon the physical and natural sciences. The process of production
is a conscious scientific process. The new technology has itself laid
the foundations of the modern natural sciences by inventing tools for
them and by providing them with the means of communication which bring
them material from every country. Production consciously utilizes the
forces of nature. As a result, the process of production _needs_ men
who understand the natural sciences, mechanics and chemistry, since
only such men can take responsibility for the direction of production
and discover new methods and new tools. This is why, because they are
social requirements of the process of production, the secondary school
and the institution of higher learning are often organized principally
with a view towards the study of nature and they teach those sciences
which are necessary for the direction and extension of the process of
production.

_Knowledge_, the sum of all the particular _knowledge_ of all these
mechanics, shipbuilders, engineers, agronomists, chemists,
mathematicians, and science teachers, is therefore _determined_ by the
process of production.

We shall draw a second example from these same social classes. The
activity of lawyers, professors of law and economics, judges, notaries,
etc., does it not presuppose a certain property law, that is, as we
have seen above, certain relations of production? The notaries,
lawyers, etc., are these not people who are needed by capitalist society
for the preservation and protection of the rights of property?
Therefore, is it not true that their particular way of thinking is
inspired by the bourgeois class, and their thought has its source in the
process of production which has engendered these classes?

The nobility, the bureaucracy, the parliament -- do they not presuppose
property or class interests based on relations of production, interests
which must by protected at home against the other classes and overseas
against other peoples? Is the government not the central committee of
the bourgeoisie which defends their property and interests? The
government itself, as well as the knowledge and special techniques
which it possesses for that purpose, are born from social needs, from
the needs of the process of production and property. The knowledge of
its members is used for the preservation of the existing relations of
production and property.

And what is the role of the clergy, of the minister and the priest? If
they are reactionaries, they officially serve -- with their demand that
one must unconditionally submit to the dogmas of the Church and to
certain moral precepts -- to uphold the old society. This is what their
knowledge is used for, this is why they were educated in institutions
of higher learning; there is a social need, a class need, for people
who preach such things. If they are progressives, they proclaim the rule
of God over the world, the rule of the spirit over matter, and thus
help the bourgeoisie -- who have educated them for this purpose -- to
preserve their rule over labor.

The system of production and property required the cultivation of a
certain kind of priest, judge, physicist, and technician. It produced
them and, through social necessity, the protagonists and representative
of these social roles have continuously been making their appearance
_en masse_ in society. The individual imagines that he freely chooses
one of the professions and that the conceptions nourished in them "are
the determinant characteristic causes and the point of departure for
his activity". In reality these conceptions and his choice, first of
all, are determined by the process of production.

"In the social production of their lives," Marx says, "men enter into
necessary and determined relations, independent of their wills,
relations of production." This is certainly true. These relations are
necessary and independent of our will. They were already present before
we were born. We must _necessarily_ enter into these relations;
society, with its process of production, with its classes and needs, has
us in its power.

And all these kinds of professions require a certain amount and a
certain type of knowledge in order to fulfill their functions in
society. It is therefore clear that, like their functions themselves,
the various kinds of knowledge required by society are determined by
the social process of production.

#### Our Opponents' First Objection

In this first discussion we have addressed the issue of knowledge,
which plays an important role in society and thus, in our doctrine,
which is the true image of society, a role which we must therefore
mention again and again. It is a question of _necessity_.

_Necessity_, however, is something mental, it is felt, perceived and
thought, in the soul, in the heart, in the spirit and in the brain of
man.

With this argument, the opponents of social democracy forge a weapon
against us.

They say that if the institutions of the process of production are
engendered by man's need, then the cause of this need is, first of all,
spiritual and not material-social.

This objection is easy to refute. _Where, after all, do needs come
from?_ Are they born from free will, are they based on opinion? Are
they the independent results of the spirit? No, needs originate in
man's corporeal nature. Above all, if the needs of food, clothing and
shelter are not met, men would perish miserably. The activity of
procuring food, clothing and shelter, for the production and
reproduction of life, is the purpose of the process of production; when
we speak of production, we must always include the production of those
articles which men need in order to live.

But if man in general has need of food, clothing and shelter, each
particular mode of production implies its own particular needs. Such
needs are always rooted in the process of production. Today, the
production of our vital necessities is only possible by way of big
industry, under the protection of State power; it therefore requires a
highly-developed science; it requires people who understand science.
The student, for example, needs knowledge of mechanics, law, theology,
and political science; _but who provided him with these needs?_
Society, _his_ society, with its particular process of production,
which, without such knowledge, could neither exist nor produce his means
of subsistence. In a different form of society, he might not have
desired _these_ fields of knowledge and might have aspired to study
completely different subjects.

The worker also feels the need for knowledge, that is, for knowledge of
society, for the kind of knowledge we are attempting to give him at
this very moment -- a knowledge of a completely different kind than
that which is given him in the school of the ruling class -- but where
does this need come from? From the process of production. For the
latter transforms the worker into a member of a class which numbers in
the millions, which must fight and is capable of attaining victory. If
this were not so, the worker would not seek such knowledge. In the
eighteenth century, he did not yet seek it because the relations of
production were of another kind during that era and did not provoke this
need in him.

It is therefore only an _illusion_ to think that it is the need for
knowledge, the spiritual sensation of the soul, which leads us. If we
reflect deeply, we see that this need is inspired within us by the
social-material relations.

This is true not only in the case of the "higher" spiritual need for
knowledge but is also true of much "lower" things; material needs are
also often determined by technology, by the relations of production and
of property.

The worker needs, for example, food like any other man, but does he
need margarine, does he need ersatz food, or substitutes for his
clothing, his comfort and his adornment? Honestly, no. It must instead
be said that man, by his nature, desires food which invigorates him and
good clothing to adorn him. But if the system of production and of
property needed cheap food for the workers, it experienced the need to
give rise to mass-produced articles; it produced them, and only in this
way and only for this reason has the need for these cheap,
mass-produced, low-quality products arisen.

Thus, no one needs, _in and of itself_, a production process capable of
producing 100,000 pieces per hour or one that runs at the speed of one
hundred kilometers per hour; only the producer who is under the
pressure of competition needs it as a consequence of the system of
production; the latter produces the machines which attain such speeds
and such levels of productivity, and only in this way and for this
reason is this need felt by all of society's individuals.

We could thus provide hundreds of examples. The reader will easily find
them by just looking around.

"Is the system of needs as a whole based on opinion, or on the complete
organization of production? In most cases, needs are born from
production or from a general situation based on production. World trade
almost exclusively revolves around the needs of production rather than
individual consumption." And in this manner knowledge, too, is born
from the needs of production.

#### The Second Objection

But -- say our opponents -- there is a general desire for knowledge
common to all men! The desire for any particular kind of knowledge
might be temporary, but the general desire for knowledge is eternal.

Not at all. There are peoples who have absolutely no desire for
knowledge, who are perfectly satisfied with the little passed on to
them by their ancestors in the way of science.

In a lush tropical region where nature provides the inhabitants with
all they need, the latter are content when they can plant their palm
trees and when they know how to build a hut with branches and leaves,
and when they know how to do a few other things, of great antiquity,
which have been transmitted to them from the past. In countries with
fertile soil and small-scale agriculture, the inhabitants can remain in
the same situation for centuries. They do not seek new knowledge because
the relations of production do not require this of them.

A convincing example -- which we have not yet mentioned -- is provided
by those peoples who practice agriculture in the valleys of large
rivers which flood periodically: they needed an astronomical calendar
and were therefore obliged to study the celestial bodies.

Such were the inhabitants of Egypt, Mesopotamia and China, who arrived
at astronomy on account of the Nile, the Euphrates and the Yellow
River. Other peoples, who did not experience the need for this
knowledge, did not become acquainted with it.

It is, then, the relations of production which drive knowledge and
which determine the quantity and the quality of this knowledge.

To verify this truth, the worker only needs to take a look around him
once again. Who are the active workers, the ones with a thirst for
learning, the ones who are full of the desire for social development?
The ones who can understand the role of the proletariat _in the context
of the process of production_, that is, the workers in cities and big
industry. Technology, the machine itself, tells them that a socialist
society is possible; the vast process of production which they have
before their eyes teaches them that the old relations of productions
are too narrow for the forces of the machine. New relations must come;
as you are equal in terms of rights, you must yourselves take possession
of the means of production: these are the words that are shouted in
their ears by the modern city. And thanks to these words of the process
of production, a desire for knowledge is born in the workers of the
cities which is much stronger than that of the rural worker, who does
not yet see so much of the new forces of production.

#### Observation

On the basis of the example of the tropical regions, where the process
of production does not spur the search for knowledge, and of the
example of the great river valleys, where the desire for knowledge was
aroused, the attentive reader sees that historical materialism does not
recognize the process of production as the _sole_ cause of this
development. Geographical factors have great importance in historical
materialism. Thus, and to take one last important example, the process
of production would never have developed so vigorously and rapidly in
Europe if the latter had a tropical climate and if the soil had provided
abundant harvests almost without labor. It is precisely Europe's
temperate climate and its relatively poor soils which obliged its people
to work harder and, for that very reason, to acquire an understanding of
nature.

Thus, the reproach that the process of production is for the social
democrats the only independent motor force is unfounded. Besides
climate and the natural qualities of a country, besides the influences
of atmosphere and the soil, we shall learn to recognize still other
motor forces in the course of our argument.

### B. Inventions

There is a domain of science which must be discussed in more detail.
That is the domain of technological inventions.

We said: the relations of production rest upon technology. Do we not
also thereby admit that the relations of production rest upon the mind?

Of course we do. Technology is the invention and the conscious
utilization of tools by thinking man, and when the defenders of
historical materialism say that all of society rests upon technology,
they are also simultaneously saying that all of society rests upon
material and mental labor.

But does this not contradict what we said? Does this not thus convert
the mind once again into the leading motor force of social evolution?

If the mind produces technology and technology produces society, then
the mind is undoubtedly the first creator.

Let us take an even closer look at this question.

Historical materialism by no means denies that the mind is part of
technology. Men are thinking beings. The relations of production, the
relations of property, are relations between men; it is within these
relations that they act and think. Technology and the relations of
property and production are just as mental as they are material. This
is not the object of our dispute.

We only deny the _autonomous, arbitrary, spontaneous, supernatural and
incomprehensible_ nature of the mind and its activity. We say: if the
mind discovers a new science, or a new technology, _it does not do so
of its own volition but as the result of an impulse or a need of
society_.

In other times, most technological inventions were made by men who were
themselves involved in the process of production. It was their desire
to improve the labor process and to make it more efficient in order to
make more wealth for themselves or to enrich the whole world!

Whatever the nature of society, whether large or small, nomadic horde
or tribe, feudal or capitalist, this desire was social; it was
engendered by an economic need. In societies where property was held in
common, it was the social desire to do something for the community; in
class societies with private property, it was the social desire to do
something for the social individual, for the private owner or for the
class of private masters.

There is nothing surprising about this. Since man is a social being and
man's labor is social, the desire to improve labor is not something
which results from the mind of the individual, but something which
derives from his social relations. The desire for an improved
technology, for inventions, is a social desire; it is born from social
needs.

This is what the defenders of historical materialism say: they deny the
independence, the arbitrariness, the preeminence of the mind; they say
that existing social need obliges the mind to follow a particular road
and that this need is also engendered by specific material relations of
production. Therefore, they also deny the absolute mastery of the mind.

This relation between technology and science is so important that we
are well advised to pause and give it more thorough consideration.

We shall provide a few detailed examples.

Let us consider a weaver of the Middle Ages. The job done by the weaver
is generally sufficient for social needs. Trade, circulation and the
foreign market have not yet developed to the point where large-scale
productive forces are necessary. The need for them is not yet felt.
However, the especially wise weaver cannot neglect his tools, since he
knows that a more convenient and efficient manner of production would
benefit him personally. He invents a small improvement and implements
it. Within his circle, this improvement is noted and imitated. And that
is as far as it goes. It is a small change in the process of production
which barely signifies a step forward and which might be the only such
change for decades or centuries. It was the result of an individual's
need.

Let us suppose, however, that circulation and trade have made great
progress (as in the fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, for
example), that the foreign market has seen extraordinary growth, and
that colonies have been founded which generate a demand for
manufactured goods from their home countries; then, the social need and
desire for improved technology, and for greater labor productivity,
become generalized; then, it is not one man who ponders the subject of
technological improvements, but one hundred men who do so; then a new
instrument is born as the result of numerous, rapidly-accumulating
changes.

Let us consider one of the inventors of the steam engine, Papin, for
example.

In many men there is a special talent and love for technology; this is
a legacy of millions of years of human evolution; in some men, when the
relations of production contribute their stimulus, this love and this
talent are most conspicuous. The society in which they live now has a
developed technology; they study an improvement which could enhance
social productivity. Their social reflection, oriented by this purpose,
is devoted to the power of pressurized steam. They imagine a new
apparatus based on the old instruments powered by men, animals, water
or wind. Their social feeling is so overwhelming, their happiness and
their desire to produce something of this sort are so strong, that they
sacrifice their time, their health and their wealth to perfect it and
to make it accepted.

The _generalized_ need, however, still does not exist; _this
particular_ step forward for technology is so big that the price to
develop it is too high. The invention is not introduced, the experiments
must be stopped and fall into oblivion. The inventor often goes to his
grave a ruined man. He certainly did discern a social need, but society
had not yet experienced this need or, in any case, it did not feel it
sufficiently; the inventor arrived too soon.

Now let us consider an inventor of our time, an Edison. He is a
technician; his life consists _solely_ of thinking about technology.
But he is not a man born before his time who thinks of what is not yet
possible. Society, or in any case the owning classes, wants the same
thing he does. For the capitalists, improved technology means a
colossal increase in profit. Every invention which makes cheaper and
faster production possible is immediately adopted. This increases the
power of labor and also allows the latter to pose its own problems,
which no longer depend on chance but on its own will.

An Edison's desire for invention is a social desire, his love of
technology is a love engendered in and by society, a social love; the
basis upon which he labors is also social; that he is successful and
can consciously posit his object in advance, is due to society.

In our days it often happens that new machines are invented but cannot
be introduced because they are too expensive. In agriculture, for
example, there are excellent machines which, for the most part, remain
utterly unutilized or are only used sparingly. The relations of
production are still too limited for these new forces. Thus, if an
invention arises as the consequence of a social need felt by an
individual on the basis of an already-existing technology, nonetheless
only those inventions which society needs in practice and which can be
introduced in its specific relations will be adopted. Consequently both
the birth and the development of the tool are of a social nature. Their
roots are not to be found in the mind of the individual but in society.

In conclusion, here is an example drawn from the era when man was only
just beginning to fabricate his first tools. It is from Kautsky's book,
_Ethics and the Materialist Conception of History_. There we read (p.
83):

>"Ever since primitive man possessed the spear, he could herd much
larger animals. If his food had hitherto consisted for the most part of
fruits and insects, as well as birds' eggs and chicks, now he could
also kill much larger animals, and henceforth meat became a more
important part of his diet. But most animals live on the ground rather
than in the trees; therefore, the hunt descended from its airy regions
to an earth-bound domain. Even more: the animals which could be hunted,
the ruminants, are only rarely found in the virgin forest; they prefer
the vast plains of the savannahs. The more of a hunter man became, the
more he could leave the virgin tropical forest where prehistoric man
was hidden away."

>"This description is, as has been pointed out, based purely on
suppositions. The course of evolution could just as well have been
otherwise. Just as the inventions of the tool and the weapon could have
been capable of impelling man to leave the virgin forest in order to
migrate to the open savannah with its scattered woodlands, it could
also have been the case that some other cause led man to leave his
original abode and thereby presented him with the occasion to invent
weapons and tools. Let us assume, for example, that man's population had
increased beyond his ability to feed himself ... or that a drought had
thinned out the virgin forests, and that this led to the appearance of
more prairies among the forestlands. In any event prehistoric man was
compelled to renounce his sylvan ways and move closer to the ground;
then he had to seek more animal food and could no longer feed himself on
a predominantly fruit-based diet. The new way of life gave him the
chance to make more frequent use of rocks and sticks and thus brought
him closer to the invention of the first tools and the first weapons."

>"Whatever course of evolution one presupposes, the first or the second
-- and both could have taken place independently in different locations
-- one may clearly deduce from each the strict interaction which exists
between new means of production and new ways of life, new needs. Each
of these factors engenders the other by objective necessity; each is
transformed by necessity into the cause of changes which in turn
contain new changes within them. _Thus, every invention produces
inevitable effects which give rise to other inventions and therefore to
new needs and new ways of life as well, which in turn stimulate new
inventions, etc._, a chain of infinite development which becomes always
more varied and rapid as it advances and with which the possibility and
the likelihood of new inventions increases."

Kautsky goes on to tell how man, once he arrived on the grassy plains,
devoted himself to agriculture, to the construction of dwellings, to
the use of fire and to the breeding of cattle, and how, later, "man's
whole life, his needs, his dwelling-places, his means of subsistence,
were changed and how _an invention had in the end led to many more after
it, once it had been discovered, once the fabrication of the spear or
some other device was achieved_".

#### Observation

The invention of new technology, upon which, as we have seen, science
rests, takes place through social desire and social need which find
their expression in the individual, and can only totally succeed when
this need is felt by all of society. Until that moment, however, the
mind of the inventor cannot foresee in most cases the invention's
possible _consequences_.

Did the inventors of the steam engine or even the inventors of the
powerful technologies of our time, foresee that the class struggle
between labor and capital would become more rigorous and aggravated as
a result of their inventions? Do our inventors see that the socialist
society must be born from their inventions? All men, even the most
brilliant, have to this day been blind to society's future. They were
obliged to act within the framework of social needs. Under capitalism,
men became aware of these needs, although only vaguely, but they did
not know where the satisfaction of these needs would lead society. They
lived in the realm of necessity.

Only in socialist society, when the means of production are collective
property, when they are consciously utilized and controlled, only then
will man be aware of not only the social forces and needs which oblige
him to act, but also the goal towards which his activity leads and the
consequences which flow from his activity. Each technological
improvement will have as a consequence greater happiness, and more
freedom for mental and physical development. No invention will give
birth to unforeseen horrible setbacks; all of them will grant
individuals the freedom for development towards improvement and will
thus continuously improve the conditions for all men's happiness.

In all actuality, the productive forces, the material relations of
production, are pushing us towards socialism and, _within_ the
socialist society as well, we will depend upon the productive forces, on
the socialist mode of production. Since social existence will always
have precedence over the mind, we shall never be free. But if we no
longer blindly and passively endure this condition, if we are no longer
dragged along by the explosive movement of technology like poor
isolated "atoms", if we consciously produce as a _single_ whole, if _we
foresee the consequences of our social actions_, then we will be _free_,
in comparison with today's conditions, then we will have passed from
the dark realm of blind fate to the magnificent light of freedom. Nor
shall we then enjoy absolute freedom, which exists only in the brains of
the anarchists and the priests or mystical liberals; we shall be
connected to the productive forces at our disposal. But we will be
capable of using them in accordance with our common will, in accordance
with our collective benefit. And that is all we are demanding.

#### Second Observation

Naturally, once a science has been called into existence by a social
need, it can continue to develop, regardless of its stage of
development, without any _direct_ connection to social need. Although
the beginnings of astronomy resulted from a social need, it later
continued to develop outside of any _direct_ connection to the needs of
the life of society. Nonetheless, the relation between a science which
has become autonomous, technology and need, must constantly be
uncovered if we are not to be limited to just the branches or the
blossoms but see the roots of science.

### C. Law

Law is about what is mine and what is yours. Law is the general concept
of a society to which you, I and the other person belong. As long as
the productive forces and the relations of production are stable, these
ideas of property will not change. But if the former begin to waiver,
the latter will become unstable as well. This is not surprising. For
the relations of production are at the same time property relations, as
we clearly demonstrated above.

We shall proffer a few important examples, with which everyone is
familiar, drawn from our own times, to illustrate these changes.

Not so long ago, in a big city like Amsterdam, it was generally
accepted that the provision of lighting and water, as well as
transportation, was an occasion for private individuals to make money;
gas works, the water supply and streetcars had to be the property of
private individuals. Things are different now. Today it is generally
acknowledged that these activities, and many other sectors of industry,
should be municipally owned. This is a great transformation in the
conception of law, in the domain of the mind, which expresses an
opinion, a conviction or a prejudice concerning what is mine and what is
yours.

Where did this change come from?

It is not hard to show that it came directly from a change in the
productive forces. When Holland began to suffer from the influence of
big industry and world trade, the situation of the middle class and the
working class deteriorated. Their situation became even worse
after 1870. These classes of the population reflected upon the question
of how to remedy their misery. This led to the birth of a middle class
party which was joined by the workers. When this party took power, it
introduced municipal ownership so that its members would no longer be
bled by the private companies which exploited the gas works, the water
system and streetcars.

The new economic relation between big capital, on the one side, and the
small businessmen and craftsmen, on the other, which is, basically, the
relation between the big machine and the small tool-bench, created for
one part of society, for certain classes, a new condition of need. The
need for new relations of production was born, thanks to which the new
productive forces were to inflict less devastating results. The classes
which suffered the effects of these new productive forces managed to
take power and introduced new property relations.

This is a relatively minor example. Even though the municipal
enterprise (and even the national enterprise) is a completely different
form of property compared to the private business owned by one or more
capitalists, everyone knows that today's municipality or State is
capitalist and that the benefits of the municipal enterprise or State
property cannot be very significant for the ordinary man. But however
much the humble folk are conned, fleeced or shaken down by the State as
well as by the municipality, they will not be bled quite as shamelessly
as they were by the owners of private utilities.

The example of our own movement is of much greater significance and of
much greater scope.

Socialism wants to transform the means of production into collective
property. There are now millions of socialists where there were
practically none a few decades ago. How has such a vast revolution in
thought, in the consciousness of so many men, taken place? How has
their conception of _law_ been transformed?

Here, the answer is much clearer than in the case of the first example.

Big industry has made it plain to millions of proletarians that, as
long as private property in the means of production lasts, they will
never have property or well-being. But if private property is
transformed into common property, then the road to well-being is open to
them. This is why they became socialists.

In addition, crises and overproduction, as well as, more recently, the
trusts, with their competition which devours everything and their
restriction of production -- all these factors which derive directly
from the contemporary private ownership of the means of production --
have had such an awful effect on the middle classes that even among the
latter many consider collective property as the only way to save
themselves from poverty, and they became socialists.

With socialism, the direct relation between the change in the
productive forces and relations of production, and the change in
thought, is evident.

Is it a god which has put socialism into our heads? Is it a mystical
spark, a holy spirit? A light which god has shown us, as many Christian
socialists would have us believe?

Is it our own free mind which has produced for us this magnificent
thought due to the excellence of the mind? Is it our own especially
elevated virtue, a secret force within us, the categorical imperative
of Kant?

Or is the devil that has instilled in us the desire for collective
property? This is what other Christians declare.

None of the above. It is _poverty_, social misery.

This poverty comes from the fact that the new productive forces, within
the straitjacket of the old property relations of the small business of
past times, wreak devastation among the workers and the
petit-bourgeois. The solution of socialism arises on its own because all
the workers and many petit-bourgeois can sense and understand that this
devastation would come to an end if they were to collectively own the
means of production. Labor is already certainly collective. The fact
that their difficulties could be resolved thanks to common ownership is
therefore obvious.

Nor can it be said that socialism was contemplated over the course of
centuries past and that therefore socialism cannot be an emanation of
today's dominant productive forces, but that the principle of the
equality of all men is an eternal ideal which men have dreamed about in
every era.

Socialism as conceived by the first Christians was as unlike the
socialism sought by today's working class as the productive forces and
class relations of that epoch are unlike today's productive forces and
class relations. The first Christians wanted a common consumption, the
rich were supposed to share their surplus of _means of consumption_
with the poor. It was not the soil, the land and the means of labor
which were to be held in common, but the _products_. It was, then,
basically a socialism of beggars; the poor, thanks to the goodness of
the rich, were supposed to share the products with the latter.

Likewise, Jesus himself never preached anything else, that is, that the
rich should give up their wealth. The rich were supposed to love the
poor as _brothers_ and the poor were to love the rich in the same way.

Social democracy, on the other hand, teaches that those who possess
nothing must _fight_ the owners and _seize from them_ the means of
production through political power; it does not want to possess the
_products_ in a collective manner -- to the contrary, what each
receives in the way of products, of objects of consumption, will be for
him alone, he need not share it -- but it most certainly does want to
collectively possess the _means of production_.

The relations of production of the first centuries of Christianity
could not have given rise to our social democratic conceptions, any more
than our productive forces are capable of leading us to the Christian
ideal. When the productive forces were still so minimal, so fragmented
and dispersed in such a way that a greater community could not control
them, the only solution to poverty was philanthropy, as miserable and
insufficient as it was, since it only alleviated an insignificant part
of that poverty. In an era where labor is becoming increasingly social,
social ownership is the only means to confront poverty, but now it is
also a sufficient means.

Another significant example is provided by criminal law. Here, too, a
revolution has taken place in the minds of many men: socialist workers
no longer believe in the personal fault of the criminal. They believe
that the causes of crime are social rather than personal.

How did they arrive at this new opinion, which neither liberal nor
clerical Christianity was capable of discovering?

It was possible thanks to the struggle against capitalism which, as we
saw above, rests upon the process of production. Socialist authors were
led by the struggle, by their critique of the existing social order, to
look for the causes of crime, and they discovered that the causes of
crime are rooted in society. It was the process of production and the
class struggle which necessarily led them to this understanding.

This awareness is slowly penetrating the minds of
socialistically-educated workers.

We cannot provide further examples for reasons of space, but this
example once again reveals the revolution which has taken place in the
world of thought as a consequence of the change in the relations of
production. And how different things are today! It was not so long ago
that the world believed in sin, in personal culpability, in free will,
in the vengeance of God and men, in punishment; now, socialists -- but
only socialists -- see that, when "the anti-social roots of crime are
annihilated, along with capitalist society, and when every person is
provided with the social space for his essential life expression", then
social crime will disappear.

#### Observation

At this point, after examining these examples of changes in thinking
about law and property, we now very clearly discern for the first time
a law of the evolution of human thought that has not yet been subjected
to our closest scrutiny.

We have already seen enough concerning the question of _why_ evolution
in thought is engendered by the productive forces, which are its
wellsprings and causes. Now, we see _how_ this takes place. Evolution
in thought takes place in struggle, _in the class struggle_. This can
be illustrated quite clearly with the same examples of municipal
utilities and the socialist conception of property and law which we
discussed above.

Big industry made the situation of the petit-bourgeois and the workers
extremely difficult. Monopolies controlling the supply of gas and
water, taken for granted for years, became increasingly unendurable as
big industry continued to expand. The workers and the petit-bourgeois
viewed the monopolies as their enemies, and to free themselves from the
control of the latter became a vital necessity. The following thought
took shape in their minds: what would be just, just to the highest
degree, would be for the municipality to control this kind of activity.
_We, the laboring classes, must fight these parasites_. The parasites,
on the other hand, thought: it is our right to own these utilities; as a
class we will lose all our profits if we allow one profitable business
after another to be taken from us. _We must fight the laboring classes_.
It is, then, in the struggle where a new conception of law has evolved.
The development of the new productive forces has produced the new class
struggle, and this struggle has expanded the new legal consciousness.

And the proletariat, which had the feeling that it was intellectually,
morally and physically dying at the hands of big industry, recognized
the capitalists as its enemies. First, it thought: we, the workers in
this factory, are deprived, we are dying, and our capitalist is our
enemy; it is unjust that he receives all the profits and we get
nothing. _We must fight him_. Later, the proletariat of _a whole_ city,
or of a _particular_ trade, thought the same thing. And then the
proletariat of an entire country and of the whole world. All of them
thought: _we, as a class, must fight the class of capitalists_. It would
be right for _all_ the means of production to be in our hands. _We shall
struggle_ for our rights.

The capitalists, however, thought precisely the contrary, first
individually, then all of them together, in an organized way and as a
State. It is right for us to keep what belongs to us. We shall crush
these revolutionary ideas. _We shall struggle together as a class for
our rights_.

And the more that technology developed, the more that the productive
forces and wealth in the hands of the capitalists constantly grew, the
deeper, the more widespread and the less endurable became the poverty
among a continuously growing proletariat; and the more that the owners
recognized the _necessity_ of preserving their greater wealth, the
greater was the _necessity_ asserted by those who owned nothing of
seizing the means of production. So also to the same degree the
struggle between the two classes has grown sharper and for that same
reason so has the power of their ideas concerning what is right and what
is wrong become more well-defined.

With this example we see quite clearly that the conceptions of what is
right and what is wrong evolve in the class struggle and as a result of
the class struggle, and that a class could slowly come to consider
something to be wrong which previously seemed right, and that it could
also, with the growth of class interests, feel this new sense of what
is right and wrong with an increasing passion.

The material struggle for the means of production is simultaneously a
spiritual struggle concerning what is right and wrong. The wrong is the
mental mirror-image of the right.

#### Second Observation

It will not of course be necessary to show here that, in this spiritual
and material struggle, the victorious class will be the one which, in
the end, due to the development of the process of production, will be
transformed into the most powerful class, the class with the greatest
spiritual power and the greater truth, the class which, as a result of
the needs brought about by its situation, will be called upon to
resolve the contradictions between the new productive forces and the
old relations of production. We shall return to this topic at the end of
our treatise. At this time, however, we must set forth another
observation which will invalidate an objection of our adversaries.

There are members of the owning classes who pass over to the side of
those who have nothing. Does this not prove that it is not social
existence which determines thought, but that maybe something eminently
spiritual, something mysteriously ethical, is what determines our
social behavior?

An individual who passes from the capitalist camp to the proletarian
camp could do so for two kinds of reasons, reasons which could also be
at work simultaneously. Perhaps he has come to understand that the
future belongs to the proletariat. But no one can deny that it is the
process of production, i.e., the economic relations, which provided him
with this understanding and therefore that it is not in the "freedom"
of the mind that one must seek the motive for his action, but in social
existence. Or this act could be rooted in sentimental reasons, since,
for example, this individual prefers to stand alongside the weak rather
than the oppressors. In the course of our discussion of _social
morality_ we shall prove that, in this case as well, the determinant
sentiments are based on the socio-economic life of men rather than
something mysterious, supernatural or absolutely spiritual.

### D. Politics

If the socialist conceptions of property and crime provide clear
examples of how the productive forces influence thought, how the class
struggle arises and how it must be resolved, in politics we encounter
examples which are yet more clear.

And in this connection we must also refer to the example of what the
socialists think, since it is in their heads that the new productive
forces are most vigorously at work.

The new productive forces also powerfully influence the minds of the
industrialist, the financier, the wholesaler, the shipbuilder, etc.
They think of enormous enterprises, huge profits, the formation of
cartels, foreign and colonial markets, the creation of a national navy
and a powerful army, in order to increase their influence, their wealth
and their power. But regardless of the _scale_ of their thought compared
to that of the capitalists and ruling classes of past centuries, the
_type_ of thinking they engage in is the same.

The middle classes also think differently than the middle classes of
the past. The growth of the productive forces has pushed them in a
dangerous direction, into a position where they could fall into the
ranks of the proletariat. How to escape this fate -- by means of credit,
by State aid, through trade unions -- this is what they reflect upon,
totally unlike their parents. In their minds, things now seem very
different from the way they were in the eighteenth century, for example.
Their thought, however, moves in the same old direction: profit,
profit, private profit!

The mind of the non-socialist worker is also full of feelings quite
distinct from those experienced by his counterparts of the first half
of the nineteenth century, for example. Higher wages, shorter working
hours, State aid, a higher standard of living -- this is what he thinks
about; it is like a beehive, like a mill-wheel in these non-socialist
Christian organizations. This humming and grinding always resounds with
the same themes: organization, a higher standard of living. But these
men are still treading the old paths; they want to obtain greater
benefits from capital, from private property -- on the terrain of
private property.

Among the socialists, on the other hand, something different is coming
to life, something completely new, something which never before existed
in the world in this form. Even though they stand on the terrain of
private property, they want to abolish private property; even though
they are living in a capitalist State, they want to overthrow the
capitalist State. Born and raised in the shell of capitalism, their
thoughts are of eliminating this shell; their thoughts are of
transforming their thoughts into other thoughts. The working class
wants to destroy the source of its existence, capital and private
property in the means of production. This effect of the productive
forces is here completely unlike the effect it has on the other classes,
it is much more important, much more profound, and much more radical;
and for this reason socialist thought is the best example of the
influence of technology on the mind.

Politics is also where the relation between social existence and
thought is especially clearly illuminated, because politics contains the
will, desire, hope, thought, and intrigues within the State, the whole
life of all classes in the modern State, because the citizen, who has
political rights in our State, must reflect upon society as a whole as
well as its parts, and because he is therefore concerned with literally
the entirety of mental life as a result of society's changes.

What is the most important, the most ubiquitous political issue of our
time, the one which could therefore best serve us as an example?

_The social question_, the question of the struggle between labor and
capital.

The question itself arose as a result of capital, that is, due to the
development of the productive forces.

And by focusing on the way men think about this question, one can get a
better idea of how technological development constrains them to change
their way of thinking.

Sixty years ago, for example, how many people would have thought of
establishing a maximum legal working day for the proletarians, or of
laws protecting women and children, or even a workmen's compensation
disability fund? They were few and far between and those who did
contemplate such things had received news concerning such labor
protection laws from highly developed capitalist countries. It is most
likely that no one even considered such things one hundred years ago.

How did this noble idea, that is, that the proletariat should be
protected by society, get into people's heads?

It is hardly likely that Christian feeling inspired this idea, because
prior to the mental transformation which led to its adoption, thousands
and thousands of workers died from overwork, illness, poverty and
accidents, thousands upon thousands have grown old in poverty. There
were, however, plenty of Christians back then. The fact that no one
thought of State aid in other times therefore must have some other
cause.

And that cause is not hard to discover. In other times, the proletariat
was not yet strong and could not compel the owners to do more than
provide private alms and a little public assistance.

The fact that, in those days, the proletariat was not yet strong was
due to the process of production, which had not yet _organized_ the
workers. They were already numerous enough, but they were dispersed in
small enterprises and this is why they were only capable of mobilizing
small forces.

But when they were constrained by the process of production to work by
the hundreds in factories and workshops, they began to become conscious
of their power and of how to organize for the struggle, just as they
had been organized for labor. And this struggle which was born of the
process of production, this obvious phenomenon, led the different
classes of society to think, and produced a mental revolution.

This took place first of all, naturally, in England and France, where
the new process of production first made its appearance. We shall not
pause here to consider these foreign examples; we only wish to show
that it was in those countries where, under the influence of the new
relations, the utopian socialism of Saint-Simon, Fourier and Robert
Owen was born, and where Friedrich Engels, thanks to his knowledge of
English production relations, and Karl Marx, thanks to his study of
French and English politics, conceived social democratic theory.

But even in Germany one can see the truth of what we have to say about
politics.

The workers emerged from the Revolution of 1848 with empty hands. The
triune Prussian voting system of Estates [^fn-03] left them without any
political influence. No laws protected them from the awful consequences
of increasing capitalist exploitation.

But at the beginning of the 1860s, the workers began to organize.
Rebuffed by the bourgeoisie, they founded, under Lassalle's leadership,
the General Association of German Workers (_Allgemeine Deutsche
Arbeiterverein_ -- the ADAV), which assumed the leadership of the
struggle for equal universal suffrage. The Junker ruling class took
note of this; conservative spokesmen made speeches about the supreme
mission of the State to protect the oppressed.

The ADAV's propaganda spread throughout the country. Bismarck
_introduced universal suffrage_, which he had promised before the war
against Austria, first in the Confederation of North German States
[^fn-04] and then in the newly-formed German Empire.

Bebel, Liebknecht and Schweitzer, who were rapidly becoming the
spokesmen of the proletariat, were elected to the Reichstag. Trade
unions were formed. The number of socialist votes increased with each
election. The two fractions of German social democracy merged at Gotha.
Due to the growing power of socialism, the ruling class felt
increasingly worried, and then anxious. _Bismarck tried to squelch the
movement with the anti-socialist law_.

But the working class could only be vanquished by force. The elections
of 1881 demonstrated the law's ineffectiveness. Something had to be
done to contain the spread of dissent. A speech by the emperor announced
"a positive improvement in the well-being of the workers". A
hastily-improvised law concerning _paid sick leave_, proposed before
the Reichstag in 1882, was enacted in 1884.

In spite of the anti-socialist law, the socialist movement made great
progress. In the elections of 1884, 1887 and 1890, the socialist vote
rose from 550,000 to 760,000, then to 1,400,000. The anti-socialist law
was jettisoned; Bismarck was dismissed. The legislation proposed in
February 1890 promised protection for labor and legal equality of
rights for the workers.

What a gigantic reversal in thought! In an entire country, in all
classes of the population! Everyone took a stand on the social
question, that is, on the class struggle!

And it is obvious that this is related to technological development!
Statistics show us that industry developed rapidly in the early 1860s
and 1870s, as well as at the end of the 1880s, precisely the years when
socialism experienced its fastest rate of growth. One could plot an
almost identical graph for the growth of each of the following
phenomena: increasing production; the growing army of combatants; and
the changing political opinions of the ruling classes. The growth of
each one of these factors corresponds to the others; the class struggle
obviously derives from technological development.

And how clearly the particular character of this development comes to
the fore: _struggle_. The Emperor and the Chancellor, the ministers and
politicians did not arrive at their new ideas by way of Christian
sentiment, nor did they do so by way of free will, or the spontaneous
and arbitrary operation of reason or under the influence of a spirit
from one or another mystical era. It was the workers themselves, upon
the basis of their labor, who, through their organization, their
propaganda, their _struggle_, compelled the bourgeoisie to change the
contents of their minds.

Here one can disregard all mysticism. The real relations stand out as
openly before our eyes as the movements of the planets in our solar
system.

The evolution of the minds of the workers originated in technology, and
the evolution of the minds of the owning classes derived from the
effect exercised upon them by the ideas of the workers, transformed
into actions.

This is even more evident in regard to later developments. The workers
did not allow themselves to be led astray by government promises and
voted in even greater numbers for the social democracy. Those in power
understood that more significant reforms than those they were willing
to concede would be necessary to seduce such a class conscious working
class. The pace of social reform slowed appreciably. The power of the
proletariat had become too formidable.

During the nineteenth century, the trade unions had become powerful
organizations which wrested many reforms from the capitalists. The
owning classes once again considered violent repression; _proposals for
a coup d'Ãtat and prisons were brought up_, but no one dared to carry
them out.

The organization, the class consciousness, the understanding, and the
power of the workers has become so great that the ruling classes
despair just as much at the prospect of trapping them with reforms as
of oppressing them with force. They are devoting themselves to
reinforcing the instruments of their power for the purpose of preparing
for the struggle for power. Nowhere has the ruling class, armed to the
teeth, presented such a mean visage as in Germany. The reason? It was
in Germany, like nowhere else in Europe, where big industry underwent
the most precipitous growth in the last few decades, amassed the
greatest wealth, and most vigorously developed its technology.

At the risk of generating boredom with too many details, we shall pause
to examine these questions a little more closely; it is very much in
the workers' interest to have a profound grasp of them.

Up to this point we have put all the owning classes in the same bag, as
if they constituted a single mass in opposition to the proletariat.
There are, however, important differences among them, and the
development of technology does not have the same effect on all these
classes. It is therefore necessary to address these differences.

The material situations and political opinions of the various classes
are affected quite variously by technological development. Let us take,
for example, militarism and imperialism, on the one hand, and social
legislation, on the other.

Intense international competition compels the big capitalists of all
countries to support colonialism. When a State already has colonial
possessions, that State's capitalists can then obtain much more wealth
in those possessions than in the colonies of other countries. They
penetrate their own countries' colonies much more easily right from the
start; it is their State which pushes them forward, which helps them
and gives them the best protection. A colony is primarily the object of
exploitation by its own metropolis. Labor power is cheap in the colony,
violence and intimidation are authorized, and colonial profits are
often enormous. Surplus capital in the metropolis can be profitably
invested in the colony. This is why, for example, the big German
capitalists, who gaze with envy upon the gigantic profits which foreign
capitalists are extracting from their colonies, push for the greatest
expansion of their own country's colonial power.

To achieve this, however, military equipment is required, especially
the construction of a navy; not just for the subjection of the colonies
themselves, but above all in order to oppose the other colonial powers
which are pursuing the same goal. This is why the big capitalists are
demanding millions for the army and the navy.

But the army has yet another purpose. It has the duty of protecting the
owners against the working class which is rising up in a threatening
manner. When the workers, the majority of the population, are
cohesively organized and rebelling against the existing order, how else
could a ruling minority stay in power except by means of a
well-equipped, highly-disciplined army, one which blindly obeys its
superiors' orders due to its training and fear of barbaric punishments?
Fear of the socialist proletariat leads to the bourgeoisie allocating
hundreds of millions to the army.

But there is yet more. The military budget must be as light a burden as
possible for the well-off classes, and as heavy as possible for the
poorest classes. This is why the owning classes have introduced those
indirect taxes which principally affect humble folk, peasants, artisans
and workers.

Social legislation would undoubtedly be very costly if all just demands
were to be satisfied. It is impossible to completely avoid it out of
fear of the proletariat. For the owning classes, however, it must not
be too extravagant, and for that reason it is necessarily insufficient,
and the workers must in addition bear part of its cost.

This is, then, more or less what the big capitalists, mine-owners and
owners of the steel mills, metallurgical plants, and textile mills, and
shipbuilders and bankers think.

Now anyone will understand that this class's inclination in favor of
more steel plate and soldiers, and a more powerful colonialism, and its
aversion towards beneficial social reforms, will be more powerfully
manifested as the stakes get bigger and as the interests of this class
become more preponderant. A powerful imperialism and militarism, then,
go along with an insufficient social reform policy.

The class of Junkers acts in a similar fashion. Insofar as it is
composed of country gentlemen with mostly provincial outlooks, it is
indifferent to colonialism and the drive for a powerful navy; but to
the extent that these policies offer it new fields of authority with
lucrative administrative posts, it is slowly being reconciled, as a
government party, to these policies. The army, on the other hand, in
which it occupies all the higher ranks, is its own private domain; as
long as it is sovereign in the army, it is indispensable to the
bourgeoisie as a result of the latter's fear of the proletariat.
Prussia has led the way as a military State; its position as a great
power rests upon the army, and this is why the Junkers are always
demanding hundreds of millions more for the army.

It is therefore all the more easily understood that the money needed
for the army has to be drawn from indirect taxes, and from customs
duties, since these customs duties also yield millions personally to
the Junkers; without customs duties, they would have gone bankrupt long
ago.

The Junkers are deadly enemies of the working class and the worst
opponents of social reform. They view the peasants who extracted
themselves from their despotism by fleeing to the cities as escaped
slaves. A faster-paced rural exodus would amount to an improvement in
their situation; and it is only this exodus which obliges the Junkers
to set limits to their mistreatment of the agricultural workers, who
would otherwise all flee.

The middle class has a different attitude towards this question.

It by no means has such a great interest in armies and navies, and even
less in colonies. Trade with the colonies is minor and, as commercial
outlets for industry, they have little importance.

The middle class, which is composed of small manufacturers,
shopkeepers, craftsmen, and peasants, is fully capable of getting State
and municipal jobs, or jobs with the big industrial and trading firms,
for those members of its families who cannot be employed in the family
business, so that its interest in army, navy and colonies, which is of
merely secondary importance, will be further limited.

Most members of the middle class, however, follow the politics of the
class above them, and we see the parliamentary representatives of the
shopkeepers and the peasants, the centrists and the liberals, generally
vote for arsenals, armor plate, and colonial budgets.

Does this not contradict what we said above, that is, that the
development of the productive forces totally transforms the needs of
men, of classes and, for that very reason, their politics, as well? A
German peasant or petit-bourgeois has no great need for colonies and
navies: why does he so enthusiastically pay higher taxes for them?

To successfully address this difficulty, we must take into
consideration the fact that a large part of the middle class is totally
dependent on capital. Not only because it supplies the employees for
private and State services, but especially because it lives on credit.
The peasants and shopkeepers most of all. Capital which is available
because it is surplus capital means cheap credit for them; flourishing
industry and trade produce a surplus of capital. Thus, for this part of
the middle class, the following tactic prevails: support as much as
possible anything the State and capital seem capable of doing: army,
navy, colonies.

A large part of the middle class, such as the small manufacturers,
artisans who employ manual laborers, peasants who employ servants, and
many shopkeepers, live more directly from the exploitation of the
workers. With the big capitalists they have in common the exploitation
of the workers, and experience it first-hand; if their tax burdens are
increased for funding social reform, their existence will become more
difficult; this is why they fight against the workers.

A large part of the middle class therefore does not have a direct, but
an indirect, interest in militarism and imperialism. It does have a
direct interest in the exploitation of the workers.

This is how things stand with that part of the middle class which
derives more benefits than inconveniences from capitalism. It is
otherwise in regard to that part of the middle class which is closer to
the proletariat. The poor peasant, the small-scale tenant farmer, the
craftsman of modest means, the owner of a small shop, and the low-level
employee, without reliable incomes, also depend on capital, but only in
the sense that they are oppressed by it. They have no credit; on the
contrary, they are neighbors of the proletariat, upon whose business
they must often subsist. They are therefore against militarism and
imperialism and, although not quite with the same consistency as the
workers, in favor of social reforms.

And as technological development causes the ranks of the proletariat to
swell, as the danger increases, for the impoverished middle class, of
falling into the proletariat, and the pressure of the State and capital
becomes stronger, the thought of these layers of the middle class also
changes, its will is increasingly turned against capital.

This part of the middle class thus does not have a direct, but an
indirect interest in social reforms.

And since the higher layers of the middle class do not have a direct
interest in big capital, and the lower layers do not have a direct
interest in social reforms, the political thought of all of these
layers is uncertain and fluctuating. It is just as likely for the higher
layers to lean a little towards the side of the workers, as it is for
the lower layers to lean a little towards the side of the capitalists,
and this, of course, temporarily. And these layers easily become the
playthings of social climbers and schemers.

The effect of the relations of production and property are here
reflected quite clearly.

The working class -- we hardly need to point out -- has neither a
direct nor an indirect interest in imperialism, militarism or
colonialism. The latter exploit the workers and make social reforms
difficult or impossible. War and national rivalry shatter the
international solidarity of the workers, the mighty weapon with which,
as we shall prove below, they will defeat capitalism.

Imperialism and militarism are the spoiled and pampered children of the
big bourgeoisie, and the mortal enemies of the proletariat. The middle
class vacillates between love and hate, and for the most part follows
behind the powerful.

Radical social reform is the nightmare of the wealthy, and the
springboard to power for the workers. The middle class oscillates
between these two poles.

This is how the relations of production and property are reflected in
the political ideas of the classes. For modern technology grants big
capital the monopoly, the major properties; it makes the middle class
dependent on capital or allows it to drift between property and
poverty; it deprives the proletarians of all personal property, and all
personal power.

The political thought of the classes is the mental reflection of the
process of production, with its property relations.

#### Objection

It seems quite mechanistic to suggest that entire classes of thinking
men should be obliged to think the same way. This is what our
adversaries put forth as an objection.

But anyone who reflects, even for an instant, upon the fact that the
classes are moved by their _interest_, that their class interest is for
them the question of existing or not existing as a class, will be
neither surprised nor discomfited by this objection. _For classes
defend their own existence_. If the individual must do everything
possible to preserve his existence, this is all the more true of a class
which, through its cooperation and social organization, is a thousand
times more powerful than an individual.

But each man ultimately conducts the class struggle within the limits
of his capabilities. The worker only needs to look around him to note
that the lively, passionate mind and the passionate heart are more
responsive to the call of highly-developed technology than the languid,
the fearful or the cowardly. The technological revolution advances
rapidly, men follow behind a little more slowly. In the end, however,
the masses follow, in the end the whole world follows. The power of the
social forces of production is omnipotent.

Today one plainly sees millions of proletarians following modern
technology, at first slowly, then faster, and joining the social
democracy _en masse_.

The _individual_ therefore has great importance in the evolution of
society; the energetic, the passionate, the sensitive, the brilliant,
and the diligent, accelerate the progress of a class, while the fools,
the slow and the indifferent, retard it; but no man, however brilliant,
active or ardent he may be, can divert society in a direction opposed
to technological development, and no imbecile, no slacker or apathetic
person, can halt the current. Social existence is omnipotent. The
individual who resists it is crushed, and his resistance itself will be
determined by social existence.

### E. Customs and Morality

Now that we have finished with the so-called lesser domains of the
mind, we shall move on to the so-called higher domains: customs, social
morality, religion, philosophy and art. These domains are set above the
others by the ruling classes because the latter are all-too connected
to matter, while the former seem to soar above all material things.
Law, politics and natural science, although mentally elevated,
nonetheless deal only with the terrestrial, with material relations and
things, things which are often ugly. Religion, on the other hand, along
with philosophy, religion, morality and art, seems to be purely mental,
beautiful and sublime. A lawyer, a parliamentarian, an engineer or a
professor seems less noble than an artist, a priest or a philosopher.

We should not want to give our support to this classification. But it
is true that, for us as well, art, philosophy, religion and morality
are _more difficult_ domains. Precisely due to the fact that the ruling
classes have transformed these domains into supernatural, purely mental
spheres, without any link to the earth or society, and because this
opinion has insinuated itself into everyone's mind as a prejudice, it
is more difficult to demonstrate in this case as well the relation
between thought and social existence. We must be twice as lucid in this
case, since it affects the interests of the workers twice as much. To
grasp the truth on this point makes for tough fighters.

We shall begin with the simplest of the four domains: customs. Here one
must clearly distinguish between customs and morality. Customs
constitute prescriptions for particular cases, while morality is
something general. Among the civilized peoples, for example, it is
customary not to go about completely naked, while to love your neighbor
like yourself is morality. We shall deal with the simplest morality
after having examined customs.

Two clear, very general examples, drawn from our era, and which the
worker always has before his eyes, show how customs are transformed by
the change of the relations of production.

In the past it was customary for the working class not to bother with
public affairs. Not only did the workers have no influence on the
government, they did not even think about it. It only drew their
attention during times of great tension, during a war against the
foreigner or when the kings, the princes, the nobility, the clergy or
the bourgeoisie fought among themselves; then, everyone tried to win
the workers over to their side; there were thus moments when the
workers felt that their interests were also at stake; they would then
participate, or allow themselves to be used. But this never led to an
enduring political interest among the workers.

All of this is totally different now. Not only do many workers
participate in political life but, in the countries where the
proletariat has been educated by social democracy, the proletariat has
become the class which is most actively involved in politics.

In the past, it was customary for the worker to stay home during the
evening; now, the custom is -- increasingly so -- for the worker to go
to a union or party meeting or a gathering of his proletarian cultural
association at this time of day.

These customs result from class interest, and class interest is born as
a consequence of property relations. In the past it was also in the
interest of the ruling classes for the workers to be moderate,
peaceful, modest and humble, and for them not to worry about politics
except on special occasions. And because the working class was weak due
to the technological level of those times, it allowed this status to be
imposed upon it by the ruling classes. The priests, government lackeys,
schools and, later, the newspapers, preached this attitude to the
workers.

The interest of the working class is different now; technology has
transformed it, and also made it strong enough to stop listening to the
bosses. Thanks to class interest, customs have changed: now, the worker
who is not organized is a dull and indifferent worker, a bad worker;
but the passionate man who fights for the organization is a good worker.

Therefore -- and is this not clear for everyone? -- someone is
classified as good or bad in accordance with the current custom.

Today the opposite of what was good in other times is good. To be
outside, in the street, in a meeting or at a demonstration, is now
good. For _now_ technology promises victory to the working class, and
the victory of the workers is good for them and good for all of society.

When our comrade Henriette Roland-Holst said that the conceptions of
good and bad "are a game of musical chairs", she was never forgiven.
But a steady examination of the facts, instead of righteous indignation
at the drop of a hat, leads to the observation that different peoples
and classes -- or the same peoples and classes in different eras --
have called the same things good or bad. All of history is replete with
such instances. Here we shall only call attention to the customs which
regulate the relations between the sexes and marriage, which are
different for different peoples and classes or vary from era to era.

Now let us take another very general example drawn from our era.
Besides the working class which aspires to advancement, another part of
humanity is seeking the freedom of social mobility: women. How did it
come about that women, who until not so long ago were educated solely
with a view towards domestic labor and marriage, are also striving,
hundreds of them, for another goal: a field of activity in society?

In the proletarian woman, this is a result of big industry. Machine
labor is often so easy -- even if it becomes hard as a result of its
_duration_ -- that women and children can do it. The father's wages
were not enough; the women and children had to go to the factory so
that, thanks to their efforts, the family's pay would be sufficient.
This is how proletarian women entered the factories and their number has
been increasing ever since.

As a consequence, the contents of the minds of women have changed. The
socialist idea, the highest point of the _labor_ which they carry out,
has also insinuated itself into their heads. In some countries, like
Germany, proletarian women have come a long way along the road of
socialist organization; they have begun to take this road in every
capitalist country. The working class women and the young workers have
become comrades in struggle with the men in the political party and the
trade union! How unlike other times, when the woman sewed, washed
clothes, cleaned the house and took care of the children, and never did
anything else!

And it has also gotten into the heads of the socialist women of the
working class that there will be a time when women and young people
will be _completely_ autonomous socially, and _completely_ free as
producers. In the society of the future, no one, neither male nor
female, will have a master, either in marriage or in the workplace,
anywhere. Individuals will rub elbows as free and equal beings.

And this idea, too, was given to women by the process of production.

The bourgeois woman also aspires to freedom. For her, as well, this
idea comes from the process of production. First of all, when big
industry took off, women's housework was diminished. Big industry
produced all kinds of things so cheaply, such as lighting, heat,
clothing, and food, that no one needed any longer to make these things
or prepare them at home; secondly, competition has been so fierce that
the wives and children of the petit-bourgeoisie have had to go to work
and have sought positions in schools, offices, telephone switchboards,
pharmacies, etc.; thirdly, among the bourgeoisie the number of marriages
has been reduced due to the violent struggle for existence, desires for
a better life and the search for pleasure and luxury. All of these
things are consequences of the modern mode of production.

This is why the mind of the bourgeois young woman is oriented towards
greater social mobility; her thought has been modified. Compared to her
grandmother, she is a new human being.

While the proletarian woman, as a result of the place she occupies in
the social process of production, has in mind the liberation of the
proletariat and, for that very reason, the liberation of all of
humanity, the bourgeois feminist only thinks of the liberation of the
_bourgeois_ woman. She wants to lead her to power within bourgeois
society; she wants to give her capitalist power, which is evidently
only possible if she economically and politically oppresses the workers
as energetically as the male bourgeoisie currently oppresses them.

The feminist does not want "to free woman from property, but to procure
for her the freedom of property", she does not want "to free her from
the filth of profit, but to give her the freedom of competition". The
working class woman wants to free herself and all the other women and
all men from the pressure of property and competition and thus to
really free all human beings.

Even if the contents of the minds of these two women are as different
as a lamp is compared to the full light of the sun, their thoughts are
nonetheless born from the process of production; their thoughts are
only distinguished by the different property relations in which the two
"sisters" find themselves.

What passionate feelings are inspired in us by the complete liberation
of woman, the liberation of the worker, the liberation of humanity!
What passion and what resolve they awaken in millions of people, what
wellsprings of energy they cause to flow within us! And what
magnificent golden and sunset-colored dreams they bring us in the hours
of rest that follow after the fight! It might seem that it is the mind
of man which has, by its own effort, given birth to all this energy,
this mad combativity and these enchanting dreams! But let us never
forget, dear friends, that this powerful will of the proletariat, this
joy in victory and this stubborn hope after defeat, this extravagant
idealism of the workers -- the most elevated, the greatest and the most
magnificent, yes, the most magnificent by far, because it is the most
conscious and therefore the most profoundly idealist expression of the
mind that the world has ever known -- that these most beautiful mental
phenomena are of a piece with labor, with the tools of labor, which, for
their part, are rooted firmly in the earth.

These two examples show, on the basis of the two most important changes
to affect customs in our time, just how correct our doctrine of
historical materialism is. Now we shall address general _morality_.
Before we do so, however, in order to prepare the ground for this next
step, and to make the whole issue more comprehensible, we shall first
take an example which is not one of the customs of the everyday world
of work, like attending workers meetings or female office work, nor is
it part of those supposedly higher realms of morality, like loving
one's neighbor, love for the truth, etc.

We shall use love of one's country, patriotism, as a bridge between
these phenomena.

In this feeling as well, in this thought, we see that a powerful
transformation has taken place in our times and, once again, it has
principally affected the workers.

In the past, when the working class did not yet represent any kind of
autonomous social force whatsoever, it was patriotic, that is, it did
not know any better than to follow the ruling classes of its respective
countries in wars with foreign powers. It is true that it is not likely
that the proletarians of years past and the sons of the peasants and
the bourgeoisie of other eras, who enlisted in the army or the navy, did
so out of a passionate love for their fatherlands. The majority did so
as a result of coercion and poverty, through lack of a better way to
earn a living, but the working classes could hardly have known how to
do anything else then, or even what they should have done. The idea
never arose in their minds that they could declare themselves to be an
autonomous force against war and prevent it, even when the ruling
classes wanted war, since they were politically and economically an
appendage of the ruling classes. They were not strong enough either
numerically or organizationally to form their own idea concerning this
question, and even less so when it came to implementing such an idea in
practice. Even where they fought to preserve the peace, they habitually
did so as defenders of a part of the ruling classes, who saw more
advantages to be gained from peace than from war, and carried out their
struggle under the slogan that this would be good for the fatherland,
that this idea and this activity constitute the real love for the
fatherland.

In reality neither war nor such love for the fatherland were very often
of any sure use or advantage to the working classes in general. In the
past, just like today, it was _they_ who often had to foot the bill
with their blood, their lives, and their modest possessions which were
torn from them by means of burdensome taxes or which were devastated by
war. Even so, in their conceptions they followed the ruling classes and
embraced the slogans that were preached to them, such as love for the
independence of their country, love of the fatherland or the reigning
dynasty, without offering any well-delineated opposition.

How all this has changed! In every country one can daily witness the
increase in the number of workers who understand that wars against
civilized and uncivilized peoples are only fought for the benefit of
the bourgeoisie; that the bourgeoisie only preaches love for the
fatherland in order to make the workers docile tools of war; that the
end and result of all wars is augmented pillage of the working class or
the spread of exploitation to even more workers; that an international
war of the peoples is a danger for the workers of the victor nation as
well as the vanquished.

>"War" -- so thinks the modern worker -- "is in the _interest_ of the
bourgeoisie. Production, that is, the capital invested in production,
has become so enormous that it seeks markets and territories as
destinations for its money and wants, by means of war, to eliminate
some and find a distant use for the rest. But it cannot succeed without
collecting ever more burdensome taxes, paying me a lower wage, making
me work harder and longer and not providing me with any reforms, or
giving me regressive reforms. It is in _my_ interest, on the other hand,
to have higher wages, shorter working hours, and progressive
legislation and not to have to bear customs duties on foodstuffs or
taxes on consumer goods. I must therefore be against war. Furthermore,
it is in my interest for my comrade on the other side of the border to
enjoy the same benefits, since in that case the industry of his country
would not be able to compete unfairly with poverty wages; then, their
trade union will become stronger and I will be able to use it as a model
to reinforce my trade union and I could even join an international
union. And if the workers political party is powerful there, this will
be a stimulus for us to make ours stronger as well, and we will be able
to form an international association of all the workers political
parties with the same goal and for mutual aid. But if war breaks out,
our economic power will be annihilated and the bourgeoisie will sow
hatred among us."

The development of industry and world trade has transformed the workers
into an autonomous force capable of achieving its goal _on its own_.
But this development, because it has caused capital to metamorphose into
a vast power which overwhelmingly dominates every country, has resulted
in a situation where the workers can only defeat capital if they act
internationally. It is impossible for the workers of _one_ country to
defeat their capitalists without the capitalists of the other countries
moving heaven and earth to come to the aid of their class comrades.
This is now made crystal clear by the international employers'
federations. Taking these causes and motives into account, the socialist
workers have come to understand that love for the fatherland is no
longer their slogan, and that they must take up the watchword of
workers international solidarity.

Technology, that is, the currently-attained stage of development of the
process of production, makes it necessary for the capitalists of each
country either to monopolize the colonial markets, or to obtain the
largest possible share of these markets for themselves.

Technology, that is, the currently-attained stage of development of the
process of production, makes it necessary for the workers of each
country to stand in opposition to this trend because war and
colonialism are always accompanied by an increase in the exploitation of
the proletariat.

Although all the capitalists are fighting among themselves over
markets, technology has reconciled their interests wherever it is
essential to oppress the workers.

Technology has organized the workers of every country and has showed
them that their interests are the same for all of them wherever it is a
matter of expressing the solidarity of all the workers.

Therefore, the owners are for war and oppression of the workers, the
workers are for international prosperity and international workers
unity.

The working class is therefore certainly not patriotic in the same way
as the bourgeoisie, that is, in the sense which has always been
attributed to this word under capitalism and which means: love only for
your own country; scorn, disdain or hatred for the foreign country.

Modern capitalism is exclusively patriotic out of greed. It does not
really consider patriotism to be a virtue, nor does it really think the
fatherland is sacred, since it definitely stole the fatherlands of the
inhabitants of Transvaal, the Philippines, India, the Dutch East
Indies, China, Morocco, etc. It imports Poles, Galicians, Croats and
Chinese in order to put pressure on the wages of its compatriots, who
are sons of the same fatherland.

It demands of the oppressed class a love for the fatherland which it
does not itself feel. The bourgeoisie's love of the fatherland is greed
and hypocrisy.

Such a love for the fatherland is undoubtedly totally foreign to the
socialist proletariat.

Basically, all love of the fatherland as it is understood by the
bourgeoisie is foreign to the worker.

Naturally, the worker wants to preserve his language, which is the only
one with which he can find work. But this is not the patriotism which
the bourgeoisie demands of him. The worker also loves the natural
surroundings, the climate and the air of his country, amidst which he
was raised since infancy. But this is not the patriotism which the
bourgeoisie requires of him, either. The patriotism which the
bourgeoisie wants to impose upon the worker is the patriotism thanks to
which the worker docilely allows himself to be used as an instrument of
war by the bourgeoisie and allows himself to be massacred by the
bourgeoisie when the latter is defending its profits, or is trying to
grab the profits of other capitalists or the property of unarmed
populations. This is bourgeois patriotism, and it is completely foreign
to the socialist workers. In the bourgeois sense of the word, the
worker has no fatherland.

Whenever international incidents break out the worker asks himself,
what is in the workers' interest, and this, and only this, determines
his judgment.

And since at this time the interest of the class of workers demands a
general preservation of peace, _the policy of the workers presents
itself as the means of protecting all nations_. If peace endures and
the working class comes to power in every country, then there is no
longer any possibility that one country will conquer another; next, it
would only be a matter of the progressive disappearance of borders and
disputes, by organic methods, without violence. Until that point is
reached, international social democracy assures the existence of every
nation.

And in those rare cases where the proletariat approves of a war -- to
destroy despotism, in Russia for example -- it will not be the
patriotism of the bourgeoisie that will be put to work, but the love of
the international proletariat.

The working class, which is blazing the trail to socialism, can calmly
oppose its goal to the chauvinist patriotism of the bourgeoisie, which
pursues filthy lucre, and its hypocritical pacifist farces: the
international unity of the workers and therefore of all men, eternal
peace for all peoples. The bourgeoisie's goal is limited, just as a
country or a little piece of land is limited in relation to the planet;
but it is also false and unattainable because the capitalist owners of
the countries fighting over the spoils will continue to fight among
themselves as long as there are spoils to be had. The goal of social
democracy is sublime, pure and resplendent, but it is also really
attainable; the working class cannot desire anything but peace among
the workers since peace is in their interest and is also the
precondition of their victory.

What a change in comparison with the past! The worker of the past
thought by slavishly following the lead of the limited ideas of his
masters; today's worker embraces the world, all of humanity, he is
independent of his masters and fights against them.

And the machine brought about this whole transformation; it is the
machine that is responsible, since it engendered and organized millions
of proletarians.

#### Observation

We have already discussed above the fact that the patriotism of the
working classes was in past times derived not from their interests, but
from the interests of the ruling classes, whose dependants they were.
And so it will always be: as long as a class does not have the power to
defend its most profound real interests, as long as the interest of
another class is in the last instance its own interest, its thought
will be largely determined by the thought of the ruling classes. The
patriotism of the past was a clear example of this, and still is in
many instances. "The ruling ideas of an era", Marx says, "have always
been the ideas of the ruling classes". But from the moment when the
oppressed class gets the chance, in a revolution for example, to display
its most profound interests, it shows its most profound spirit and
rejects the ideas which were imposed upon it by its rulers. And as a
class becomes stronger by degrees, in such a way that it can defend its
own interests, its world of feelings and thoughts are expressed in an
increasingly vigorous manner and, finally, openly and brazenly, without
false modesty.

Now we shall address the topic of the "higher" domains of morality. The
desire for improvement on the part of the worker, the desire for social
juridical equality with men on the part of the woman, and patriotism,
are only lower feelings in relation to disinterestedness, the love for
one's neighbor, devotion, loyalty, honesty, and justice.

These latter virtues pertain to the higher morality, they are morality
itself.

What are these virtues? Where do they come from? Are they eternal, have
they always lived in men's hearts, or are they just as mutable as all
the other mental phenomena we have discussed?

These questions have remained insoluble for man for centuries, since
the Greek philosopher Socrates and his contemporaries first posed them.

They also present a special difficulty.

For there is a voice in us which _immediately_ tells us, in many cases,
what is good and what is bad. Acts of love for one's neighbor and of
self-denial are spontaneously produced _on their own_, on the command
of this voice. It spontaneously and imperatively prescribes love of
truth, faithfulness, and probity for us. Our _conscience_ warns us when
we do not listen to this voice. We are _proud of ourselves_ when we have
done good deeds, even when no one is aware of them. _Moral law_ and the
precepts of _duty_ live in us, and neither education nor the feeling of
pleasure can fully explain them.

This imperative and spontaneous character is a specific trait of ethics
and morality. No other mental domain possesses such a character, not
the natural sciences, law, politics, religion or philosophy, which
everyone has to learn because it could not be otherwise.

Attempts have been made to derive moral law from the individual's own
experience, from his education, his habits, desire for happiness, a
refined egoism or sympathy for others. But no one has ever managed _in
this way_ to explain either the origin of _that which is imperious_ in
the voice which calls upon us to love our neighbor, or that which is
marvelous in the fact that a man could disregard his own existence to
save another's.

Since morality cannot be derived from experience, there is nothing left
but the habitual refuge of ignorance: religion. Since morality cannot
be explained by the earthly road, its origin must be sought in the
supernatural. God gave man the sense of the good, the notion of good;
evil comes from the carnal nature of man, from the material world, from
sin.

The incomprehensibility of the origin of "good and evil" is one of the
causes of religion. The philosophers Plato and Kant constructed a
supernatural world upon this fact. And even today, when nature is much
better understood, when the nature of society appears much more clearly
before man's eyes, even today morality, the desire "for good", the
aversion towards "evil", are in the end so marvelous for many men that
they can only explain it by a "divinity". How many men no longer need
God for an explanation of natural phenomena or history, but declare
that God is necessary for "the satisfaction of their ethical needs"? And
they are right because they understand neither the origin nor the nature
of the great moral precepts, and what is not understood but
nevertheless considered to be something very noble, is deified.

The noblest moral precepts have been understood, however, in regard to
both their nature and their effect, for half a century. We owe our
understanding of them to two investigators: the first studied man in
his animal existence, the other studied man in his social existence --
Darwin and Marx.

Darwin showed that all organisms carry out a struggle for existence
against the natural world around them, and that only those organisms
survive which acquire the most suitable specific organs for their
_defense_ and for their _nourishment_, and whose organs attain the best
_division of labor_, and are best adapted to the outside world. A large
part of the organic world, comprising the animals, has developed in the
struggle for existence and has by means of that struggle developed its
_freedom of movement_ and its _ability to learn_. The ability to learn
is composed of _observation_ of the details of the environment,
_discernment_ of what is similar and what is different in the
environment, and the _memory_ of what previously took place. By means
of the struggle for existence, the instincts of _self-preservation_ and
_reproduction_ have become increasingly more powerful, as have the
division of labor, freedom of movement and thought. This is how the
instinct of _maternal love_ evolved. _Among the animals that, in order
to prosecute the struggle for existence, must live together in
societies of greater or lesser size -- such as some carnivores, many
herbivores and, among the latter, the ruminants and many primates -- the
social instincts evolve. Man also belongs among these species; man, for
his part, has only been able to preserve his existence in nature by
social means, by living in groups or hordes, and this is also how the
social instincts have evolved in man_.

But which social instincts have formed in man and animals due to the
struggle for existence and have become stronger thanks to natural
selection? "They could be different due to the different living
conditions of the various species, but a series of instincts
constitutes the precondition for the development of _any_ society."
There are instincts without which a society cannot survive and therefore
these instincts _must_ be developed in every species which, _in order
to assure its continuation, must_ live socially, like man. What are
these instincts?

"Above all, _self-abnegation_, devotion to the community." If this
instinct had not arisen, each person would have lived for himself, and
would not have put the community above himself; society would have
perished under the blows of the natural forces of the environment or
hostile animals. If, for example, in a herd of buffalos, each
individual did not devote himself to the collective by resisting when a
tiger attacked the herd and taking his place in the circle of his
comrades, if every individual fled to save his own life without worrying
about the community, then that society would be destroyed. This is why
spontaneous self-sacrifice is the first social instinct which must arise
in such an animal species.

>"Then, _bravery_ in the defense of common interests; _loyalty_ to the
community; the individual's subjection to the will of the community and
thus obedience or _discipline_; truthfulness towards society, whose
safety would be endangered or whose forces would be squandered when led
into error, for example, by false signals. Finally, _ambition_,
receptivity to the praise or condemnation of society. All are social
instincts we already find in a developed state in animal societies,
often in a highly-developed state.

>"But these social instincts are nothing but the most eminent virtues,
morality itself. All that is lacking at the highest level among them is
love of justice, that is, the desire for equality. In fact, there is no
place for such an evolution in animal societies, because they only know
natural and individual inequalities, but not social inequalities
produced by social relations."

This love of justice, the desire for social equality, is therefore a
property found only in man [^fn-05].

Moral law is a product of the animal world; it already existed in man
when he was still a gregarious animal; it is very old, since it has
existed in man for as long as he has been a social being, that is, for
as long as he has existed.

Men have only been able to overcome nature by mutual aid. Men owe
everything to mutual aid, to this moral desire for mutual aid, to this
moral law, to this social instinct.

Moral law has spoken in them since the beginning.

>"Hence the mysterious nature of this voice in us which, without
external stimulus, is not connected to any visible interest ... It is
certainly a mysterious desire, but no more mysterious than physical
love, maternal love, the instinct of self-preservation, the nature of
the organism and so many other things ... which no one would consider
to be products of a supersensory world."

>"Moral law is an animal instinct just like the instincts of
self-preservation and reproduction, hence its force, its energy, which
we obey without thinking, hence our rapid decision in certain cases
where it is a matter of knowing whether an action is right or wrong,
virtuous or immoral, hence the determination and the energy of our
moral judgment, hence the difficulty in providing a basis for it when
reason begins to analyze actions and question their motives."

Now we clearly see the nature of _duty_, we see what _conscience_ is.
It is the voice of the social instincts calling us. And among these
social instincts, at the same time the voices of the instincts of
self-preservation and of reproduction also echo, and it often happens
then that these two instincts enter into conflict with the voice of the
social instinct. When, afterwards, the instincts of reproduction and
self-preservation become silent because they are satisfied, then the
social instinct often still resounds, but this time as _remorse_.

>"There is nothing more mistaken than to see in conscience the voice of
the fear of one's peers, their opinion or their physical force. This
voice also acts -- as we said above -- in relation to actions which no
one has experienced, and even in connection with actions which appear
quite praiseworthy in their surroundings, and can also act as the agent
of repulsion in relation to actions which have been undertaken out of
fear of one's peers and their public opinion. Public opinion, praise or
blame, are certainly very influential factors, but their effect already
presupposes a particular social instinct, _ambition_; they cannot
produce social instincts."

One can thus see how easy it is to explain this apparently so marvelous
domain of the mind, which embraces the highest precepts of morality,
how false it is to resort to the supernatural to do so, and how clear it
is that the causes of morality are to be found in our earthly animal
and human existence.

This, then, is the _nature_ of morality; this understanding we owe most
of all to Darwin. But why are the great virtues so different among the
different peoples and eras? How can these social instincts have such
different _effects_ in each case?

Darwin did not examine this question. We owe our knowledge of this
matter above all to Marx.

It was Marx who discovered the principal causes of the _change_ in the
effects of the social instincts with reference to the centuries of
written history, the era of private property, and the era of commodity
production.

Marx made it clear that, due to private property which, in turn, is a
product of the development of technology, of the increasing division of
labor thanks to which manual labor has been separated from agriculture,
_classes_ were born, those of the owners and those of the non-owners,
whose members have, from the origins of classes down to the present,
waged a struggle among themselves for the products and the means of
production. Marx has demonstrated that, from non-stop technological
development a non-stop struggle is born. He thereby identified the
causes, the most important ones for the modern era, of the changes in
the _effect_ of moral precepts.

First of all, competition arises among the private owners, even if they
belong to the same class. And this rivalry has a deadly effect on the
highest moral precept, the one that states that one must help one's
neighbor, that is, that an individual must sacrifice himself for
another. This precept becomes a dead letter in a society which rests
upon competition. In such a society, the precept becomes an abstract
precept of other-worldly, exclusively heavenly origin, which is
delightfully beautiful but which is not followed, and, strictly
speaking, is only for Sunday, when shops and factories are closed and
only the church is open. It is not _possible_ to accept the market, a
position in the firm, work, engaging in competition, and at the same
time to obey the internal voice which has been whispering to us since
prehistoric times that we must help our neighbor, since two are
stronger than one. It is impossible, and any doctrine that says that it
can and must be this way leads to hypocrisy.

In his analysis of the commodity and of capitalist production, Marx
discovered that the character of those men who produce their products
as commodities in isolation from one another must necessarily be
hostile and alienated, as a result of relations not between men, but
between things, bolts of cloth, sacks of coffee, tons of minerals,
mountains of gold; Marx thus shows us the true relation prevailing among
men, the real relation and not the one that exists in the poet's
imagination or the priest's homilies.

Secondly, however, technological development and the division of labor
created human groups whose members, although often competing with one
another, nonetheless have the same interests in opposition to other
groups: social classes. Landowners as opposed to industrialists, and
employers as opposed to workers, have the same interests. Although they
may inflict mutual harm upon one another on the market, all the
landowners have the same interest in the struggle for the tariff laws
on grain, all the industrialists have the same interest in the struggle
for protectionist legislation in favor of industrial products, and all
the business owners have the same interest in opposition to progressive
social legislation for the workers.

_Therefore_, the class struggle in reality is fatal to a good part of
morality, since the moral precept cannot apply to a class which is
trying to destroy or weaken our class, and since that class is capable
of experiencing neither support for nor loyalty to our class. Within
the domains of the class struggle, there can be no question of any
moral precepts whatsoever except within a class; the highest moral
precept is just as inapplicable to another class as it is towards the
enemy in war. Just as no one ever thinks of sacrificing himself for the
enemy during wartime, so it would never occur to anybody to help a
member of enemy class. Just as it is true that among certain animal
species the moral precept only applies to the members of the same herd,
so amongst the primitive lineages of humanity it only applied to the
members of the tribe, so too in class society it only applies to class
comrades, and this only to the extent allowed by competition.

As a result of technological progress and the accumulation of vast
wealth on the one side, and legions of propertyless proletarians on the
other side, the class struggle between owners and non-owners,
capitalists and workers, is becoming increasingly more acute and
violent in our era. These days, then, as time passes, it becomes less
and less possible for the classes to mutually observe the highest moral
precepts. The _other_ great instincts, however, self-preservation and
the reproduction of the species, have far and away taken the lead ahead
of the ancient social virtues. The instinct of self-preservation leads
the capitalist classes to an ever more obdurate denial of providing the
workers with what is necessary. They sense that, in a not-too-distant
future, they will have to yield everything, all their possessions, all
their power, and, out of fear of giving even one inch in that
direction, they are increasingly less disposed to yield anything at all.
Nor does the worker feel love for his neighbor in regard to the
capitalist, since the instincts of self-preservation and love for his
children drive him to attack the capitalists and thereby win a
magnificent and happy future.

Technological development, the expansion of social wealth and the
ongoing progress in the division of labor have advanced so far, and the
owning and non-owning classes have become so distanced from one
another, that the class struggle "has been transformed into the
essential, the most general and the most long-lasting form of the
struggle for existence of the individuals in society."

With increasing competition, our social feeling, our feelings with
respect to the members of our society, that is, our morality, is in
decline. With the class struggle, our social feelings towards the
members of the other classes, that is, our morality with respect to
them, is undergoing the same degree of attenuation, but with respect to
the members of our own class it has become much stronger.

For the class struggle has already reached such a point that, for the
members of the most important classes, the good of their class has
become identical with the public good, with the good of all of society.
In the name of the public good, one only relies upon one's class
comrades and one resolutely prosecutes the struggle against the other
classes.

If, therefore, the _nature_ of the highest morality consists of
self-denial, bravery, loyalty, discipline, attachment to the truth, a
sense of fairness and the aspiration to respect and glorify one's
neighbor, the _effect_ of these virtues or instincts is continually
transformed due to property, war, competition and class struggle.

In order to make this as clear as possible, we shall now apply what we
learned from Darwin and Marx to a particular example, from our own
immediate environment.

Let us imagine a business owner, the owner of a factory which he also
manages, who is engaged in fierce competition with his class
colleagues. Can this man follow the highest precepts of morality, those
precepts which, according to the bourgeoisie, are eternal, with respect
to his class colleagues, the owners of the competing factories? No, he
must attempt to preserve or expand his own market share. He can do this
by fair or foul means, but he _must_ do this. Perhaps he is by nature a
person with a highly-developed social sense, but he does not pay
attention to this sense, because his instinct of self-preservation and
his concern for his offspring will overwhelm this social sense. In
competition, it is often of vital importance to preserve one's market
share, and to get more customers. Stagnation amounts to decline.

As competition becomes more acute, that is, as technology and the world
market continue to develop, this manufacturer will have less social
feeling, he will more obsessively think about self-preservation, that
is, the greatest possible profit. The more acute the competition, the
greater the danger of failure.

Can this manufacturer follow the highest precepts of morality with
respect to his workers? The question is ridiculous. Even if he is a
good man by nature, even if he has an especially strong feeling for
those who suffer, he will nonetheless be obliged to give his workers a
low enough wage to ensure that his factory will produce a big profit for
him. No profit, or a small profit, signifies stagnation. The business
must grow, now and then it must be modernized; if not, in a few years it
will fall behind the other businesses and, after ten years, it will not
be competitive. It is therefore necessary to engage in exploitation,
and even the gentlest measures, the most favorable for the workers,
must also be such that in the end they do not harm the product, profit.
We are considering the case of a capitalist who still feels something
for his personnel; most are not like that; for most of them, social
feeling was killed long ago by the quest for profit, and those who
employ more favorable methods also often do so out of guile, out of a
well-considered personal interest, in order to chain the workers all
the more firmly to the factory and to make them into slaves who will
produce even more.

Let us now suppose that the _class_ of workers begins to struggle
against this capitalist and his class, that trade unions are formed and
strikes break out, that one or another demand is more or less violently
asserted; then all social feeling will slowly disappear in this
capitalist and his class with regard to those among their
contemporaries who constitute the personnel of their businesses; then
_class hatred_ towards the workers will be awakened in them and,
wherever there is a struggle with the workers (that is, outside of the
ongoing competition), class solidarity with the other capitalists will
develop.

And this is also subject to change; this spiritual atmosphere becomes
denser as technological development proceeds and as the violence of the
class struggle simultaneously increases.

Let us suppose that this manufacturer becomes a member of a syndicate,
a trust or a cartel. This is what he often _must_ do for purposes of
self-preservation. Then he assumes the role of despot over his workers
who, because his trust has a monopoly, can only find work in that trust
and are as a result totally dependent upon it. This capitalist then
proceeds to treat his workers in the manner required by his syndicate.
When a restriction of production is necessary, the slave is thrown out
of work; if circumstances are more favorable, he is called back to the
factory; it is not generosity, or love of one's neighbor, but the world
market which decides. As we write this, we are witnessing what may be
an unprecedented mass layoff of workers. The American trusts are
throwing them onto the streets by the hundreds of thousands. And things
are no better for the workers in Europe. In most of these capitalists, a
social feeling towards the workers no longer exists.

Now let us take as a second example a politician to whom the capitalist
classes have confided the advocacy of their interests in a legislative
assembly. Can this person follow the loftiest, allegedly eternal
morality with respect to the working class? No, not even if he wanted
to do so. For equity, that is, the aspiration to give everyone equal
rights, is a moral precept of the highest order. But the capitalist
class would perish as such if it were to give equal rights to the
workers. Equal rights means, first of all, equal political rights and,
secondly, the common ownership of the land and the means of production.
As long as the latter does not prevail, there is no higher law, there
is no supreme justice. Could a bourgeois politician achieve such a
goal? No, because to do so would be class suicide. He must refuse.

The more passionate the class struggle becomes as a result of
technological development, the more numerous, powerful and organized
the workers become, the more clearly the possibility of their rule
appears, the more determined must the bourgeois politician be to refuse
to do anything meaningful on behalf of the workers. The bourgeois
politicians must silence their social feeling for the workers and only
listen to the voice of self-preservation. Just as it is for the
individual capitalist, it is a question of life and death for the whole
class.

But as social feeling towards the workers disappears, a feeling of
solidarity with the other owning classes is born in the bourgeois
politician -- we assume he is a representative of one of the owning
classes -- while struggle and competition prevail with respect to them
in other domains.

And this class hatred, as well as this class love, becomes stronger in
the politician as the contrast between the owning and non-owning
classes becomes more striking, due to technology.

This explains why politicians who, prior to their engagement in
practical politics -- in an opposition party, for example, or in a
young bourgeois party -- were full of social feeling for the workers,
lose this feeling from the very moment that they have to carry out the
practical struggle against the workers. Practice kills this feeling and
replaces it with the class solidarity of the owners. Kuyper [^fn-06] in
Holland, and Millerand, Briand and Clemenceau in France, are
outstanding examples of this phenomenon [^fn-07].

Now let us take a worker as our third example.

Can he obey the noble precept of generosity in relation to his
employer, to the latter's class and State? No, because he would work
himself to death, his wife and children would die of poverty. Poverty,
illness and unemployment would ruin him, him and his class. Against this
outcome the powerful instincts of self-preservation and the survival of
the species both rebel, together with all the most implacable sentiments
which are closely related to those instincts, love for his children and
his parents. He must not sacrifice himself for the capitalist or the
State, since if he allows either untrammeled rule, they would destroy
him; they would condemn him to slavery and premature death. History
teaches that if the workers do not fight for a better life, the
capitalist class will push them to a point where they will be incapable
of life or death, and where even the slightest improvements will cost
years of efforts. The existence of the workers is often so miserable;
unemployment, female and child labor, illness, and competition among the
workers are often so unendurable; their lives are so deprived of all
spiritual and physical pleasures whose satisfaction would nonetheless be
so easy, that surrender to the capitalist class and its State means
nothing but the downfall of the worker from that narrow ledge he
occupies, a fall to his death. This is why the worker behaves in a
manner contrary to the highest moral law with respect to the capitalist
class (the law which Christians express as follows: love your neighbor
as yourself): he commits himself to the struggle against the ruling
class.

And the greater the resistance of the capitalists due to technological
development, the stronger their organization in employers'
associations, trusts and political parties, the weaker the social
instinct towards the capitalist class becomes in the hearts of the
workers; just as, in the capitalist class, this instinct is transformed
into class hatred.

Let us proceed to imagine that this worker has come to understand class
and production relations so profoundly that he becomes a socialist; his
higher moral instincts will then become increasingly passionate with
regard to the class of non-owners and will grow to the same degree that
they will diminish with respect to the capitalists and their society.
If he is a man who is gifted by nature with elevated moral sentiments,
the latter will be strengthened by the understanding that he and his
children, and all his comrades, will only attain happiness if all of
them, and he as well, will mutually listen to the voice which calls to
loyalty, love of truth, bravery, self-sacrifice and justice.

And as the misfortune of the class deepens, that is, as a result of
technological development, the greater is the workers' need for a
socialist society and the more widespread the owners' resistance to
such an outcome, the more the workers' solidarity will grow, the more
forcefully will morality speak in the proletariat, the more the
proletariat will pay heed to that voice. And therefore the effect of
morality will undergo continuous changes in this instance as well.

Finally, let us suppose the case of a worker who has so expanded the
scope of his intellectual development that he feels quite distinctly
the happiness which the communist society will bring to all men, the
misery which it shall cause to disappear; he will then discover, through
his hatred of the owners and his solidarity with the non-owners, a path
for his highly elevated moral sentiment. He feels that only when the
workers are victorious and realize communist society will moral _law_ be
capable of being applied by us _towards all men_. This is why, in his
aspiration and that of his class, to abolish private property,
competition and the class struggle, he feels in the bottom of his heart
something, even if it is only the first glimmer of dawn, of the moral
law that will apply to _all_ men. If socialist society is a blessing for
the whole world, then the aspiration to hasten its arrival will also
already contain something of the universal love for humanity that
extends to every nation [^fn-08].

With these examples, which are known by every worker from his immediate
experience in real life, it becomes absolutely clear that the effect,
the content and the mode of existence of our allegedly supreme and
eternal morality is modified in our heads and our hearts in response to
the changes which take place in the class struggle, in class relations,
that is, in the relations of production and therefore, ultimately, in
production and technology. The highest morality is therefore not
immutable; it is alive, that is, it changes.

#### Objection

We have already mentioned the fervor with which the adversaries of
social democracy seized upon the contention of Henriette Roland-Holst
that the conceptions of good and evil "are a game of musical chairs".
What our comrade meant by this expression is that, just as children
change places in the game of "musical chairs", so also do the
conceptions of good and evil not always apply to the same acts, and
that today one finds "good" in the chair where "evil" used to be.

We have now _demonstrated_ with the most comprehensive examples that
this judgment is correct. The new female virtues, the new workers'
virtues, patriotism, international feeling, are changing: what was good
has become evil, and vice-versa.

Our adversaries cry out at us: there is an eternal and unchanging
morality; its supreme precepts are always the same.

We respond: prove it. Not with exclamations and rhetoric, not with an
authoritarian arrogance or with spectacular judgments of condemnation,
but historically, with facts that the whole world can see and examine.

They cannot.

We, however, have demonstrated, with the support of Darwin and Kautsky,
that, first of all, there exists in man a tendency to help his fellow
man, a moral precept of purely earthly, and even animal origin, but
that, on the other hand, the expression of this moral law is always
different due to the struggle over property, competition and the class
struggle, and that moral law when applied to class comrades has a
completely different content than when applied to class enemies.

The whole world knows this is true; anyone can observe this every day
with respect to themselves and others. We have, then, opposed _vain
assertions_ with _realities_.

It clearly emerges from our proofs that, against the enemy, whether the
enemy of the tribe, the nation or the class, the highest precepts of
morality do not apply; that, to the contrary, the morality which orders
us to help our comrades, simultaneously obliges us to destroy the enemy
who torments them; and therefore that the precepts of self-sacrifice,
solidarity, honesty and loyalty are _not_ applicable to the class enemy.

Our adversaries are also shocked that we should actually _say_ this,
and this is why they _insult_ us. But we can again tranquilly draw
attention to the fact that they themselves, the conservatives, the
liberals, the supporters of the religious parties and the democrats,
constantly act in precisely the same way. For day after day, year after
year, they deny the absolute necessities of life to the enemies of
_their_ class, the workers; they sacrifice nothing of what their class
possesses, beyond what is snatched from their grasp by fear of the
workers' power; they do not show the least solidarity with the workers
but throw them in chains when they try to mobilize and take disciplinary
measures against them as in the case of the Dutch rail strike; they are
neither honest with nor loyal to them, but in the elections they
regularly make promises to them which they do not fulfill. And in the
meantime they are preaching love for one's neighbor, for all neighbors!

We, on the other hand, know from history that whenever someone wanted
to help his class or his people, the highest precepts of morality have
_never_ applied to the enemy, and we frankly confess that we shall be
neither altruistic nor loyal, nor honest in our dealings with the enemy
class when the salvation of our class requires it [^fn-09].

Against these observations, it might be objected that, even so, all
human feeling is not totally squelched in the class struggle; if, in
war, despite the desire to destroy the enemy, the precepts of morality
have a certain validity, prisoners are not killed, agreements are
abided by and promises are kept, this is all the more true for the
class struggle where the adversaries are much closer to one another!

This observation is perfectly just, but does not constitute an
objection to our observations. For we make it perfectly clear that the
precepts of morality as applied to the enemy are only jettisoned _when
the true salvation of the class demands it_. Human feeling is not
universally suppressed in the class struggle, but only when a class
judges that such a course is unavoidable for the purpose of preserving
its existence. If it is not necessary, the workers are not killed by the
capitalist power; if it is necessary, they are killed. In the Prussian
mines, they do not employ labor inspectors, because it is feared that
then the great masses of miners would become politically and
economically too powerful. In 1903, they simply allowed the Dutch rail
workers to starve to death, but in 1871 the fighters of the Commune were
subjected to mass killings because the bourgeoisie judged that it was
necessary for its power to sow a great deal of fear among the
proletariat.

The worker, on the other hand, will not lie to or deceive his employer
if possible. Generally, it is not in his class interests to deceive
him. But where his class interest requires the violation of moral
precepts, he will violate them.

But it is precisely in regard to this point that objections will be put
forth by the social democrats themselves, by workers in the midst of
struggle. They acknowledge that the capitalists are constantly
violating moral precepts in the class struggle, that they act in bad
faith, falsely, insincerely and brutally against the oppressed class in
order to preserve its oppression. But socialism signifies precisely a
higher morality; the fighting workers do not need such means, and when
they do on occasion employ them we must hold them accountable for it.

In this objection there is only one correct point, and that is that the
working class is much less obliged than the ruling class to violate
moral precepts; this is based on its situation as a weak and oppressed
class which rises thanks to economic development, while the ruling
classes try in vain to stay in power. But in its generality, this
observation is nothing but one more proof that one can always easily
detect the violation of morality by one's class enemy, but it is very
hard to discern such violations by one's own class. Some examples will
show us -- if we want to clearly face up to the truth -- that we do not
condemn violations of moral precepts when they are undertaken
_essentially_ in the interest of our class, but, on the contrary, we
celebrate them as noble deeds.

Let us imagine a factory that pays low wages, and a trade union that
wants to struggle for higher wages. Let us suppose that this can only
be achieved by means of an unannounced strike. A few days before the
strike is scheduled to begin, when everything is ready, the owner of
the factory notices something; he approaches a worker and asks him if
something is afoot. If the worker responds evasively, the manufacturer
will immediately understand what is going on and will call for
strikebreakers. For this reason the worker _lies_; he denies that
anything is going on and says he knows nothing. In the eyes of the
manufacturer he is evil, but in the eyes of the workers he is good.
Such cases are common. It can be a good thing to lie.

Let us imagine an office employee in a government ministry, and let us
assume he is a social democrat. A proposal that constitutes a threat to
his class comes into his hands. He _steals_ it and conveys it to the
_VorwÃ¤rts_ editorial office. We consider this to be a praiseworthy act.
Dishonesty with respect to the enemy class can therefore be a virtue in
the eyes of your own class.

In 1903, many of Holland's rail workers came to an agreement to stop
rail traffic after a particular signal was given. This was an act of
disloyalty to the railroad companies. For us, however, it was an act of
the most elevated kind of loyalty.

After the Dutch rail strike, a parliamentary commission was appointed
to investigate the situation of the railroads and it discovered the
horrible conditions prevailing in that industry. But its report was
kept secret and the government did not feel obliged to intervene using
legal methods. Some office employee or functionary, or perhaps a printer
who acquired a copy of this report, gave a copy of it to the secretary
of the rail workers union, and the union secretary publicized the
contents of the report in speeches and numerous meetings. At that time
no worker, no social democrat, disapproved of this act; everyone felt
that loyalty to one's own class was more important than loyalty to the
capitalists.

How many more examples do we need to contrast our truth with
hypocritical bourgeois morality! One more: the workers of the Commune
did not hesitate to fight the reactionary classes with their weapons.
This was a crime in the eyes of the enemy, the greatest courage and
self-sacrifice in our eyes. Much the same can be said for our comrades,
the combatants of the Russian revolution.

On the other hand, one could proffer numerous examples of how our
adversaries infringe upon moral precepts in the class struggle. We
repeat: all classes conduct themselves in the class struggle in
accordance with a custom which stands in contradiction with the
universal morality preached by the bourgeoisie. The capitalist classes
are constantly lying to, cheating and robbing the working class; they
do these things in their capacity as ruling elements, and it is for
this reason even more serious; they must do this, because their social
system is based upon such conduct. But the working class is also often
obliged to be disloyal, insincere, etc., in the class struggle [^fn-10].

Here it is necessary to insert one more observation to make ourselves
perfectly clear. We have shown that all classes use bad faith as a
means in the class struggle and that they consider this to be moral. But
the owning class is obliged by its situation to employ the lie much
more often than the working class as a method of struggle. This is true
not only in regard to the everyday struggle, but also and above all in
connection with scientific truth concerning society itself.

The capitalist class is in decline, the working class is on the rise;
this is how the process of production wants it to be. But the
acknowledgment of this fact would be, for the bourgeoisie, one part of
the decline which it denies is taking place. This is why it hates all
the truths which refer to this aspect of its decline, and tries to
combat them wherever it still holds sway. But since the process of
production moves inexorably forward, this is not possible except by
means of lies. Out of class interest, it instinctively seeks out the
lie and in the best cases it actually believes it to be the truth. The
working class, on the other hand, has an interest in the truth in all
domains of society. It advances thanks to social forces; it therefore
wants to understand them; this knowledge is beneficial for it because
it becomes a new force for its advancement.

Everything that affects the domain of the class struggle is for us an
object of honest study in search of the truth. We do not fear clear
understanding because our victory is becoming all the more certain.

Therefore, we do not always speak the truth; in the struggle, we must
sometimes be -- our examples have proven this -- insincere with respect
to the adversary; but we always seek _the scientific truth concerning
society_, we never conceal it. We also do this out of class interest.

This is a major difference between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

Here, too, the worker must decide for himself which side he wants to be
on, that of the capitalists or that of the socialists.

There is, however, yet one more thing that requires clarification, and
this will allow us to put this difficult point behind us.

The attentive reader might ask: if the same highly ideal morality does
not float before the eyes of all men, and if morality is not eternal
and does not always take the same form, then is the _ideal_ of
equality, universal love of one's neighbor, happiness and justice really
the same for the whole world?

Marxism responds as follows: it is so only in appearance; one always
finds the same words in human history: liberty, equality, justice,
fraternity. It seems, then, that the ideal is always the same.

But upon closer examination, it is clear that the cause of this
appearance resides in the fact that, since the advent of class society,
_all_ ruling classes have always preserved enslavement, inequality and
injustice, and _all_ the dominated and oppressed classes, from the
moment that they became aware of this and began to flex their muscles,
have demanded justice, liberty and equality. Since there has always
been oppression, there has always been a sense of liberty and equality.
But if we look behind the slogans, behind the words, we find that the
liberty and the equality proclaimed by some people was completely
unlike the liberty and the equality proclaimed by others, and that the
difference derived from the class and production relations within which
the various oppressed peoples lived. We have already proven this above
thanks to the examples of Christianity, the French Revolution and
social democracy, and therefore need not undertake to provide further
proofs.

The moral ideal is also different for different eras and classes. It
lives and evolves like all ideas. _All_ morality is, then, like
politics, law and other mental products, a _natural_ phenomenon which
we understand quite well and which we can trace in its evolution.

#### Observation

Morality is not a spiritual domain completely separate from all others.
Man is not partly a political being, partly a juridical being, and
then, categorized separately, a moral being and, in yet another part, a
religious being. Man is a whole which we split into different parts
solely for the purpose of _understanding him better_, so as to more
clearly understand each part considered separately. In reality,
political, moral, juridical and religious conceptions are intimately
interwoven and all of them together comprise _a single_ spiritual
content. For us, then, it is not surprising that they mutually
_influence_ one another. Once a political conviction takes shape, it
has its own power and it influences juridical conceptions and moral
sentiments; once moral sentiments are formed, they have a retroactive
effect on political as well as other convictions.

We shall prove this with an example.

As everyone knows, the misery caused by the capitalist system leads
many people to abuse alcohol. But capitalism compels the destitute to
_organize_ and struggle and thereby creates in them the following kinds
of morality: sentiments of solidarity, a greater power of moral
resistance, bravery, pride, etc. This morality, these social instincts,
lead to abstinence or temperance, and the latter qualities have the
effect of making political convictions more clear and the political
force of the destitute much greater. Morality has therefore exercised
influence on knowledge, thought, ideas concerning legal rights,
property and class struggle.

It is, however, no less correct to maintain that changes in morality
derive from the development of the forces of production -- for without
the latter, the former would never have led to organization and
consciousness of its own power -- but there is a reactive force among
all these spiritual domains which, as a result of their all being
rooted in social labor, all influence one another mutually.

Our adversaries often attempt to refute our positions by saying that
they call attention to the influence of spiritual causes, religion,
morality and science. Social democracy must not allow itself to fall
into error as a result of this objection. It will grant a high degree
of recognition to the _influence_ of intellectual forces -- otherwise,
why would it stir up people's minds so much if it did not believe such
activity to be of any use? -- but it will also examine how this
intellectual force has been put into motion prior to its exercising
this influence. And then it will discover that the development of
production and of the relations of production is the ultimate cause of
its being put into motion.

### F. Religion and Philosophy

Every religion -- there were and there are thousands of kinds of
religions -- every religious sect, considers itself to be the true
religion. Nothing, however, is more dependent upon the evolution of
technology, nothing is changed more by the latter than religion. We
shall demonstrate this by means of a brief account.

When technology did not yet dominate the forces of nature and, to the
contrary, _nature_ almost totally dominated man, when the latter still
used only what he found in nature as tools and was only capable at
first of manufacturing a few such tools, he worshipped the _forces of
nature_, the sun, the sky, lightning, fire, mountains, trees, rivers and
animals, as a function of the importance conceded to these factors by
the tribe. The same is still true among the so-called primitive peoples:
the inhabitants of New Guinea, which the Dutch are currently colonizing
on behalf of the capitalists, worship the starchy pith of the sago palm
tree as their god; they believe they are the descendants of this
material.

But after the development of technology, after the invention of
agriculture, after the warriors and priests seized power and property,
after the appearance of rulers and ruled and therefore of classes,
after man was no longer completely subject to nature, but to _man_, _and
above all to men of higher status_, since man has exercised power, the
true nature gods disappeared and were transformed into imaginary
creatures in the form of powerful _men_. The divine forms found in the
works of the ancient Greek poet Homer are powerful princes and
princesses, the prince being deified bravery, the princess being deified
prudence, beauty or love. The nature gods became magnificent men.
Technology gave power to men, the gods became powerful men.

But when the Greeks, as a result of their technology, which continually
improved, had covered their country with trade routes, the sea with
fleets and, especially, the coasts with cities, when trade and industry
prospered, when, in short, commodity society was born, in which
everything, land, products, tools, ships and carts, became commodities
destined for trade, then neither sun, or fire, or mountain or tree was
marvelous or the most important of all, all-powerful or mysteriously
divine for this society anymore; nature was now too much within its
power for such views. During that era, it was no longer human strength
or skill, bravery or beauty, as in Homeric times; these physical
characteristics no longer possessed their former importance in a
society which rested on competition. Something else, however, appeared
in this society as more important than anything else, dominating
everything, the most marvelous of all, and so it was for Greek society.
_This was the mind, the human mind_.

In commodity society, the mind is the most important factor. It counts,
it invents, it measures and weighs, sells, makes a profit, subjects,
dominates men and things. In commodity society, the mind is at the
center of life, like the starchy pith of the sago palm tree among the
Papuans and like beauty and strength in Homer. It is what expresses
power.

The first great philosophers of Greek commodity society, Socrates and
Plato, often said that what interested them was not nature, but only
the phenomena of thought and the soul.

This step is a clear consequence of the technological development which
created commodity society.

There were strange phenomena in the human mind which were not
understood. What were the universal ideas found in the mind, where did
they come from? What was the magnificent force in thought which
operated with such ease and so prodigiously with these universal ideas?
Where did it come from?

It could not have come from the earth, because only particular things
are found on the earth, but not universal ones. And what were the moral
sentiments, those conceptions of good and evil which are found in the
human mind but which are so difficult to apply in commodity society?
For what is good for one person is bad for another: the death of one is
bread for the other, and the advantage of one private person often
means harm for the community.

All of these things constituted enigmas which, for the great thinkers
like Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, Zeno and so many others, were
insoluble in other times, which could not be explained by nature and
experience and which had to lead to the assertion that the mind was of
divine origin.

The social instincts and sentiments are so important for men that, when
they are shattered by commodity society, men need to undertake an
investigation to find out where they come from and how they can be
recreated. They are also so vigorous, so splendid and so sublime, that
acting in accordance with them provides such pleasure and such an
increase in strength that when it becomes possible to do so, their
magnificence receives an ideal splendor and it seems that they must
necessarily come from another, superior world.

In order to explain them, a heaven full of gods, such as was the case
with the numerous natural phenomena, was no longer necessary; one god
was enough. And since "good and evil" are mental concepts, this god is
easy to represent as mind.

In commodity society, intellectual labor dominates manual labor.
Management, the administration of the business and the State, are the
affair of the intellectual laborer; the artisan, when he is not a
slave, is of lower rank. This also led people to see the divine in the
mind, and to consider god as a mind.

To this was added the fact that, in the commodity-producing society,
every man becomes an individual who is in competition with the others.
Every man thus becomes the most important object for himself and --
since he feels, reflects and ascertains everything in his mind -- his
mind becomes the most important part of this object. This was most
conducive to making the men of this society perfectly fitted to
consider the mind as divine and god as an individual mind which exists
by itself.

Technology had led man so far that he no longer deified a bull, a cat,
or an ibis, a tree or a human physical attribute, but not so far that
he was capable of understanding the nature of thought and the
conceptions of "good" and "evil". This is why, in the past, this mental
and moral complex which was all-powerful yet incomprehensible in that
society was declared to be divine. And this has remained unchanged in
commodity society up to the present day. "God is a spirit", is still
said today, and most moral conceptions even today have a supernatural
origin.

As long as the known world of the ancients was not yet _a single_
economic and political whole, that is, _one_ big commodity society,
there was naturally room within it for various gods, and also for the
gods of nature. But when the world trade of the Greeks, first of all,
and later Alexander of Macedon and finally the Romans, had created a
world empire which produced commodities throughout the entire
Mediterranean basin, _one_ spiritual god was enough, _one_ divine
spirit, to explain the whole known world and all the hardships within
it, and to cause the nature gods to disappear from it. The Roman
technology which penetrated everywhere, Roman trade and circulation,
the Roman commodity society, universally repelled the nature gods. And
so, too, was the system with only one god, monotheism, discovered in the
two philosophical conceptions which had previously been imposed on the
great world empire, in the doctrine of Plato and in Stoicism.

And when _one_ particular kind of monotheism penetrated into this zone,
one that was specifically suited to the gigantic scale of the general
economic collapse, and to the social relations of the Roman Empire in
the era of the Caesars, Christian monotheism, it everywhere discovered
a fertile field and only had to integrate Greek monotheism as one
element within it.

The whole society of the Mediterranean basin had become _one_
commodity-producing society that everywhere presented the same
mysteries and contradictions, and everywhere exhibited identical
individuals who produced commodities. Everywhere the spirit was what was
powerful, marvelous and mysterious. Everywhere, the spirit was God.

And as primitive foreign peoples, such as the Welsh and the Germans,
were integrated into the commodity society, they, too, gradually lost
their original religions and also became ripe for Christianity, which
attributed all power to _one_ God [^fn-11].

But the Christian religion did not remain the same as it was during its
first few centuries. From a religion for one class only, it became the
religion of all classes, when production regressed to the state of
natural economy and thus when the great community of production for
which _one_ god and _one_ spirit was sufficient to explain the universe
had decomposed into a mass of small separate units of production. As
medieval society developed, the content of religion was also
transformed. Medieval society was the society of landed property, in
which men became progressively bound to one another by ties of
dependence and in which those who were dependent did not sell the
surplus product of their manual labor but gave it to their lords. The
serfs and those who were subject to personal service delivered the
products of nature to their noble and religious lords. At the head of
secular society was the Emperor, under him the princes, under them the
feudal lords, under them the petty nobility, and under the nobles the
great mass of serfs and persons subject to personal services. In the
Church, which also owned vast landed estates, similar relations
prevailed. The Church had evolved from the ancient impoverished
community which consumed in a communist manner, to an enormous
institution of exploitation. At its head was the Pope, and under him
the most diverse kinds of great religious lords, who were in various
grades of dependence upon one another, cardinals, archbishops, bishops,
abbots and abbesses, and then the lower grades of the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, the monks and the nuns of all kinds, and finally the vast
mass of the people, the community. Together, the religious and secular
powers formed _one_ great hierarchical society which rested primarily on
the supply of the products of nature by the oppressed. And the Christian
religion had been transformed _into the image of this society_, with
_this mode of production_. It was no longer _one_ god which inhabited
heaven, but a whole population of spiritual powers. God thundered above
all, existing only as _one_ with his son and the Holy Spirit,
penetrating and enveloping everything. Under him, in various grades,
there were many kinds of angels with diverse functions, and also fallen
angels or demons, which had to be busy with evil. Then there were the
saints who, as society rested for the most part on the delivery of
products of nature and not on commodities, and since society depended on
nature (on the weather, for example), were also turned into a new class
of subordinate nature gods, all of whom also had their own functions:
one saint for vintners, one for the hay, one saint who came to the aid
of women in childbirth, etc. God was, consequently, with all these
people around him, an image of the emperor or the Pope with the secular
or religious powers they wielded. And under all these angels and saints
were men, alive and dead: an image of the earthly communities and the
earthly population. The relations of production and landed property,
the personal dependence of the princes, the nobles, the bishops, the
abbots, the serfs and the people, were represented by the ruling classes
simply as the result, the creation of precisely a heavenly society
which, to speak truly, was incomprehensible but which, precisely as a
result of its divine essence, did not need to be understood. And the
naive believers accepted this representation in their desire to
understand society, the mysterious humanity as well as "good" and
"evil".

Never, in any era we know of, has religion so clearly been a reflection
of society. The spirit created a heavenly image of earthly society.

This changed when cities began to get bigger.

The burghers of the cities of Italy, southern Germany, the Hanseatic
League, France, Flanders and the Netherlands became powerful and
_independent_ thanks to trade and industry. They freed themselves from
the oppressive bonds which had been imposed upon them by the nobility.

The possession of capital, which belonged to them alone, with which
they could do as they pleased, transformed them into free and
autonomous _individuals_, no longer dependent upon the favor of a lord.
_This placed them in a different kind of relation to society_ than was
the case with the serf class, from which many of them had issued, and it
was also unlike that of the nobles or the clergy.

As they were conscious of their different relation to society, they
also felt a different sort of relation to the world. This called for a
new religion, because it was through religion that men expressed their
sense of their relation to the world.

Just as they could do as they wished in the world with their capital,
which they had acquired with their industry, their technology and their
trade, and since they did not acknowledge any economic power above them
-- and they became more free politically -- and since, as individuals,
as capitalists, as traders, they could freely hold their heads high in
the world, just as they did not accept any intermediaries between
themselves and the world, so also did they not want to accept any
intermediaries between themselves and God. They _protested_ against
such a state of servitude.

They did away with the Pope and the saints, and became their own
priests. Every man was his own priest; every man was in direct contact
with God. This is what Luther and Calvin taught.

It was the protestant religion, that is, bourgeois consciousness, which
made its appearance with the development of _modern capitalist_
commodity production and which saw its most powerful growth take place
in those countries which followed the bourgeois path of development,
France, Switzerland, Germany, Holland, England and Scotland [^fn-12].

In this case as well, religion is again a reflection of social life.
Just as the bourgeois is individualist, so also is his religion
individualist; his God is as solitary as he is.

The stronger capitalism became, especially after the discovery of
America and the East Indies, the more rapid and vigorous was the growth
of trade and industry, as less of the home countries' production was
devoted to their own needs and more to the foreign market, the more
generalized and difficult became the social struggle of each against
all under capitalism as a result of constant improvements in the means
of communication and instruments of production, and the more solitary
man became in economic life and in his spirit as well. With the
development of modern capitalism, men increasingly fell under the
domination of their products; their products somehow acquire a human
power over men; men are dominated as if they were things and everything
has an abstract exchange value in addition to the use value products
have for men. In such a society, men have, as Marx says, come to see
each other as abstractions; their god had to be transformed into an
abstract idea.

Furthermore, with the growth of capitalism, poverty gets worse, society
becomes more complicated and harder to make sense of, and it becomes
increasingly more difficult to distinguish what is really good from
what is really bad for everyone. Introspection, speculation, and
spiritualization become the only means by which one can find certainty,
stability and happiness, in the midst of the struggle and activity
unleashed by the production of commodities and trade.

As a result, we see that the image of God is becoming more and more
isolated, more spiritualized and more abstract. Among the philosophers
of the seventeenth century, in Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz, God
became one vast being within which everything exists, and outside of
which there is nothing. In Spinoza, who may have set out the most
complete philosophical system -- it has been likened to a pure,
perfectly-cut diamond -- in Spinoza, then, God is a vast body with a
vast mind, outside of which nothing exists and which constantly moves
and thinks for itself. A reflection of the individualist, bourgeois man.

Knowledge of nature increased along with the development of technology
and capitalism; by the seventeenth century nature had been so
extensively understood in its true coherence that its
incomprehensibility and divinity had been dispelled. The mind, however,
the faculty of understanding itself, general ideas and, above all, the
ideas of good and evil and the so-called mental sciences, were not yet
understood. For this reason, nature and matter slipped more and more
into a secondary level in religion. God had become more of a ghostly
and abstract spirit, distant from reality. The old Christian contempt
for the "flesh" made no small contribution to this development. And the
separation between mental and manual labor, which had become more
marked as technology advanced and with the spread of the division of
labor, within which intellectual labor was reserved for the owning
classes and manual labor was reserved for the proletariat, this
separation, then, was also the cause, as in the Greek world, of the fact
that matter was completely omitted from religion. For all these reasons
the philosopher Kant simply designated everything relating to time and
space as phenomena without real existence. The philosopher Fichte only
recognized one spiritual subject or the ego, the philosopher Hegel
posited an absolute spirit which established the world as the
manifestation of itself, a world which finally arrives at
self-consciousness and reverts to absolute spiritual existence.

Capitalist society isolated the bourgeois individual, it spiritualized
him and made him incomprehensible to himself to such an extreme degree
that the philosophers of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
created such a solitary, abstract and incomprehensible god [^fn-13]!

Meanwhile, thanks to the invention of the steam engine, the productive
forces, the means of communication and, therefore, capital, have
undergone tremendous growth. The new technology, in turn, permitted a
more effective investigation of nature, which it required. Yet more of
nature was revealed to the eye of man, new discoveries were made
regarding the coherence of the laws which rule all natural phenomena,
the existence of a supernatural being in nature was increasingly
rejected and, finally, such a being was completely eliminated from
nature.

And then, for the first time ever, the understanding of society also
became more profound. Prehistoric times became the object of research,
the era of written history was more fully understood, statistics made
its appearance and, for the first time, laws were discerned in human
actions. And as what was natural in man became better understood, the
supernatural disappeared from him and from society itself just as it
had been eliminated from nature.

Technology, the means of communication, the mode of production, and the
capital which had accumulated so prodigiously, provided the incentive
and the means for the investigation of nature. The vast social
questions born from the process of production stimulated man's mind to
investigate society. Technology permitted the exploration of deep layers
of the earth and distant journeys to the lands of the most primitive
peoples, as well as the collection of materials for history and
statistics. The mode of production which created needs, also created the
means to satisfy them.

The class which had the imperious necessity of new sciences to augment
its technology and its profits and to defeat the old reactionary
classes of the landowners, nobility and clergy, that is, the capitalists
of industry and commerce who called themselves liberals in the
political arena, this class acquired more and more understanding of the
rule of law in the phenomena of nature and society; within this class,
religion had almost completely disappeared. What remained within this
class which pertained to religion was the idea -- which subsisted in the
deepest recesses of its conscience and which had no practical
significance -- that "maybe there is a god, after all".

Moderns and free-thinkers, who are the counterparts in the domain of
religion of the liberals in politics, no longer need god to explain
notions of "good" and "evil", or, as they say, to satisfy their "moral"
needs, and to give birth to the spirit, whose nature is still to this
day an enigma to them, of a supernatural nature. For nature and for a
good part of human and social life, they no longer need God; science,
which rests upon technology, has illuminated these topics sufficiently
for them.

In this manner, modern capitalism, because it has so much improved the
understanding of the world, has increasingly refined religion since the
era of Luther and Calvin, and has made it more nebulous, cut-off from
the world, and unreal. I aroused a great deal of opposition in
reactionary, liberal and even socialist circles when I wrote that
religion had fled with its head bowed from the earth like a fearful
ghost. But all I did was to state what was really the case: religious
representations are becoming increasingly ghostly. Only the classes in
decline, such as the petit-bourgeoisie and the peasants, and the
reactionary classes like the big landowners with their ideologues, are
still convinced of its representations from centuries past; for most of
the members of the owning classes and their intelligentsia only a tiny
bit of religion remains, or they pretend to hold fast to it in order to
keep the proletariat down, or for some other reason. The knowledge
engendered by the development of capitalist production has drained all
substance from religion and has only left it with a ghostly, ethical
existence.

But that same economic development, which has largely deprived the
liberal bourgeoisie of religion, totally deprived the proletariat of
religion.

We are only drawing attention to the facts when we assert that the
proletariat is becoming increasingly irreligious.

This is socially just as natural as all the other changes in religious
thought that we discussed above.

In general, we discovered the reason for religion in the domination of
powers which are not understood. The forces of nature, and the social
powers which are not understood, but which are nonetheless felt to be
dominating forces, are deified.

And now what is happening in relation to this point with the modern
proletariat, that is, the industrial worker of the city who lives in
the surroundings of capitalist big business?

The factory has allowed him to see with his own eyes that the forces of
nature do not represent incomprehensible forces. Man understands and
controls them there, he plays with those forces which, untamed, are the
most dangerous. Even if the worker does not understand them
theoretically, they are under the control of this hand, and he knows
that they are understood.

The modern proletarian, furthermore, understands perfectly well those
social forces which are the causes of his poverty. The capitalist mode
of production unleashed the class struggle in which he participates,
and the class struggle has taught him to recognize capitalist
exploitation and private property as the causes of his miserable
situation, and socialism as his salvation. For him, then, there is
nothing supernatural about either nature or society. He feels that there
is nothing in either nature or society which he is not capable of
understanding, even if society has temporarily deprived him of the
possibility of doing so. He also feels that what is currently an
overwhelming cause of poverty for him and his class will not always be.
But when the sense of an incomprehensible higher power is lacking,
religion doe not arise in him, or if he had it before, it dies and
disappears. For this reason the socialist worker is not anti-religious,
but has no religion, he is an atheist.

If this is already true for the "ordinary" worker, who has neither the
time, or the desire, or the opportunity to devote himself to study, how
much more true is it of the worker who is compelled to educate himself
due to the class struggle! Precisely because he is a worker, because
the poverty of the proletariat compels him to study, he is capable of
attaining a better understanding of society than a bourgeois professor
of political economy, for example. The bourgeois cannot see the truth;
he cannot admit that his class is in decline; he cannot even
acknowledge the class struggle in which his class will necessarily be on
the losing side. The mind of the worker, on the other hand, which can
expect everything from the future, is as prepared for the truth as a
hunting dog is prepared to hunt.

The worker has impressive resources at his disposal. More than sixty
years ago, Marx explained to the proletariat that capital comes from
unpaid labor [^fn-14]. More than sixty years ago, Marx and Engels
unveiled to the proletariat the nature of the class struggle [^fn-15].
And then Marx set out in _Capital_ the nature of the whole capitalist
production process, which the worker can find explained more clearly
and concisely in Kautsky's _The Economic Doctrines of Marx_ and in the
_Erfurt Program_. The bourgeoisie has no such resources of social
knowledge. The worker who has quenched his thirst from these springs
will no longer see anything supernatural in society. It is not simply
something _negative_ that shall take root in him, a _lack_ of religion,
but also something _positive_, a clear and coherent _conception of the
world_.

And if he continues to read and to reflect, he will discover the
_proof_ in the works of Marx, Engels, Kautsky, Mehring and many other
eminent theoreticians of the fact that the mental life of man is
determined by his social existence, that the law is class law, politics
is class politics, that good and evil are mutable social notions, in
short, the truth of everything we have been discussing in this pamphlet
and of everything taught by historical materialism. Then he will also
understand the transformations which take place in thought and he will
therefore understand his own thought. The man who practically engages
in the production of society, with his hands, also penetrates it more
thoroughly with his mind.

He understands class thought, and once again it is metaphysical thought
which collapses, a bastion of religion, which he learned at home and at
the church.

And the proletarian for whom the superficial test given him in the
factory, and by the political and trade union struggle, is not enough,
can go even further in his understanding!

Joseph Dietzgen, the philosopher of the proletariat, as he has been
quite justly called, and a student in his time of Marx, has he not
taught the proletariat, on the basis of socialist science, what is
mind? Has he not explained to the workers the enigma by which the
bourgeoisie is still dumbfounded, that is, _the nature of human brain
work_? He proved that every domain of thought produces nothing but the
classification of the particular, from experience, towards the general.
The mind can therefore only reason concerning the particular,
concerning experience, and concerning observed facts. He proved that
_this_, and nothing else, is the effect, the nature of the mind, just as
movement is the nature of the body, and that therefore thinking about
something supernatural as if it were real (the thing in itself, God,
absolute freedom, the eternal personality, absolute spirit, etc.) is
just as impossible, just as much in contradiction with the nature of
thought, as the representation of a "supernatural piece of sheet-metal";
that the mind is undoubtedly something extraordinary and magnificent,
powerful and splendid, but is no more enigmatic and mysterious than any
other phenomenon of the universe to those who do not deify it. Dietzgen
proved that the mind is comprehensible precisely because the nature of
mind consists of understanding, that is, of seeing what is general
[^fn-16].

When the proletariat, full of a hunger and a thirst for knowledge,
motivated by the desire for freedom and freedom for his class, has
understood this, then one could tranquilly state that there is no
longer any place in its thoughts where religion could find a place. The
capitalist production process, which has given it unemployment,
poverty, the need and the desire for liberation, and finally, knowledge,
has caused religion to die in the proletariat. The idea of it has
disappeared forever; one does not need a lamp in the full light of day.

Some day, when socialist society exists, nature will be even better
understood. The detailed study of society will no longer demand so much
sweat and hard work, as it does today. It will lie clear and
transparent before out eyes. The idea of religion will no longer be
taught to children.

Now we have shown, then, that the conceptions of religion, which in
days past played such an important role in the mental life of man, are
changed by and with the relations of production. And how much they have
changed! The belief in a fetish, in a tree, a river, an animal, the
sun, in a deified man of beauty, strength and valor, in a spirit, a
father, a sovereign, a ghostly abstraction and, finally ... in nothing.
And all these changes constitute a clear consequence of the changes in
man's social situation, of his changing relations with nature and with
his own species.

#### First Objection

Our opponents say that the explanations set out above contradict the
following point of the social democratic program: religion is a private
affair. They consider this point of the program to be hypocrisy and
deceit, intended to win over the believers among the workers by
dissimulating our real beliefs. That this was not hypocrisy on our
part, but simply a lack of understanding on the part of our enemies, was
quite elegantly demonstrated one day in an article by comrade Pannekoek,
which we reproduce below:

>"The supposedly anti-religious character of social democracy is one of
the most persistent misunderstandings used as a weapon against us. No
matter how unequivocal our assertions that religion is a private
affair, the old accusation is always repeated. It is quite evident that
there must be a reason for this; if it was just a matter of a baseless
claim, without the least semblance of justification, it would have long
ago been revealed to be unsuitable as a weapon and it would have
disappeared. For an ignorant person there is a contradiction between
our declaration and the fact that, as social democracy grows, religion
is disappearing in working-class milieus and also that our theory,
historical materialism, should contrast so sharply with religious
doctrine. This alleged contradiction, which has already disturbed many
comrades, has been exploited by our opponents in order to show that our
practical proposal, which leaves the matter of religion to each
individual's choice, is nothing but hypocrisy, a pretense to conceal
our real anti-religious intentions, and that all of this is really done
to win over the religious workers _en masse_."

>"We claim that religion should be considered to be the private affair
of each individual; that each individual must decide for himself,
without anyone else making the decision or prescribing what should be
done. This demand emerged as something obvious for the necessities of
our practice. For it is completely correct that in this way we have won
over, _en masse_, non-religious and religious workers of various
faiths, which means that they want to join together in a common struggle
for their class interests. The goal of the social democratic workers
movement is nothing less than the economic transformation of society,
to make the means of production collective property. It is, then,
normal that anything extraneous to this goal should be set aside, along
with anything which could lead to disputes among the workers. It would
require all the biased narrowness of perspective of the theologians to
impute to us, instead of an openly-acknowledged goal, another, secret
goal, the abolition of religion. Ultimately, one cannot be surprised at
the fact that someone who devotes all their thought to religious
subtleties and who pays no heed to the deep poverty and the magnificent
struggle of the proletarians, should only view the liberating overthrow
of a mode of production and the mental and religious changes
accompanying it as nothing more than a passage to apostasy and passes
over the abolition of poverty, of oppression and of slavery as of no
interest."

>"Our practical principle in regard to religion was born from the
necessity of the practical struggle; as a result it also must be in
accord with our theory, which bases socialism totally on the practice
of the everyday struggle. Historical materialism sees in economic
relations the basis for all social life; it is always about material
necessities, class struggles, of disruptions of the mode of production,
where the old ways, and the struggles themselves, exhibit religious
discord and conflicts. Religious ideas are nothing but the expressions,
the reflections, and the consequences of man's real life relations and,
therefore, primarily, of economic institutions. Today we are also
witnessing a thorough economic change but, for the first time in
history, the class which must carry it out has a clear understanding
that it does not involve the victory of an ideological conception. This
clear awareness, which extracts from theory, expresses the practical
demand: religion is a private affair!; therefore, this demand is a
consequence of both clear scientific consciousness and practical
necessity."

>"Concerning this conception, that is, the one held about religion by
historical materialism, it follows that it can by no means be put in
the same bag with bourgeois atheism. The latter is directly opposed and
hostile to religion because it saw in religion the theory of the
reactionary classes and the principle obstacle to progress. It only saw
stupidity and a lack of knowledge and education in religion; which is
why it hoped to be able to extirpate the blind faith of the peasants
and the stupid petit-bourgeoisie by means of scientific rationalism,
especially by means of natural science."

>"We, on the other hand, see in religion a necessary product of living
conditions, which are essentially of an economic nature. The peasant to
whom the caprice of the weather grants a good or a bad harvest, the
petit-bourgeois for whom the market situation and competition can lead
to profit or loss, feel dependent upon mysterious higher powers.
Against this immediate sentiment, bookish science, that is, the
knowledge that the seasons are determined by natural forces and that the
miracles of the Bible are legends invented from whole cloth, is useless.
The peasants and the petit-bourgeoisie are against this knowledge; it
makes them feel uneasy and arouses their mistrust, because it comes from
the class that oppresses them and because, as classes in decline, they
cannot use it as a weapon, for salvation or even for consolation. They
can only imagine consolation in the form of the supernatural, in
religious representations."

>"It is the just the opposite for the class-conscious proletarian; the
cause of his misery lies clearly delineated before him, in the nature
of capitalist production and exploitation, which have no supernatural
qualities in his eyes. And since a future full of hope is set before
him, and he feels that he needs knowledge to be able to break his
chains, he passionately seizes upon the study of the social mechanism.
His whole world-view, even if he knows nothing about Darwin and
Copernicus, is thus a non-religious perspective; he feels the forces
with which he must work and struggle as cold secular realities. The
irreligiousness of the proletariat is therefore not a consequence of
any lesson preached to it, but a direct apprehension of its situation.
Reciprocally, this mental disposition born of participation in social
struggles leads the workers to diligently appropriate all the
rationalist and anti-theological writings of BÃ¼chner [^fn-17] and
HÃ¤ckel [^fn-18] in order to provide a theoretical basis for their way
of thinking in the form of the knowledge of natural science. This
origin of proletarian atheism results in the fact that the proletariat
never employs it as an object of struggle against those who hold
different opinions; their only objects of struggle are their social
concepts and goals which constitute the essential aspect of their
world-view. Proletarians who, as class comrades, live under the same
oppression, are their natural comrades-in-arms, even if the effects
referred to above are absent among them due to their particular
circumstances. For there are such circumstances, abstractions
constructed from the power of tradition, which operates everywhere and
can only be slowly defeated. The proletarians who work in conditions
where powerful, unpredictable and terrifying natural forces threaten
them with death and ruin, such as miners and sailors, often preserve a
strong religious sentiment, while they can also be stout fighters
against capitalism at the same time. The practical attitude which
results from this state of affairs is still frequently underestimated
by our party comrades who think that we must oppose Christian belief
with our concepts, as 'a superior religion'."

>"Thus, in regard to the relation between socialism and religion, the
truth is precisely the reverse of the way our theological enemies
represent the issue. We do not make the workers renounce their old
beliefs by preaching our theory, historical materialism; they lose
their beliefs after attentive observation of social relations, which
makes them recognize that the abolition of their misery is a goal within
their reach. The need to understand these relations more profoundly
leads them to study the historical-materialist writings of our great
theoreticians. The latter do not exercise their hostility to religion,
since there is no longer any belief; to the contrary, they present an
appreciation of religion as a historically based phenomenon that will
only disappear under future circumstances. This doctrine spares us,
then, from having to emphasize ideological differences as if they are
what is important, it sets our economic goal on the first level as the
only important matter, and expresses the latter in the practical demand:
religion is a private affair."

#### Second Objection

Why have old religions continued to exist for so long while old
relations of production have had to yield to new ones?

This question must be answered because this fact is utilized by our
opponents as an objection against us. The answer is not complicated.

First, an old mode of production does not die all at once. In the
preceding centuries, this collapse was taking place quite slowly, and
even now, when big industry is so rapidly replacing the old
technologies, the small business is taking a long time to disappear.
Thus, the old religion will still have a place for a long time.

Second, the human mind is lazy. Even when the body already finds itself
in new work relations, the mind is slow to adopt new ways of thinking.
_Tradition_, customs, bear upon the mind of living beings. The worker
can easily observe this in his surroundings: two men work side by side
in the same factory, with the same hardships, the same problems. One,
however, is a spiritual invalid who does not want to fight, who is
incapable of learning how to think on his own, and who follows the
priest's recommendations about politics, religion and the trade unions.
The other worker is full of life, he is all fight; he is always
talking, he is ceaselessly making propaganda, constantly agitating, his
slogan is: neither God nor Master.

Here, it is tradition, alongside differences in temperament, which is
decisive. Catholicism, even though it has managed to manifest itself in
new guises, is a religion adapted to ancient relations. As a
consequence of the inertia which is inherent in thought as well as in
matter, it stubbornly resists. Long after a mode of production has
disappeared one can sometimes still find its dried-up old blossoms.

Thirdly, the rising classes and the threatened classes act in such a
way that their old ways of thinking continue for a long time. In other
times, when the class struggle was still fought under the guise of
religion, under religious slogans, a rising class, which aspired to
different social relations than those upheld by the ruling class, often
had a new religion which corresponded with what it considered good,
just and true. Thus, for example, Calvinism was at first a religion of
rebels. But once the rising class replaced the old and became the
ruling class, its religion was then transformed into the ruling
religion; it was then imposed by force on everyone, but in this way the
revolutionary character of the religion was changed into a conservative
character; its own _new_ relations were also expressed in this religion.
So, Christianity -- of old the religion of the poor and the
propertyless, and still in that era, simply and unadorned, a religion of
love and mutual aid -- became, as an official Church, a complicated
system of dogmas, ceremonies, representatives of God on Earth, hierarchy
and exploitation, which hardly resembled early Christianity. The class
which comes to power and establishes new relations simply changes the
nature of religion from a means of struggle to a means of oppression.

And we also see this in our time.

The ruling classes, who demand pleasure for themselves, have inculcated
submission, humility and resigned suffering into the oppressed and used
them against them, these aspects of the doctrine of Jesus, after
Christianity became the religion of the ruling classes. When the
possessing classes were revolutionary, like the Calvinists and the
other Protestants, they did not preach tolerance but struggle. But now
that a class opposed to them is on the rise, a class which does not want
to suffer but to fight until it is victorious, then the old religion of
suffering is used again by all sects, even by the ones which were
previously revolutionary, in order to separate at least part of the
rising classes from the struggle.

It does not surprise us that, as a result of the cumulative effect of
the old relations of production which still subsist, and of tradition
and class rule, an old religion should still preserve its existence and
its power after so long. And thus that it no longer has a rich interior
life but is rather like fossilized remains, nor should it surprise us
now that we know that religion comes from society.

### G. Art

We can only briefly touch upon this domain of the mind, because the
proletariat, unfortunately, has yet to experience it.

But the fact that our doctrine must be applicable here, and precisely
here, can be explained thanks to the following observation and by a
single example.

Art is, in its lines, its colors or its tones, the figurative
representation of _emotional_ life. Man only has feelings for man. For
this reason art must change at the same time that the relations between
men change.

What follows can serve as an illustration.

The individual of bourgeois society is alone and is ruled by production
and its products. This fact must be exemplified in art; from the Greek
bourgeois art of the Fifth Century BC until now, this has also been
demonstrated.

The individual of socialist society has the feeling that he forms a
whole with the others, that he has power thanks to them and that he
rules production and its products. This will necessarily someday be
manifested in his art; this feeling of control, of freedom, of
happiness with _the whole world_ must be externalized and will be
externalized as sure as the desire for externalization is inherent in
social man. But this art will be as different form bourgeois art, that
is, enormously different, as the socialist individual will be from the
bourgeois individual. And this difference will be brought about -- do we
need to repeat it once again? -- by the fact that the relations of
production, which are now based on private ownership and wage labor,
will then rest upon collective ownership and labor in common.

## 6. Conclusion

With what we set forth above we have resolved the question we posed
ourselves. Let us examine our conclusions once again.

We have seen that science, law, politics, customs, religion and
philosophy, and art change because the relations of production change,
which are themselves changed by technological development.

We saw that this was confirmed by a series of quite simple, generally
well-known yet all-embracing examples, which involve entire classes and
populations.

Obviously, we cannot supply an endless series of examples, and there
are undoubtedly many pieces of history which, if we were to be asked to
explain them in terms of historical materialism, would put us in an
awkward position since we do not know enough about them to explain
everything that happens in them to our opponents. But it is precisely
for that reason that we have set forth such all-embracing examples,
because, _if_ they are correct in their vast scope, the correctness of
the theory can hardly be doubted.

Furthermore, historical materialism has been applied by our comrades,
primarily in Germany but also in other countries, to every field of
history, with such overwhelming success that we can calmly say:
experience has demonstrated the correctness of this part of Marxist
doctrine.

We have also seen that historical materialism must by no means be
considered as a form suitable only for the introduction of historical
questions. One must begin by studying. If one wants to know why a
class, or a people, thinks in a particular way, one does not say: well,
the mode of production was this or that, and therefore this way of
thinking was produced. For we would often be mistaken, since the same
technology has produced very different ways of thinking in different
peoples, just as different modes of production can also be effectively
based, among different peoples, on the same technology. Likewise, other
factors must be examined, the political history of the people, the
climate, the geographical situation, all of which, together with
technology, also influence the mode of production and the way of
thinking. Historical materialism, the effect of the productive forces
and the relations of production, appears most resplendently highlighted
_in its environment_ only when the other factors are understood.

For those who cannot take history courses, and who must be satisfied
with the observation of our own epoch, of the struggle between capital
and labor, the reflection of which is clearly visible above all in the
mind of the worker -- and which the worker may quite readily understand
by his own efforts thanks to reading good texts and attending good
courses.

We have also seen that the various domains of the mind are not sealed
compartments. Together they form _a single_ whole, all of them mutually
influence one another, politics influences the economy, customs
influence politics, technology influences science, and the other way
around. There is an interaction, a reaction, a permanent survival of
the mental life which flourished in the past. But its motor force is
labor, and the channels through which the mental rivers flow are the
relations of production.

Tradition is also a force, often a braking force.

The whole process is, as we have seen, a _human_ process, which takes
place thanks to man, among men, and in man; that is, it is not a
mechanical process. We have been able to repeatedly prove that human
_need_ and human _instincts_ are the bases of every event, and that the
social instinct is the basis of the instincts of self-preservation and
the continuation of the species. Instincts and needs are not mechanical
things, they are also mental things, living things, they are
_feelings_, and undoubtedly not at all simply mechanical. We have seen
that nothing is more stupid or dishonest than to confuse historical
materialism with mechanistic materialism. Technology itself is not just
a mechanical process; it is also a mental process.

We have also seen that the great instrument used by nature for
furthering the evolution of human thought, struggle, takes the form in
our time of class struggle. We have seen, by means of numerous
examples, that technology leads the classes into different relations of
production and ownership and that, in this way, their ideas aggressively
clash with each other; that a struggle among them over ownership
results, and at the same time a battle of ideas affecting law, religion,
etc.; that the material victory of one class is at the same time the
victory of its ideas.

We have seen all of this and we believe we can calmly draw the
conclusion that thought constantly changes, that thought is in constant
motion, and that in all the domains we have addressed there are no
eternal truths, that the only thing that is eternal and absolute is
change, evolution. And it is also precisely this general, great truth
that, as we said at the beginning of this work, even if we do not
subject it to a specific examination, will nonetheless emerge from our
experiences. The reader will have observed that we have not set forth
this result as a dogma established in advance, but as a consequence of
the facts, of simple historical experience.

### The Power of the Truth

We have not in any case provided this analysis for the purpose of
transforming the workers into _philosophers_. This will certainly be of
interest if the reader understands that the mind, like everything else,
is not an absolute thing, but _is in a process of transformation_; this
understanding, as a philosophical truth, however salutary its influence
on the mind may be, is still only a secondary outcome.

We have set ourselves another goal; we want to transform the workers
into combatants. And into victors. While they attentively read these
explanations, they must surely feel their inner power grow.

What, then, is the result of our doctrine and our examples?

If technology changes in such a way that it transforms an insignificant
class into a powerful class, a slave into a fighter, then that class's
ideas must also be transformed from insignificant to powerful, from
servile to proud. And if technology finally transforms this class into
a victor, its ideas must finally come to be the only true ones.

Our intention is to give the working class the certainty that it has
the _truth_, and confidence in its mental powers.

For technology is making the proletarian class as numerous as the
grains of sand on the seashore; it organizes it, pushes it into battle,
transforms it mentally, morally and materially into a powerful class.
The old relations of production, private ownership, have proven to be
too narrow for modern labor; labor has become social; only with social
ownership can it be freely exercised and developed. Technology in the
narrow confines of the small business, in the joint-stock companies and
the trusts, requires collective ownership so as to be capable of
spreading its wings everywhere without obstacles. It does not want to
be artificially stimulated at one time, then slowed down at another.
And the workers will finally organize technology and the relations of
production in accordance with their will, precisely because technology
turned them into a powerful class, and because their will expresses the
requirements of technology.

But, for just this reason, the ideas of the workers, which rest upon
this conviction, _to the extent_ that they rest upon it, are all
_true_. For if reality proves the workers right and, therefore, if the
ownership of the means of production is becoming collective, then all
their ideas which point in that direction, _to the extent_ that they
point in that direction, are also correct and those of their opponents,
who do not want this, are mistaken. If, one day, the soil and the
machines belong to the whole world, then it is _right_ that it should be
that way, and the conception of those who wanted this is _revealed_ to
be true; the closer reality comes to this situation, the more _true_ and
_right_ is the proletariat's idea of law, and the more _false_ is the
conception of its opponents, and in contradiction with reality. And the
same is true of its politics. If the workers must become, due to
technology, the most numerous, the most organized, the most materially
powerful class, their political points of view which express this status
are _true_, and those of their opponents, who oppose this development,
are _false_.

For truth is correspondence between thought and reality.

If the socialism of the working class is a requirement of technology,
if, without it, production cannot continue to develop, then the
morality of the proletariat, to the extent that it is concerned with
this end, is also the true morality.

If the working class is right to believe that socialism can only come
from the development of the productive forces and from the natural and
social forces which have been understood by the working class, then it
is also right to not accept anything supernatural, since there is no
longer any basis for it, and all its adversaries who subscribe to a
religion are imbued with superstitions.

And this is how it is in every domain: the development of technology
proceeds in such a way that one class rises or falls not only
materially, but also mentally. When the relations sought by a class
become reality, its ideas, which expressed its desire for the new
relations, then become true. Nor is this surprising, since ideas are
nothing but the theories, the considerations, and the summaries of
reality in a general concept.

This is why we have attempted with all the forces at our disposal to
clarify historical materialism for the workers. The power of the truth
must live in the mind of the proletariat.

### The Power of the Individual

That last sentence itself leads us to a good conclusion: the power of
the truth must live in the mind of the worker.

Surely, technology is leading to socialism. We do not make history _by
our own will_.

>"Labor is becoming social." "The relations of production must become
socialist." "Property relations demand socialization."

It is true. Social matter is more powerful than the mind of the
individual. The individual _must_ follow wherever it leads him.

But technology is composed of machines and of _men_. Labor in
production means human hands, human brains and human hearts which take
part in it. Property relations are relations between owners and
non-owners.

Once again: the process is a living process. The social power which
drags us along is not a dead fate, a brutal mass of compact matter. It
is society, it is a living force.

To speak truly, we _must_ go in the direction it is going in. The labor
process is dragging us in a direction that we have not ourselves
determined. We do not make history _by our own will_.

But ... we do make it.

It is not a blind destiny but living society which destines you,
workers, to usher in socialism.

You, as a class, can do nothing else. You must want higher wages, a
happier life, and more leisure. You must organize. You must fight the
State, you must conquer political power, and you must be victorious. It
is production, it is living labor that you want.

But does it not also depend upon you personally to bring this about
_quickly, smoothly and correctly_? Is it not precisely because you must
do so as a _living_ power that it will depend upon you, living
individuals, living men, women and children, not _what_ you do, but
_how_ you do it?

This depends on your body and your mind.

Physically robust and mentally strong proletarians will realize one of
the most magnificent and greatest tasks ever seen in the world better
than weak proletarians.

Under capitalism, to be as physically as healthy as you will need to be
does not depend on your desires. Wage levels, the length of the working
day, housing, do not depend on you alone. But to a very high degree, it
is up to you whether or not you are mentally healthy. You can fully and
completely accept into your mind the power and the force of the truth,
of the socialist social truth, even when your body is not so strong.

It is something characteristic of the mind. Social existence dominates
it in such a way that it can be feeble, tired, mortally exhausted, that
it can no longer move.

But technology awakens it, shows it a point of light on the horizon,
happiness, a goal. It points the way to victory for the class through
social existence, then the mind of those who belong to that class go
into motion; then it is impassioned, it lives, it aspires to something,
it acts, then the saying according to which the mind rules the body
becomes true. The mind then becomes more than the body; however weak
the body may be, however under-nourished, however anemic, with a
thousand troubles and worries, the mind becomes powerful, the mind
becomes free.

Worker, comrade, it is necessary for you to be told that your mind can
be free under capitalism. The process of production can make you
mentally free immediately. You must free yourself from the mental yoke
of the bourgeoisie. Historical materialism teaches you about the
relation between man and nature. It teaches you that the time
approaches when not only will humanity rule nature but will also rule
itself. It teaches you that you are called upon to hasten the arrival of
that day. He who understands this and acts in accordance with this
understanding is mentally free. _Only he, with his individual power, is
capable of helping to lead his class to the new society_.

The mind must be revolutionized. It must extirpate prejudice and
cowardice. The most important thing is mental propaganda. Knowledge,
mental power, is the essential thing, the most necessary of all.

Only knowledge creates a good organization, a good trade union
movement, correct policies and therefore improvements in the fields of
economics and politics.

No prosperity will be possible as long as capitalism exists.

Only socialism will bring prosperity.

But socialism can only be achieved, the hard fight for socialism can
only be led, by mentally energetic men who are intellectually free.

First make your own mind strong, and then to do so with the minds of
your comrades: this is the great and universal power of the individual,
thanks to which he can hasten the advent of the socialist future.

Try it, workers, comrades. Drink deep from the development of the
productive forces which you have before your eyes and even in your
hands, what you must find in them: the new truth, the socialist vision
of the world. And spread it!

[^fn-01]: _Neue Zeit_, XXII, 1, p. 5.

[^fn-02]: _A Plot against the International_, 1874, p. 33.

[^fn-03]: _Dreiklassenwahlrecht_: in this voting system introduced by
  Frederick Wilhelm IV in Prussia in 1849 and which was in effect in
  that State until 1918, the lower chamber (_Landtag_) was elected by
  indirect universal suffrage, but the higher chamber was divided into
  three estates and representation in this chamber was proportional to
  the taxes paid by the three estates, so that more than 80% of the
  electorate elected less than one third of the deputies. (_Note from
  the French translation_)

[^fn-04]: _Norddeutsche Bund_: a Federation of 22 German States located
  north of the Main, created on Bismarck's initiative after Prussia's
  victory over Austria, and implemented in 1867.

[^fn-05]: We cannot sufficiently recommend to the reader, especially the
  working class reader, Kautsky's lecture on _Ethics and the Materialist
  Conception of History_. Ethics is the last wall behind which people
  who want to keep the worker in a state of childhood thanks to
  religion are entrenched. When the terrestrial origin of the highest
  moral precepts is clarified, many mental obstacles are overcome. So
  also solidarity will be reinforced if it is understood to have its
  origin in the most ancient sentiments of the human species.

[^fn-06]: Abraham Kuyper (1837-1920): professor of theology, he helped
  found the Amsterdam Free University; as a journalist, he founded two
  newspapers, _De Standaard_ and _De Heraut_, and as a politician, he
  was one of the founders of the Anti-Revolutionary Party and was Prime
  Minister of the Netherlands from 1901 to 1905. (_Note from the French
  translation_)

[^fn-07]: Two mental tendencies are possible for the bourgeois or
  capitalist politician, who, as a result of the development of
  technology and the mode of production, comes into conflict with the
  working class. He can confess that he cannot and does not follow the
  precepts of the highest morality in regard to the working class. He
  then becomes a cynic, he mutes the voice inside him that tells him
  what he himself knows is "right" with a "this won't work". Or else he
  says that he recognizes and follows the highest morality. In that
  case he becomes a hypocrite whose words and actions are in sharp
  contradiction with each other, who dissimulates his anti-social
  actions behind beautiful resonant words. And the hypocrite is
  especially repugnant when, as in the case of Kuyper, he associates
  religion and devotion with his hypocrisy. Such phenomena, however,
  are not personal sins but, as we have shown, a necessary consequence
  of the development of the productive forces.

[^fn-08]: Two mental tendencies are possible, both among the capitalists
  and their political representatives as well as among the workers and
  their representatives. The worker could take nothing into account
  except the everyday struggle. His moral sentiment is then limited to a
  narrow circle, to his colleagues in his trade, for example. Or he
  could above all have his sights set on the final goal, socialism. In
  that case his moral sentiment embraces the whole proletariat, and can
  also come to include all of humanity. Cynicism and hypocrisy are the
  two general phenomena necessary in the ruling class; in the ruled
  class, an uninspiring narrowness and revolutionary enthusiasm. There
  are naturally many intermediate stages between the two poles.

[^fn-09]: Our opponents occasionally conclude from this that we think
  that anything is _always_ permitted against the capitalists. This is
  false. As we said above, this is only the case when it is necessary
  for the veritable salvation of our class. The application of such
  means would be exactly contrary to the morality which orders us to act
  in the interest of our class.

[^fn-10]: It is often said that this abrupt representation and this
  acknowledgment of the existence of a class morality is prejudicial to
  our propaganda, because our opponents exploit these things against us
  and thus arouse the suspicions of the ignorant masses against us. But
  whoever says this is unaware of the power that theoretical truth
  confers upon a revolutionary class.

  In regard to practice, I can recommend, based on my experience as an
  agitator, the following in response to this claim. When an opponent
  reproaches us for recognizing the _existence_ of a class morality --
  since it is not a question of _preaching_ a class morality -- demand
  that he make reference to particular instances where our class lied,
  deceived, etc. In most cases he will not be able to produce much in
  the way of evidence; if he cites the case of the theft of a secret
  document, explain to your listeners the whole case. If your listeners
  are workers who are ripe for our agitation, then the sentiment of
  solidarity with their comrades, which is inherited from our
  predecessors, will immediately be instinctively voiced within them,
  and they will feel that we are right.

  If the opponent's attack is repulsed in this way, then go on the
  offensive. After the failure to prove the existence of a bad class
  morality among us, show the bad class morality of the capitalists, of
  the yellow trade unions, of the bourgeois press, and of the
  politicians, as it is directed against us, against the oppressed
  class. Go on to compare our class morality, which defends the
  oppressed, and their class morality, which seeks to repress them;
  compare capitalist society, which implies such a morality, with the
  classless socialist society in which all humanity forms a solidaric
  brotherhood. Only then will you have an effect on the workers. And
  once again it will become clear that only theoretical truth will lead
  us to victory.

[^fn-11]: Today, as well, when commodity society penetrates primitive
  peoples, they are also "converted" to monotheism.

[^fn-12]: Only the Italian cities remained Catholic, also for economic
  reasons. The power of the Pope signified the power of Italy over the
  Christian world.

[^fn-13]: For reasons of space we naturally cannot deal with every
  philosophical system.

[^fn-14]: _Wage Labor and Capital_, Karl Marx.

[^fn-15]: _The Communist Manifesto_, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels.

[^fn-16]: Marx examined how the relations of production modify the
  _content_ of thought. But _thinking itself_ is explained by bourgeois
  philosophers and theologians as something that comes from God. Thus,
  after Marx's critique of the _content of thinking_, consequently there
  still remained an unexplained part of the world of ideas which the
  bourgeoisie could use to buttress their own status and to put down the
  proletariat. This is the part that Joseph Dietzgen studied. As Marx
  had covered the material side, Dietzgen approached the problem from
  the other side, that of the idea. Whereas Marx set forth what social
  matter does to the mind, Dietzgen showed what the mind itself does.
  Marx often heard the bourgeoisie say: "But no one can understand the
  nature of things; the nature of things is beyond or above the
  capacities of our imagination." This is how they tried to preserve
  the supernatural. Dietzgen proved that the cause of the
  incomprehensibility of the nature of things for the bourgeoisie does
  not reside in things themselves, but in their own understanding. The
  bourgeoisie, the bourgeois philosophers and theologians, do not
  understand what it means to understand something. Dietzgen explained
  to the workers what understanding is, and therefore, thanks to Marx
  and Dietzgen, the _entire_ relation between thought and social
  existence has been made clear, since one studied the modifications of
  thought, and the other the nature of thought.

  Marx himself had absorbed his knowledge about society from the class
  struggle of the proletariat which was taking place before his eyes in
  England and France. Dietzgen formed his conceptions of the mind on the
  basis of Marx's knowledge of society. He was able to discern
  historical materialism in Marx's writings, and only thus could
  Dietzgen arrive at his transparent doctrine of the mind. Both of
  them, then, derived their knowledge from the class struggle of the
  proletariat. The proletariat gave them, through their labor, their
  demands and their associations, the experience, and they constructed
  the doctrine, the theory. One could say that they gave back to the
  proletariat a hundred-fold what they had taken from it.

[^fn-17]: This apparently refers to Friedrich BÃ¼chner (born 1824), a
  German naturalist and materialist philosopher, author of _Force and
  Matter_ (1855) and _Nature and Mind_ (1857). BÃ¼chner was a popularizer
  and polemicist who championed the experimental method of science.
  (_Note from the French translation_)

[^fn-18]: Ernst HÃ¤ckel (1834-1919), German biologist and philosopher,
  was a stalwart proponent of the theory of evolution and popularized
  Darwin's work in Germany. He is also considered to be the father of
  ecology. Some believe he was one of the first to engage in racial
  classification, since he established a racial hierarchy within an
  evolutionist framework and was therefore a precursor of the Nazi's
  political-biological doctrine. (_Note from the French translation_)
