---
title: The Exploits of University Marxism
author: International Communist Party
date: 1969
description: Subtitled \"Concerning the works of Messrs. Baran and Sweezy.\" Originally published in French in 1969 in Programme Communiste no. 47, translated to English in 1977 in Communist Program no. 3. From <https://www.sinistra.net/lib/upt/compro/lipi/lipifbocee.html>.
...

How can Marxist theory be refuted, reformed, deformed, or castrated?
This is a problem which has excited University academicians for almost a
century. Two of these have succeeded in making of Marxism a theory of
economic growth, and of socialism a recipe for economic development.
They have presented Marx's method as the study of empirical models of
reality, denied the tendency of the rate of profit to fall (after first
having confused it with the rate of surplus value), and defined
unemployment as the underemployment of men and equipment resulting from
defective organisation and insufficient demand. Despite these and many
more achievements they are considered by "enlightened opinion" as "great
Marxist economists". For an epoch which likes to keep the record
straight it would be unjust not to devote a few pages to these
astonishing champions of the destruction and falsification, in the name
of Marxism, of Marxist theory -- Messrs. Baran and Sweezy.

For want of space and patience to take up in detail all the enormities
which are served up in the course of two works (Baran: _The Political
Economy of Growth_; Baran and Sweezy: _Monopoly Capital_), we shall be
content to deal with three topics: the idea of "economic surplus",
Marx's scientific method, and monopoly capitalism [^fn-01]. 

## Economic Surplus

The idea of "economic surplus" is expounded in Baran's book _The
Political Economy of Growth_. It is the culmination of a complete
falsification of Marxist theory which presents Marx's work as a theory
of economic growth and reduces socialism to a method of economic
development.

To make believe that black is white it is necessary also to make believe
that white is black. To effect the total _reversal_ which consists in
making Marx's work into a study of growth, and at the same time to find
it in conflict with bourgeois economics Baran begins by reversing the
latter completely and presenting it as opposed to economic growth.

>"In its beginnings, economics was a revolutionary intellectual effort
>to seek out and establish the working principles of an economic system
>best able to advance the cause of mankind. In its later days it has
>turned upon its own past, becoming a mere attempt at an explanation and
>justification of the status quo -- condemning and suppressing at the
>same time all endeavours to judge the existing economic order by
>standards of reason, or to comprehend the origins of the prevailing
>conditions and the developmental potentialities that they contain..."
>(p. 4).
>
>"Current efforts to bring about conditions indispensable for economic
>development in advanced and backward capitalist countries alike come
>continuously into conflict with the economic and political order of
>capitalism and imperialism. Thus to ruling opinion in the United States
>(but also in some other parts of the capitalist world), the world-wide
>drive for economic progress inevitably appears as profoundly subversive
>of the existing social order and of the prevailing system of
>international domination -- as a revolutionary movement that has to be
>bribed, blocked, and, if possible, broken, if the capitalist system is
>at all to be preserved" (p. 11).

The "world-wide drive for economic progress" is subversive? One is
tempted to smile at such statements, but for the moment let us pretend
to take them seriously.

It is a fact that bourgeois political economy, at first revolutionary as
it strove to break down the barriers to capitalist development,
afterwards became that which we know today, that of the status quo,
which means that it considers capitalism eternal and concerns itself
solely with its justification and smooth operation. But what is this
smooth operation of capitalism? It is the exact opposite to the
stagnation suggested by Baran. Marx shows in Vol. 1 of _Capital_ [^fn-02]
that the general formula of capital, its most abstract representation,
(and thus appropriate to _all_ its phases and forms and not merely to
_some_ of them), in fact its very essence, is the movement M-C-M', i.e.
value which begets value. This movement, when applied to industrial
capital (the principal form of capital, from which the others, i.e.
interest bearing and merchant's capital, are derived) and constantly
reproduced in a cyclical manner, results in accumulation or enlarged
reproduction. The capitalist is merely the agent of this movement, his
economists its apologists.

>"Except as personified capital, the capitalist has no historic value,
>and no right to... historical existence... And so far only is his own
>transitory existence implied in the transitory necessity for the
>capitalist mode of production. But so far as he is personified capital,
>it is not values in use and the enjoyment of them, but exchange-value
>and its augmentation, that spur him into action. Fanatically bent on
>making value expand itself, he ruthlessly forces the human race to
>produce for production's sake; he thus forces the development of the
>productive powers of society, and creates those historical conditions,
>which alone can form the real basis of a higher form of society, a
>society in which the full and free development of every individual
>forms the ruling principle" [^fn-03].

>"Accumulate! Accumulate! That is Moses and the prophets... Save! Save!
>i.e. reconvert the greatest possible portion of surplus value or
>surplus-product into capital! Accumulation for accumulation's sake,
>production for production's sake: by this formula classical economy
>expressed the historical mission of the bourgeoisie" [^fn-04].

Production for production's sake; this then is the reflection in the
bourgeois mind of the real movement of industrial capital in its search
for surplus value. One can now recognise the _ideology of growth_ as
being merely the transposition, idealisation and camouflage by vulgar
political economy of the iron law which represents the very essence of
capitalism. Every representation of economic growth as the most
desirable ideal and the ultimate goal of humanity is not and cannot be
anything more than the ideology of capitalism, just as the old "Liberty!
Equality!" was not and could not have been anything more than the
ideology of small commodity production and simple circulation. Produce
more! Such is the universal cri-de-coeur of capitalism, such is the
command in the name of which the working classes of the East as well as
the West have been enslaved. The "world-wide drive for economic
progress" (a pleasant euphemism which would cause us to laugh did it not
serve to spread complete confusion among the proletariat) is so little
subversive that it holds power throughout the entire world. It has taken
the pretty pseudonym of development, and even of human progress, to hide
its true identity: the frenzied accumulation of surplus value extracted
from the proletariat.

Baran elaborates this first falsification to serve as a starting point
for a second, even more enormous, falsehood. According to this it has
fallen to Marx and Engels to take up the standard of economic
development, let fall from the hands of an impotent bourgeoisie.

>"Thus the concern with economic and social change was left to a
>'heretical' school of economics and social science. Marx and Engels
>accepted in essence the insistence of the classical economists on
>capitalism's giant contribution to economic development. Yet, not
>wedded to the now dominant capitalist class, and \[not\]... impelled to
>regard capitalism as the 'natural' form of society and as the ultimate
>fulfilment of human aspirations, they were able to perceive the limits
>and barriers to progress inherent in the capitalist system. Indeed
>their approach to the matter was radically different from that of
>bourgeois economics. While the latter was (and is) interested in
>economic development only to the extent that it has led to the
>establishment, and is conducive to the stabilisation of, the capitalist
>order, Marx and Engels considered the capitalist order itself as likely
>to survive only as long as it did not become a fetter on further
>economic and social progress" (p. 5).

A clever trick. It is true that according to Marxist theory the final
cause of the revolution which destroys a mode of production is the
antagonism between the development of the productive forces and the
relations of production; capitalism must therefore die (with suitable
help from the proletariat) from its own growth. But this does not in any
way imply that Marx was an apostle of economic growth, studying the
capitalist mode of production from the point of view of the development
which it permits or impedes. Nor shall socialism be a mode of production
called upon to substitute itself for capitalism in order to allow for
even faster accumulation. "Development of the productive forces of
social labour", wrote Marx, "is the historic task and justification of
capital. This is just the way in which it unconsciously creates the
material requirements of a higher mode of production" [^fn-05]. This
superior mode of production will not have the same aim as capitalism.
Its task is quite different: to profit from the development already
achieved in order to abolish classes, socially manage the forces of
production, and reduce the working time to the time necessary to produce
only those use-values corresponding to the effective needs, historically
determined, of the species. As for Marxism, far from being a theory of
growth, its function is to be for the proletariat an intellectual arm
which permits it to understand the mode of production which enslaves it.
It enables the proletariat to recognise the laws of that mode of
production, to thus predict its inevitable downfall and be the agent of
that downfall, to finally substitute for it the superior mode of
production which shall be its dialectical negation. Baran reduces Marx
to the level of vulgar economy and ascribes to socialism a mission which
represents the very essence of capitalism. One cannot imagine a
confusion more complete. It is this sad note which begins the book of
our "great Marxist economist".

After this one can plainly expect anything. To shore up his thesis Baran
now proceeds to "demonstrate" that present-day capitalism is sabotaging
economic development. His position is, in substance, as follows. In the
developed countries a fall in rates of growth has established itself as
a result of the appearance of monopoly capitalism. It is because of the
monopolies that capitalism does not produce all that it is capable of
producing. In effect, monopoly capitalism is irrational and anarchic; it
impedes technical innovation by caring more for the returns on its
investments. Above all, the monopoly sectors of the economy make
considerable profits, and

>"...This tends to reduce the value of aggregate investment since the
>relatively few monopolistic and oligopolistic firms to which the bulk
>of the profits accrue find it both unprofitable to plow them back into
>their own enterprises and increasingly difficult to invest them
>elsewhere in the economy" (p. 85).

The result of all this is that net investment is less than it could be
and that under monopoly capitalism there is a lack of development of
necessary production and a squandering of the net product.

The reader will have recognised in passing many of the ideas of the
national-communists on the villainous monopolies who waste their profits
instead of investing them. All of these self-styled Marxists must be
reminded

1. that it is not necessary to construct new theories to explain the
  lowering of the rate of growth: the explanation is to be found in
  chapter XIII of Vol. 3 of Marx's _Capital_ where the phenomenon is
  called the falling rate of profit. The fall in the rate of growth is
  merely the consequence, at the level of material production, of this
  fall in the rate of profit;

2. that net investment is called, in Marxist terms, accumulation of
  capital and that it thus represents, as we have just shown, the
  _raison d'être_ of industrial capital: "... the industrial capitalist
  becomes more or less unable to fulfil his function as soon as he
  personifies the enjoyment of wealth, as soon as he wants the
  accumulation of pleasures instead of the pleasure of accumulation"
  writes Marx [^fn-06]. Fine "Marxists" are those who reproach the
  industrial capitalist for being unsuited to his purpose!

3. that this investment is made of the _surplus value_ extorted from
  the minds and bodies of the proletariat cruelly regimented to work
  and live in an inhuman manner.

All of these curious "revolutionaries" therefore, reprove capitalism not
for enslaving workers 50 hours a week or more, but for not accumulating
enough; not for exploiting the proletariat but for the bad use of the
fruits of this exploitation; not for its essence, but for not conforming
sufficiently to this essence. They do not propose to _abolish_ wage
labour and surplus value, but to use them _more rationally_, even _more
morally_. This is the economic program of the "left", from the social
democrats to the national-communists, the left of _capital_.

One is reminded of the painful dilemma of Marx's slave-owner: "Whether
to squander the surplus-product lashed out of his niggers, entirely in
champagne, or whether to reconvert a part of it, into more niggers and
more land" [^fn-07]. Mr. Baran believes himself to be marxist because he
is a partisan of the second solution!

The notion of surplus is merely the result and the summary of the vision
of these advanced servants of capitalism: since capitalism does not
produce all that it is able to produce one can go on to calculate all
that it could produce if it was a good capitalism, well organised,
planned and efficient. And since it does not produce this, it has thus
been demonstrated that the system is bad and that it is necessary to
change it -- "change" evidently means replacing it with a system capable
of producing the maximum, which one baptises "socialism". Before making
this calculation, however, it is necessary to obliterate even the memory
of Marxist theory. This is why Baran defines three different ideas:
actual surplus, potential surplus, and planned surplus. We examine these
one by one.

### Actual Economic Surplus

This is the name given by the author to "the difference between the
actual current production of society and its actual consumption"
(p. 23). In Marxist terms, such a quantity corresponds to the
accumulation of constant capital, in bourgeois terms to the net
formation of capital or net investment: nothing new so far. However,
taking the definition given, such an idea is purely empirical or
descriptive and does not _explain_ anything: its theoretical interest is
thus precisely nil. On the other hand its political and ideological
interest for "Marxists" such as Baran becomes apparent when he writes:

>"Actual economic surplus has been generated in all socio-economic
>formations, and while its size and structure have markedly differed
>from one phase of development to another, its existence has
>characterised nearly all of recorded history" (p. 23).

And with this delightful (but sly) phrase, all of Marx's life and work
are swept away. Forgotten are commodities, money, capital,
surplus-value; forgotten is wage labour (even the word wage labour is
ignored by Mr. Baran: it appears not once in his book); forgotten, in
sum, is all of Marxist theory which (we will be excused if we remind the
reader) is that of the capitalist mode of production and not that of a
mode of utilisation of the net product (a utilisation which in any case
is determined by the mode of production -- as Engels, in his time, had
to remind Herr Dühring). All good Marxists will therefore salute with us
the amazing powers of abstraction of Mr. Baran; in making an abstraction
of Marx's work he has succeeded in making of him a theoretician of
growth.

### Potential Economic Surplus

This second idea is defined by Baran as

>"... the difference between the output that could be produced in a
>given natural and technological environment with the help of employable
>productive resources, and what might be regarded as essential
>consumption. Its realisation presupposes a more or less drastic
>reorganisation of the production and distribution of social output, and
>implies far-reaching changes in the structure of society. It appears
>under four headings. One is society's excess consumption (predominantly
>on the part of the upper income groups, but in some countries such as
>the United States also on the part of the so-called middle classes),
>the second is the output lost to society through the existence of
>unproductive workers, the third is the output lost because of the
>irrational and wasteful organisation of the existing productive
>apparatus, and the fourth is the output foregone owing to the existence
>of unemployment caused primarily by the anarchy of capitalist
>production and the deficiency of effective demand" (p. 23-24).

One has to admire this definition of unemployment proffered by a
"Marxist" economist: the result of anarchic organisation and
insufficient demand. Mr. Baran should have taken the pains to read
_Capital_: he would have learnt that for Marx, unemployment, which is
relative surplus population or the industrial reserve army, results
inevitably from rising organic composition i.e. from the very movement
of _capital_:

>"This accelerated relative diminution of the variable constituent,
>that goes along with the accelerated increase of the total capital, and
>moves more rapidly than this increase, takes the inverse form, at the
>other pole, of an apparently absolute increase of the labouring
>population, an increase always moving more rapidly than that of the
>variable capital or the means of employment. But, in fact, it is
>capitalistic accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces
>in the direct ratio of its own energy and extent, a relatively
>redundant population of labourers i.e. a population of greater extent
>than suffices for the average needs of the self-expansion of capital,
>and therefore a surplus population...
>
>"The labouring population therefore produces, along with the
>accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by which itself is
>made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative surplus
>population; and it does this to an always increasing extent. This is
>the law of population peculiar to the capitalist mode of production"
>[^fn-08].

Every relation revealed here; nothing to do with anarchy, nothing to do
with demand. Moreover we can admirably understand the level of Baran's
thinking when, a few pages further on, he talks of "the unemployment of
human and _material_ resources" (p. 39), and of the disgraceful waste of
"human and _material_ resources" (p. 37) (our emphasis). We obviously do
not complain often enough about the suffering of these poor machines!
Placing on the same plane humans and material, and not seeing in
unemployment anything more than lost production -- is just another
illustration of the _technical_ criticism of capitalism typical of
petty-bourgeois university thought.

But passing on to the idea of "potential economic surplus", this really
is a fairy tale. The potential surplus is that which could be the net
product (corresponding to global surplus value) of capitalist society if
it was more "rational", if it did not engender unemployment, or luxury
production, or unproductive workers, or wastage; i.e. _if it were not in
fact capitalist society at all_. This concept of potential surplus sums
up the utopian petty-bourgeois dream of a capitalism bereft of wastage
and obstacles to production, exemplary, morally purified. Such a concept
is not even empirical as its predecessor was; it is purely a product of
the imagination and on the scientific plane has thus about as much
relevance as Father Christmas. Its only interest is, once again,
ideological. It permits the synthesis of all of Baran's former
falsifications in defining capitalism, not as a mode of production based
on wage labour and surplus value, on the exploitation of the
proletariat, but as a badly organised system which produces waste, gives
rise to parasites and unproductive individuals, and which therefore does
not invest all that it is capable of investing. One is naturally led to
the conclusion that socialism is the opposite of all this. Not a mode of
production in which wage labour and surplus value -- and the categories
which must inevitably give birth to them -- are absent, but a regime
which is not anarchic, which does not waste, has no unproductive
workers, can invest to the maximum and thus permit maximum growth. It
can do this because it is organised, i.e. _planned_. Which leads us to
our third "surplus" and ties up the whole argument into a knot of
mystification.

### Planned Economic Surplus

This idea which can "only be applied to a socialist type of planning"
represents

>"... the difference between society's 'optimum' output attainable in a
>historically given natural and technological environment under
>conditions of planned 'optimal' utilisation of all available productive
>resources, and some chosen 'optimal' volume of consumption. The meaning
>and contents of the 'optimum' involved are essentially different from
>those attached to this notion in bourgeois economics. They do not
>reflect a configuration of production and consumption determined by
>profit considerations of individual firms, by the income distribution,
>tastes and social pressures of a capitalist order...
>
>"Nor does this 'optimum' presuppose the maximisation of output that
>might be attainable at any given time. It may well be associated with a
>less than maximum output in view of a voluntarily shortened labour day,
>of an increase in the time devoted to education, or of conscious
>discarding of certain noxious types of production (coal mining, for
>example). What is crucial is that the volume of output would not be
>determined by the fortuitous outcome of a number of uncoordinated
>decisions on the part of individual businessmen and corporations, but
>by a rational plan expressing what society would wish to produce, to
>save and to invest at any given time" (p. 41-42).

In writing this Baran shows that for him socialism is defined purely and
simply by _planning_. Whether the planning decides a rate of growth of
10% a year or a reduction in the length of the working day makes no
difference to him. That it coexists with commodities, money, wage
labour, is of no importance. Planning is the essence of socialism while
disorder and uncontrolled decisions are the essence of capitalism.

Let us now try to unravel this cleverly tangled web.

1. Capitalist anarchy does not imply that each capitalist does as he
  pleases. All of Marx's work consists in showing that this anarchy has
  its iron laws, which impose themselves more or less consciously on
  individual capitals. Production is not determined by "tastes and
  social pressures" nor by the "uncoordinated decisions on the part of
  individual businessmen"; the exact opposite is the case. Individual
  capitals cannot but obey the inherent laws of capitalism, imposed
  upon them by
  competition:

  >"Free competition brings out the inherent laws of capitalist
  production, in the shape of external coercive laws having power over
  every individual capitalist" [^fn-09].

  It is thus the logic of the capitalist mode of production which
  determines the activity of producers and not the other way round
  [^fn-10]. Planning in a social formation in which the fundamental
  relations of capital exist cannot but obey the laws of capital, and
  the illusions of the planners cannot alter this fact.

2. Gradually, as the centralisation which accompanies the development
  of capital proceeds, competition between capitals of an inferior
  calibre disappears, only to reappear at a higher level with increased
  violence until the highest limit constituted by national capital, is
  reached.

  >"In a given branch of industry centralisation would reach its
  >extreme limit when all the individual capitals invested in it were
  >fused into a single capital. In a given society the limit would not
  >be reached until the moment when the entire social capital was united
  >in the hands either of a single capitalist or of a single capitalist
  >company" [^fn-11].

Trusts and monopolies therefore introduce a certain amount of
planning into a branch of production which replaces the open
competition between the capitalists of that branch. Competition then
reappears between the trusts, as well as between the latter and those
branches of production which are not monopolised, to appropriate the
greatest possible portion of social surplus value. The capitalist
state, acting as a board of directors of the company of capitalists of
the nation (itself riven with tensions and internal struggles just as
those existing among stockholders of any other company) eventually
intervenes in order to substitute for competition, national planning of
the allocation of the social surplus value and the production of the
_country_. And at the same time that this is achieved, competition
reappears with even more frenzied violence between national capitals.
This process is only tendencial. It is slow and uneven. The inferior
levels of competition continue to exist, but on a more limited basis
and within a margin of manoeuvre which is allowed to them by an overall
organisation intended for a different and much more important struggle
of the _entire_ national capital. When an army goes to war, the
quarrels between soldiers can only be tolerated insofar as they do not
pose a risk to the strategic interest of the army as a whole: between
1939 and 1945 the Western powers were forced to plan their war effort
-- without being socialist for all that. The same was true for the
capitalist economic reconstruction in the aftermath of the war. It was
true for the international economic war which began to rage once again
in the sixties. Conforming to Engels' provisions: with the approach of
socialist society, capitalist society also makes use of a plan -- the
organisation of each national capital for the struggle between national
capitals.

Merely because planning becomes possible (within national boundaries) in
capitalist society after a certain level of development and
concentration of capital has been reached, it does not suffice in order
to define the mode of production as socialist. To repeat once again
"that which is fundamental": what is necessary is the destruction of
capitalist relationships, the disappearance of commodities, money and
wage labour, and, at the same time, _the reduction of the working day_
-- a fundamental measure which is the most concrete result, the most
vivid illustration of the end of the wage slavery of a section of
humanity. All of these measures will be taken by the dictatorship of the
proletariat which intervenes despotically in the economy _by means_ of
planning.

To conclude: the only purpose of this "surplus" -- whichever adjective
it follows -- is to destroy Marxist theory. In particular, the ideas of
"potential surplus" and "planned surplus" contain all the distortions of
the ideology which seeks to define capitalism as an irrational and
inefficient system of production operating in the interests of a handful
of big financiers and sabotaging economic growth, while socialism is a
system which is organised, has eliminated waste, and thus, thanks to
planning, permits maximum economic growth. This ideology is nothing
other than the remains of the political economy of Stalinism. Its
function is, essentially, to obscure the fact that today, just as in
Stalin's day, Russia is ruled in the economic domain by _all of the
fundamental categories of capitalism_: commodities, money, wage labour
and thus the frantic exploitation of the working class [^fn-12].

Baran's book shows that this falsification inevitably implies from the
very start a revision and reversal of the theory from A to Z. It is very
simply stated: Marxist theory -- like all theory of consequence -- forms
a whole. In changing a single element, one must change it in its
entirety; to defend it in its _entirety_ we are therefore obliged to
defend _each single element_. Those eager for novelty who do not
understand this take us for purists and dogmatists: they do not see that
the theoretical arm of the revolution must be fiercely protected if the
revolutionaries are not to be disarmed.

## Marxist Scientific Method

Baran and Sweezy expound their conception of scientific method in their
work entitled _Monopoly Capital_:

>"Scientific understanding proceeds by way of constructing and
>analysing 'models' of the segments or aspects of reality under study.
>The purpose of these models is not to give a mirror image of reality,
>not to include all its elements in their exact sizes and proportions,
>but rather to single out and make available for intensive investigation
>those elements which are decisive. We abstract from nonessentials, we
>blot out the unimportant to get an unobstructed view of the important,
>we magnify it in order to improve the range and accuracy of our
>observation. A model is, and must be, unrealistic in the sense in which
>the word is most commonly used. Nevertheless, and in a sense
>paradoxically, if it is a good model it provides the key to
>understanding reality" (p. 14).

Thus, Marx had elaborated a _model_ of English competitive capitalism:

>"Now Marx derived his theoretical model of the competitive capitalist
>system from the study of Britain, by far the richest and most developed
>capitalist country of his day" (p. 6).

Now, we no longer have competitive capitalism:

>"We must recognise that competition, which was the predominant form of
>market relations in nineteenth century Britain, has ceased to occupy
>that position, not only in Britain but everywhere else in the
>capitalist world" (p. 6).

Thus, since the time of Marx

>"the structure of the capitalist economy has undergone a fundamental
>change... the structural change from competitive to monopoly
>capitalism" (p. 72).

Since Marxist analysis is no longer applicable in this era of the
capitalism of monopolies, our two professors modestly propose to replace
it by elaborating a "model" of monopoly capitalism. They thus betray
their total lack of understanding of Marxist scientific method in
general and of the role of competition in particular.

### Competitive Capitalism and Monopoly Capitalism

We shall first see where the odd conception which describes competitive
capitalism and monopoly capitalism as two systems of fundamentally
different structures, and therefore governed by different laws (as our
authors attempt to establish further on), can lead. Baran does not
flinch from placing on the same plane the passage from feudalism to
capitalism on the one hand and the passage from competitive to monopoly
capitalism on the other:

>"As the transition from feudalism to competitive capitalism led not
>only to a vast expansion of the economic surplus but also to a transfer
>of a large share of it from the feudal landlord to the capitalist
>businessman, the transition from competitive to monopoly capitalism has
>resulted in a tremendous increase of the absolute value of the economic
>surplus and in the shift of control over it from the relatively small
>capitalist to a few giant corporations" [^fn-13].

Marx constructed the theory of a _mode of production_ in which he
explained that the change from one mode of production to another cannot
be accomplished except by a violent revolution. Baran replaces modes of
production by "economic regimes" which succeed one another sometimes
violently and sometimes imperceptibly, and are distinguished from one
another not by their _relations of production_ but by the manner in
which they make use of their economic "surplus". For Marxists there is
only _one mode of capitalist production_ whose development consists of
several phases but whose invariant essence is most concretely
characterised by the existence of _wage labour_. The "Marxist" Baran has
without doubt forgotten this first truth. But we already know why our
professors rush to jump on the secondary aspect, monopolies: it is
because their major worry is to avoid seeing the essential, _capital_
and the fundamental relation which corresponds to it: _wage labour_.

This discovery of a new economic "regime" gives Baran and Sweezy the
opportunity to further justify their term "surplus" (they pose a new
"surplus" without a qualifying adjective. Is it actual? It is potential?
Is it sometimes one and sometimes the other? One thing is certain, the
authors themselves don't know either).

>"The economic surplus is, in the briefest possible definition, the
>difference between what a society produces and the costs of producing
>it... In a highly developed monopoly capitalist society the surplus
>assumes many forms and disguises. \[_Note at foot of page_: It is for
>this reason that we prefer the concept 'surplus' to the traditional
>Marxian 'surplus value', since the latter is probably identified in the
>minds of most people familiar with Marxian economic theory as equal to
>the sum of profits + interest + rent. It is true that Marx
>demonstrates... that surplus value also comprises other items such as
>the revenues of State and Church, the expenses of transforming
>commodities into money, and the wages of unproductive workers. In
>general however, he treated these as secondary factors and excluded
>them from his basic theoretical schema. _It is our contention that
>under monopoly capitalism this procedure is no longer justified, and we
>hope that a change in terminology will help to effect the needed shift
>in theoretical position._\]" (p. 10. Our emphasis).

If we understand correctly, according to Baran and Sweezy, it is no
longer justifiable to attribute to the State, to unproductive workers,
etc., a secondary role in the explanation and movement of capital and
surplus value. There are however, _only_ two ways of looking at the
question:

* either surplus value is extorted by _industrial capital_ which buys
  the commodity labour-power at its value in order to recoup, by its
  use in the process of production, a larger value than was paid -- a
  _surplus value_ -- to be divided between the profit of enterprise,
  interest, and rent and finally redistributed among the many parasites
  such as the State, those engaged in unproductive activities, etc. In
  this case the State, those engaged in unproductive activities, etc.,
  have only a secondary role, and the introduction of the category
  "surplus" merely confuses the issue;

* or else, if one wishes to attribute to the State _as such_ (and not
  just in its role as a capitalist), and to other parasites, not a
  secondary but an essential role, it must be admitted that they
  themselves _directly_ extort surplus value from the proletariat: we
  would be interested to know _how_ they manage to do this. At all
  events, it can be seen that we have left the realm of the real world
  of the capitalist mode of production and have entered that of the
  "monopoly capitalist mode of production" or some other delirious
  invention to which the authors will not openly admit.

There is no third solution. In one case as in the other the term
"surplus" once again serves to obliterate Marxist theory.

Whatever the pretext invoked, all attempts to make competition the
discriminating element between the two supposedly fundamentally opposed
systems is stupid for two reasons:

1. because the centralisation of capital, far from suppressing
  competition, does no more than depersonalise it and carry it to a
  higher level where it is waged with even greater violence;

2. because competition is not an element of the "structure" of capital
  (to use the jargon of the authors). This is so far from being the case
  that Marx, desiring to study _capital in general_, had, in Vols. 1 and
  2 of _Capital_, to make an abstraction of competition. He only
  introduced the latter when, in Vol. 3, he redescended to the surface
  of the capitalist economy in its conceptual reconstruction. "A
  scientific analysis of competition is not possible before we have a
  conception of the inner nature of capital" [^fn-14].

Competition can only in effect _execute_ the laws of capital: it can
neither explain nor change them:

>"Competition executes the inner laws of capital; makes them into
>compulsory laws towards the individual capital, but is does not invent
>them. It realises them. To try to explain them simply as results of
>competition therefore means to concede that one does not understand
>them" [^fn-15].

Thus has Marx pre-empted us. Baran and Sweezy have understood nothing
either of capitalism or _Capital_.

### Theory and Model

If our two professors have made such nonsense of the role of
competition, it is in effect because they have not bothered to
understand Marx's method. According to them, scientific method consists
of constructing models of reality under discussion and then to establish
the relationships between the elements of the model.

What is a model? It is a schematic representation of the salient aspects
of the reality observed at a given moment, leaving to one side all that
is secondary. What can it tell us? In the best of cases, a good
description of a phenomenon bereft of all that is secondary or
accidental. But to describe is not to explain. Such a method is
_empirical_: it rests at the level of phenomenal appearance (free from
all accidental disturbances). Now appearance is not scientific truth. On
the contrary: "All science would be superfluous if the outward
appearance and the essence of things directly coincided" [^fn-16]. What
is more this method is not dialectic. It fixes the observed forms and
prevents at the same time consideration of their movement and
_transformation_.

Marx did something entirely different: his work does not consist of a
model, but of a theory. Marx did not construct a model of English
competitive capitalism: he _explained_ the capitalist mode of production
and its laws of development; he constructed its _theory_, and he
_illustrated_ this theory using concrete historical examples drawn from
the capitalist society in which he lived (the only possible empirical
verification in the social sciences when expounding theory):

>"In this work I have to examine _the capitalist mode of production_,
and the _conditions of production and exchange corresponding to that
mode_. Up to the present time their classic ground is England. That is
the reason why England is used as the _chief illustration_ in the
development of my _theoretical ideas_" [^fn-17].

Marx therefore gave us a theory and not a model. Not a schema but an
explanation and exposition of the laws which govern the birth, movement
and death of the capitalist mode of production. Far from being content
with summarising what he saw, he searched for and found _scientific
truth_, which is often the complete opposite of the immediate
interpretation suggested by outward appearances. To _explain_, he
started by analysing the _elementary form_ of capitalist social wealth:
the commodity. And, on the basis of this elementary form he constructed
the essential abstraction thanks to which he was then able to
conceptually reconstruct the rest: value, which consists in essence of
labour _in general_ (abstract human labour). It was on the basis of this
abstraction (without which it is impossible to proceed) that he
developed the theory: value permits the explanation of the concrete
forms of commodities and money and at the same time provides the secret
of _capital_: value which begets value. Value, capital, surplus value,
etc., are the _concepts_, the theoretical instruments which permit the
_understanding_ of the concrete forms which appear on the surface of
capitalist society, their mutual relations, the laws of their movement
and of their transformation. The theory is the explanatory discourse
which permits us to _understand_ the capitalist mode of production, to
_know_ its movement, thanks to our knowledge of its laws, and thus to
_predict_ the evolution of the concrete forms by which it manifests
itself.

The "model" does not allow us to understand or predict, that is not its
aim. It is the methodological symbol of the impotence of bourgeois
social "science" which having long since given up explaining reality, is
content when it succeeds in schematising and baptising appearances. The
approach of our authors is the best example of this impotence. Having
defined their method they proceed to its application in constructing
their model of monopoly capitalism. Briefly, their reasoning is as
follows:

1. The "typical unit" of present day capitalism is the "ideal type" of
  big firm or enterprise, characterised by the behaviour of its
  directors which have complete control of effective management, who
  themselves recruit their successors, and who ensure by a policy of
  self-financing the financial independence of the firm.

2. Empirical studies show that the objectives and the motivations of
  these directors are as follows: power, large growth-rates and sizes of
  enterprise.

3. That such objectives can only be maintained if there are very high
  rates of profit -- even if personal enrichment is not the fundamental
  aim of these directors. Thus the objective of the big enterprise is
  profit.

4. What is monopoly capitalism? It is a system where giant corporations
  such as these are the dominant force.

  This whole approach merely reverts to defining capital by describing
  the activities of its representatives. Even if the description is in
  places correct, this does not advance by one iota our _understanding_
  of the phenomenon. Twenty pages of the construction of a model result
  in this remarkable discovery: the objective of the giant corporation
  is profit. But why does it seek to make profit? Because, reply Baran
  and Sweezy, this is what is shown by a study of its directors. If poor
  Marx had been acquainted with the method of models, he would have been
  spared all his efforts! In place of writing thousands of pages it
  would have been sufficient for him to define competitive capitalism as
  a system of small enterprises directed by individuals eager to enrich
  themselves and, indulging in competition, succeed only in lowering
  their rates of profit. Explaining capital by its agents is just as
  stupid as explaining the State by its functionaries or a disease by
  its symptoms: it is however what bourgeois charlatanism has done for
  more than a century.

  To complete this methodological masterpiece our two professors finish
  the construction of their "model" in the following manner:

5. The relations between these big firms themselves and between them
  and other economic agents are market relations, and thus the relations
  of price: "... the study of monopoly capitalism must begin with the
  workings of the price mechanism" (p. 53).

6. The thing which distinguishes monopoly capitalism is that the big
  enterprise is a "price maker" while under competitive capitalism the
  individual enterprise is a "price taker" (p. 53).

To commence the analysis at the level of price is obviously to prevent
any further advance in the understanding of things as they are. It is a
regression, not merely in comparison with Marx, but even compared with
classical political economy who at least posed the question of _value_
in order to explain _price_. The entire first volume of _Capital_, which
our "Marxist" professors have been until now content with demolishing
piece by piece, is here swept resolutely to one side _en bloc_. For
them, capitalism can be explained at the level of circulation [^fn-18].

Marx constructed the _theory_ of a _mode of production_; Baran and
Sweezy describe certain parts of the process of circulation. In doing so
they follow in the footsteps of vulgar political economists before them,
but the latter at least had the grace not to pretend they were Marxists.

## The "Laws" of Monopoly Capitalism

A stupid method produces stupid results -- we could not really have
expected otherwise. It becomes obvious that at the level of results,
i.e. the "laws" discovered thanks to the Baran-Sweezy method, the
confusion attains its height. These results and their demonstration can
be summarised in the following way: competition, which manifests itself
in forms other than a price war, obliges the monopolies to lower their
costs of production; but being monopolies, they can fix their prices at
the level that they desire. In this way their profit margins increase.
It follows logically that under monopoly capitalism profits increase in
value both absolutely and relatively (relatively in relation to the
national revenue, that is). This is the "_law of increasing surplus_"
(equated, for the purposes of argument, with profit), valid for monopoly
capitalism, and which must be substituted for the law of the falling
rate of profit, valid only for competitive capitalism.

This is so confused that we must retrace the argument step by step.

### The Increase in Profit Margins

According to the authors, monopolies fix their prices at the desired
level and concentrate on the other hand on lowering their costs of
production. Thus under monopoly capitalism, profit margins increase:

>"... we have argued, that oligopolies succeed in attaining a close
>approximation to the theoretical monopoly price" (p. 67).
>
>"The whole motivation of cost reduction is to increase profits, and
>the monopolistic structure of markets enables the corporations to
>appropriate the lion's share of the fruits of increasing productivity
>directly in the form of higher profits. This means that under monopoly
>capitalism, declining costs imply continuously widening profit margins"
>(p. 71).

Such an explanation is worth _absolutely nothing_ because, resting as we
have seen at the level of _phenomenal appearance_, it cannot but
summarise the false interpretation suggested by this appearance. It is
true that one or _some_ monopolies can, by preventing the entry of new
capitalists into their branch, escape the equalisation of the rate of
profit (explained by Marx in the second section of Vol. 3 of _Capital_),
and can thus ensure for themselves a monopoly super profit. In doing
this, however, they have not _created_ this extra value, but
_appropriated_ value created by the labour power employed by _other_
capitals. And in a system with generalised monopoly in all branches, at
the global level, such an explanation (Baran and Sweezy's) is completely
useless since it reverts to saying that the entire system can create
super profits merely by increasing prices; in other words value can be
created in the sphere of circulation.

If our authors had taken the trouble to read chapter V of Vol. 1 of
_Capital_ they would have avoided such a patent absurdity: Marx
demonstrates therein, in his usual impeccable manner, that it is
impossible to create value in the sphere of circulation [^fn-19]. Thirty
seconds reflection would be enough for a child to conclude that if
tomorrow everyone decided to sell his commodity at a 10% higher price
(including labour-power), this would enrich no one. Or else, if the only
commodity which did not raise its price was labour-power, then the
explanation of increased profit lies not in monopoly prices but in the
increased exploitation of the working class, a general tendency of
capital in which monopolies as such play no role in particular. But
Baran and Sweezy are incapable of understanding this: if one makes
profit then My Goodness! we have sold dearer than we bought. Here is the
political economy of the grocer in all its splendour!

A solution to the problem remains to be found. If the profit margins of
the large American corporations have, over a long period, a
statistically justified, sustained rise (we are not implying that this
is or is not the case) the explanation cannot be found in their policies
on costs or on prices, but elsewhere. Without going into any great
detail, we can see that Marxist theory offers several ways in which this
might be achieved.

* **Monopoly super profit**: American monopolies may escape the
  equalisation of the rate of profit of American capitals and the
  equalisation of the world rate of profit (this last functions with
  more difficulty due to the lower mobility of capital at a world
  level).  Monopoly super profits thus realised _cannot but_ be at the
  expense of other capitals, whether American or no, operating in the
  non-monopolised sectors. The raising of monopoly prices is merely the
  concrete form taken by a transfer of value:

  >"The monopoly prices of certain commodities... merely transfer a
  >portion of the profit of other commodity producers to the commodities
  >having the monopoly price. A local disturbance in the distribution of
  >the surplus-value among the various spheres of production would
  >indirectly take place, but it would leave the limit of this
  >surplus-value itself unaltered" [^fn-20].

* **Super profit from productivity**: Following upon the increased
  productivity of labour-power, the individual value of a commodity
  may fall below its social value. The capitalist has only to sell it at
  its social value to pocket some extra profit. Such extra profits are
  realised in one branch of production be it at the level of the world
  market or of a national market:

  >"Capitals invested in foreign trade can yield a higher rate of
  >profit, because, in the first place, there is competition with
  >commodities produced in other countries with inferior production
  >facilities, so that the more advanced country sells its goods above
  >their value even though cheaper than the competing countries. Insofar
  >as the labour of the more advanced country is here realised as labour
  >of a higher specific weight, the rate of profit rises, because labour
  >which has not been paid as being of a higher quality is sold as such.
  >The same may obtain in relation to the country to which commodities
  >are exported and to that from which commodities are imported; namely,
  >the latter may offer more materialised labour _in kind_ than it
  >receives, and yet thereby receive commodities cheaper than it could
  >produce them. Just as a manufacturer who employs a new invention
  >before it becomes generally used, undersells his competitors and yet
  >sells his commodity above its individual value, that is, realises the
  >specifically higher productiveness of the labour he employs as
  >surplus labour. He thus secures a surplus-profit" [^fn-21].

* **Super profits arising from the export of capital**:

  >"As concerns capitals invested in colonies, etc., on the other
  >hand, they may yield higher rates of profit for the simple reason
  >that the rate of profit is higher there due to backward development
  >and likewise the exploitation of labour, because of the use of
  >slaves, coolies, etc. Why should not these higher rates of profit,
  >realised by capitalists in certain lines and sent home by them, enter
  >into the equalisation of the general rate of profit and thus tend,
  >pro tanto, to raise it, unless it is the monopolies that stand in the
  >way" [^fn-22].

We will not elaborate upon these explanations, most particularly the
last, since they are already widely known (cf. _Imperialism -- the
Highest Stage of Capitalism_). That the profit margins of giant American
corporations are due at least in part to American imperialism which
entangles the entire planet in chains is beyond dispute. And yet our two
American "Marxist" professors have forgotten it.

### The Absolute Increase in the Mass of Profits

Baran and Sweezy continue their argument by stating that growing profit
margins imply an increase in the mass of profits:

>"\[such\] continuously widening profit margins in turn imply
>aggregate profits which rise not only absolutely but as a share of
>national product. If we provisionally equate aggregate profits with
>society's economic surplus, we can formulate as a law of monopoly
>capitalism that the surplus tends to rise both absolutely and
>relatively as the system develops" (p. 71-72).

Our two professors obviously imagine that they have made a great
discovery: _because_ of monopolies, the mass of profit grows. Marx
wrote:

>"Thus, the same development of the social productiveness of labour
>expresses itself with the progress of capitalist production on the one
>hand in a tendency of the _rate_ of profit to fall progressively and,
>on the other, in a progressive growth of the absolute mass of the
>appropriated surplus value, or profit; so that on the whole a _relative
>decrease_ of the variable capital and profit is accompanied by an
>_absolute increase_ of both. This twofold effect, as we have seen, can
>express itself only in a growth of the total capital at a pace more
>rapid than that at which the rate of profit falls" [^fn-23].

Marx had established then the law of the augmentation of the mass of
profits (or of surplus-value) one century ago. He demonstrated that it
was an inherent tendency of capital necessitated by its movement of
accumulation. Monopolies have nothing to do with the question. Our
"Marxist" professors are really good: not only have they not discovered
anything, they have succeeded in giving us a false explanation of a law
already perfectly explained a hundred years ago.

### The Relative Increase in Profits

According to the reasoning of the authors the increase in profits occurs
not only in absolute terms but also in _relative_ value i.e. "as a share
of national product" (see above). Ignoring the total abandonment of
Marxism which consists in referring to a completely mystified category
belonging to bourgeois economics, and supposing that it was intended to
mean the Marxist "social revenue" designated by (v + s), or the total
sum of variable capital and surplus value for one year, we have the
following:

To say that profits augment "as a share of national product" means
purely and simply that the ratio s / (v + s) increases. This relation
never must be mistaken for the rate of profit which is not at issue here
until constant capital is introduced [^fn-24]. The increase in this
ratio is the result of the increase in the relation s / v which is the
_rate_ of surplus value. In other words, putting the best face upon it,
all that Baran and Sweezy have "discovered" at the end of their tortuous
and, in any case, incorrect reasoning is that the rate of surplus value
increases -- a fact illustrated by Marx long ago.

But to cap it all, even after attaining these dizzy heights of idiocy,
not only do our professors not understand that they have discovered
nothing new, they imagine that this "new" law is specific to monopoly
capitalism and contradicts the law of the falling rate of profit
[^fn-25].

### The Law of Increasing Surplus

The conclusion of their demonstration, expurgated, accelerated, improved
and reduced, gives the following:

>"We can formulate as a law of monopoly capitalism that the surplus
tends to rise both absolutely and relatively as the system develops.
>
>"This law immediately invites comparison, as it should, with the
classical Marxian law of the falling tendency of the rate of profit.
Without entering into an analysis of the different versions of the
latter, we can say that they all presuppose a competitive system. By
substituting the law of rising surplus for the law of falling profit, we
are therefore not rejecting or revising a time-honoured theorem of
political economy: we are simply taking account of the fact that the
structure of the capitalist economy has undergone a fundamental change
since that theorem was formulated. What is most essential about the
structural change from competitive to monopoly capitalism finds its
theoretical expression in this substitution" (p. 71-72).

Here is a concluding reply to these final absurdities:

* The law of the tendency of the _rate_ of profit to fall (and not
  profit itself) has no "different versions" and does not presuppose
  "a competitive system". It lies in the innate movement of capital
  itself which arises from the rise in organic composition and thus the
  growth in the productivity of labour:

  >"This mode of production produces a progressive relative decrease
  >of the variable capital as compared to the constant capital, and
  >consequently a continuously rising organic composition of the total
  >capital. The immediate result of this is that the rate of
  >surplus-value, at the same, or even a rising degree of exploitation
  >is represented by a continuously falling general rate of profit...
  >The progressive tendency of the rate of profit to fall is, therefore,
  >just _an expression peculiar to the capitalist mode of production_ of
  >the progressive development of the social productivity of labour"
  >[^fn-26].

* Furthermore, the law of a rising rate of surplus-value, that our
  "Marxists" call the "law of increasing surplus" because they do not
  understand the difference between the _rate of profit_ and the rate of
  _surplus-value_, was established by Marx as a general law of capital:
  monopolies have nothing to do with it.

* Finally, there is obviously no substitute for these laws: the law of
  the increase in the rate of surplus-value and the law of the
  tendency of the rate of profit to fall. They cannot be contradictory
  since they both express, at different levels, the innermost essence of
  capitalism.

Only incredible simpletons could pack into such a few pages so great a
number of stupidities. Well can Baran and Sweezy take their places among
bourgeois university scholars!

We really lack the courage to make a final summary of all this
foolishness. The reader is probably also exhausted after scaling these
heights of university cretinism, and so we leave the last word to Lenin.
Here is how he concluded a polemic against Tugan-Baranowski, who had
also attempted in his own way to "improve" Marxism -- the phenomenon is
not new apparently -- and, moreover, was much better acquainted with
Marx's work than are Baran and Sweezy:

>"The puzzled reader may ask: how could a learned liberal professor have
forgotten these elementary axioms familiar to anybody who has read any
exposition of the views of socialism? The answer is simple: the
_personal_ qualities of present day professors are such that we may find
among them even exceptionally stupid people like Tugan. But the _social_
status of professors in bourgeois society is such that only those are
allowed to hold such posts who sell science to serve the interests of
capital, and agree to utter the most fatuous nonsense, the most
unscrupulous drivel and twaddle against the socialists. The bourgeoisie
will forgive the professors all this as long as they go on 'abolishing'
socialism" [^fn-27].

A final word: of all the little academic wood grub who owe their
existence to and earn their living from gnawing away at revolutionary
theory, those who camouflage themselves behind a disguise of Marxist
vocabulary are the most dangerous and repugnant.

[^fn-01]: Baran, "The Political Economy of Growth", Monthly Review
Press, 1957; Baran and Sweezy, "Monopoly Capital", Monthly Review
Press, 1966. For a critique of Baran's theories (and those of the
"Monthly Review") on the question of "underdevelopment", we refer the
reader to the article "Marxisme et sous-développement" published in
_Programme Communiste_ no. 53-54, October 1971.

[^fn-02]: Contained in Chapter IV: "The General Formula for Capital".
_Capital_, Vol. 1, Moore-Aveling edition, London, 1938, p. 123 ff.

[^fn-03]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chap. 24, p. 603.

[^fn-04]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chap. 24, p. 606.

[^fn-05]: _Capital_, Vol. 3, Moscow, 1966, Chap. 15, p. 259.

[^fn-06]: "Theories of Surplus Value", Vol. 1, Moscow, 1954, p. 274.

[^fn-07]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chap. 24, p. 609.

[^fn-08]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chap. 25. p. 643 -- The 3rd and 4th
sections of Chap. 25 are devoted to relative overpopulation.

[^fn-09]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chap. 10, p. 255.

[^fn-10]: A century after the appearance of Vol. 1 of _Capital_, 
petty-bourgeois "Marxism", held enthralled by the capitalists, has not 
yet understood this elementary truth upon which Marx insisted many 
times in his work. From the Preface of the 1st German edition of 
_Capital_: "My standpoint, from which the evolution of the economic 
formation of society is viewed as a process of natural history, can 
less than any other make the individual responsible for relations whose 
creature he socially remains, however much he may subjectively raise 
himself above them" (p. XIX); to Chapter 51 of Vol. 3: "The principal 
agents of this mode of production itself, the capitalist and the wage 
labourer, are as such merely embodiments, personifications of capital 
and wage labour; definite social characteristics stamped upon 
individuals by the process of social production; the products of these 
definite social production relations" (p. 857-8).

[^fn-11]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, p. 822.

[^fn-12]: On all that concerns the Russian economy we refer the reader
to our fundamental study "Struttura economica e sociale della Russia
d'oggi" (Edizioni Il Programma Comunista, Milan, 1976) and in French to
our study "Bilan d'une révolution".

[^fn-13]: "The Political Economy of Growth", p. 60-61. The remaining
quotes are from "Monopoly Capital".

[^fn-14]: _Capital_, Vol. 1, Chap. 12, p. 255.

[^fn-15]: "Grundrisse", Penguin 1974 (paperback) edition, p. 752. 
Marx's remark is directed against Adam Smith.

[^fn-16]: _Capital_, Vol. 3, Chap. 48, p. 817.

[^fn-17]: Preface to the 1st German edition, Vol. 1, p. XVII (our 
emphasis).

[^fn-18]: The authors, moreover, manifestly ignore the _process of 
production_ of capital: "We are particularly conscious of the fact that 
this approach, as we have used it, has resulted in almost total neglect 
of a subject which occupies a central place in Marx's study of 
capitalism: the labour process" (p. 8). To see only the labour process 
in the capitalist process of production is to provide further evidence, 
if such were needed, of the authors' lack of understanding.

[^fn-19]: The aim of the chapter entitled "The Contradiction of the 
General Formula of Capital". When we remember that this demonstration 
is an essential cornerstone of Marx's reasoning when passing from the 
general formula of capital to the illustration of the role of the 
commodity labour-power; that he stressed the question many times in 
Vol. 2 (chaps. 5 and 6) and Vol. 3 (4th Section); that the 1st section 
of Vol. 3 is entirely devoted to showing that profit is a mystified 
category, the disguise of surplus-value, it is disconcerting to have to 
waste time and paper to remind "Marxists" of these elementary truths.

[^fn-20]: _Capital_, Vol. 3, Chap. 50, p. 861. To this explanation the 
authors devote one phrase, by accident, when talking about something 
else (the intervention of the state). "... Extra large profits are 
gained not only at the expense of consumers but also of other 
capitalists" (p. 65). It does not occur to them that the explanation of 
super profits lies here. We can see also that the word "extra-large" 
indicates that we are in the domain of the plaintive economics of the 
petty bourgeoisie, and not that of Marxist theory.

[^fn-21]: _Capital_, Vol. 3, Chap. 14, p. 238.

[^fn-22]: This passage follows directly on the last.

[^fn-23]: _Capital_, Vol. 3, Chap. 13, p. 223 (our emphasis).

[^fn-24]: Recalling that the rate of profit is represented by the 
formula s / (c + v) in which c represents the constant capital 
advanced.

[^fn-25]: One cannot deny to Mr. Sweezy a certain consistency in false 
ideas. He has contrived, for more than thirty years now, to disprove, 
by various means, this fundamental law of Marxist theory -- starting 
with "The Theory of Capitalist Development" (London, 1946). In this 
work he substituted (with suitable modesty) for Marx's view -- judged 
defective -- an entirely different one based on the increase of wages 
due to accumulation. Later, in "Monopoly Capital", he stated that this 
law was not false, but had lost its applicability. Today, we do not 
need to challenge his silliness at the level of theory, it suffices 
merely to hear the daily lament of the bourgeoisie that the rate of 
profit is falling in practice (the remedy to which they have found to 
be the lowering of wages). When Samuel Brittan, an economic commentator 
of the "Financial Times", writes that "A falling productivity of 
capital is normally due to a rapid increase in capital per man, 
unmatched by correspondingly technical advances, leading to diminishing 
returns" (FT. 3 March 1977), he shows a better understanding of reality 
than all the Sweezys put together.

[^fn-26]: _Capital_, Vol. 3, Chap. 13, p. 212-213.

[^fn-27]: Lenin, _Collected Works_, Vol. 20, p. 146-147.
