---
title: Trotsky and Trotskyism
author: Internationalist Communist Tendency
date: 2000
description: This is a pamphlet of the Internationalist Communist Tendency, available at their website at <http://www.leftcom.org/en/articles/2000-10-01/trotsky-and-trotskyism>. Slight fixes were made to typos and formatting.
keywords: Trotsky
...

## Introduction

### Preface

The disappearance of the Russian bloc at the end of the 1980s,
culminating in the collapse of the Moscow regime and the disintegration
of the USSR, marked a turning point in the history of the world. More
specifically it marked a turning point in the history of capitalism in
its imperialist phase.

The underlying global relationships which had crystallised in the years
following the Second World War ceased to exist as one of the two
competing imperialist blocs collapsed. In place of global competition
between blocs led respectively by the USA and USSR, a far more complex
series of relationships has developed. The old alliances have been
replaced. The USA's former allies, particularly Germany and Japan, have
struggled to assert their independence and forge new alignments against
the backdrop of a world capitalism which stumbles from one crisis to
another with each turn meaning more misery for the working class.

As the 1990s moved towards their close the ideological gurus of Western
imperialism's boasts that the Russian collapse had marked the end of
history was exposed as a total nonsense. Indeed it would be a laughable
nonsense, except that its falsehood is borne out by the increasing
impoverishment and barbarism imposed on workers across the globe. The
certainties of late imperialism have collapsed with a great rapidity.
The experience of the "tiger economies" of the western Pacific rim
proved the impossibility of sustained capitalist growth in the current
epoch as debt-strangled states attack wage levels and social provision
in an attempt to shore up profitability.

In Europe a series of barbaric episodes have engulfed a whole area of
the continent as the global powers seek to carve out and defend spheres
of influence. Meanwhile imperialist competition, and its twin sibling,
trade war continues apace. The struggles around renewing the GATT
agreements and then the World Trade Organisation are reflections of the
same process which in turn has led to the competing powers developing
their own local trading arrangements: NAFTA dominated by the USA and the
German dominated "Euroland". The experience of imperialism throughout
the twentieth century shows that trade wars and the construction of
trading blocs during economic crisis is merely one step along the road
to full-scale military conflict the final and most complete expression
of imperialism.

Marxism explains the necessity of proletarian revolution as the path to
the liberation of humanity. A key task for Marxists is to understand the
historical process and to interpret and explain the unfoldings of the
class struggle. Nothing can be more harmful to communism than a
political method which dresses itself in shreds of Marxist terminology
only to mislead workers in general (not to mention its own followers)
with confusing and confused interpretations on key questions of the day.

For more than half a century the Trotskyist movement has acted as
"critical" apologist for, and supporter of, both Stalinism in the East
and Social Democracy in the West. The mainstream of capitalism has
ditched both those sets of structures as it seeks to grapple with
unmanageable crisis. Today those Trotskyists who have not disappeared
from sight present themselves as shifty salesmen, trying to peddle the
cast-off, out-of-date ideological products left over from world
capitalism's post-war boom. A root and branch re-evaluation of
Trotskyist theory is a necessary preparation for any confused elements
wishing to move to consistent internationalist communist politics. This
pamphlet serves as a tool for those wishing to achieve that
clarification.

### Synopsis

The pamphlet comprises three main parts.

The first is an analysis of Trotsky and Trotskyism from 1917 until 1940.
This, in turn, can be broken down into three main components.

The first of these deals with the positions taken by Trotsky and his
followers during the 1920s as the proletariat in Russia lost political
power. The Russian state, now acting on behalf of capital, continued to
claim the mantle of Lenin and even maintained the existence of Soviets.
However, by now, the "Soviets" of the Russian state were the antithesis
of the revolutionary workers' councils which had been the key tool for
the proletariat in struggle.

The article serves to debunk a number of myths which today's Trotskyists
peddle about the positions of their predecessors during the 1920s. In
particular the article deals with the oft-repeated lie that the
Trotskyists were the only, or at least the most consistent, opposition
to those in the party and state machine who were rehabilitating
capitalism. This is shown in two ways.

Firstly, by tracking the factional manoeuvres which Trotsky undertook it
is clear that, until forced out of power in the mid-1920s, his role was
that of a faction leader within the Russian party and state, initially
against Zinoviev but then with Zinoviev and Kamenev against Stalin. The
second key point which helps to debunk the Trotskyist mythology is the
highlighting of the role of the Italian Communist Left in opposing the
degeneration of the Comintern and the loss of the heritage of the
Russian revolution. We should also not forget the history of the
non-Trotskyist Left Communist elements in Russia who took up the
struggle against the degenerating Soviet state far earlier and more
thoroughly than Trotsky. The struggle of those comrades -- valiant
strugglers for proletarian revolution in the most difficult and
confusing circumstances -- has been airbrushed from history by both
Stalinists and Trotskyists alike. Trotsky's own quote about the role of
the Democratic Centralists, reproduced in the pamphlet, is part of the
reply to the distorters of revolutionary history. We hope in future to
build on the work of other communists to rectify this historical crime.

The second key element of the analysis deals with the feature which was
identified earlier as Trotskyism's core confusion -- the nature of the
degenerated Soviet state. From the 1920s until his murder by their
agents in 1940 Trotsky maintained that the group around Stalin somehow
defended "the gains of October". For Trotsky the nationalised industry
of the Stalinist monstrosity was a historic gain for the working class.
From the mid 1930s the confusion of the Trotskyist movement was complete
as it combined this claim with the argument that the Stalinist
bureaucracy could not be reformed and thus there had to be a "social
revolution". (In fact during the 1990s many Stalinists succeeded in
reinventing their role and holding on to power when the capital which
had only recently been held by the state became more or less transformed
into private capital.)

In summarising the roots of Trotsky's confusion the first document
observes that:

>Trotsky .... could not recognise that it [the Soviet bureaucracy]
>represented a new ruling class in the making who collectively disposed
>of the surplus product created by the working class.

The document goes on to the key clarification necessary to understand
the class nature of Stalinist Russia.

>The ineluctable need to serve in the process of the accumulation of
>capital, the iron necessity imposed by world capital, determined the
>objective role of the new strata, who were class functionaries by
>virtue of their relation to reified capital.

The third key element of Part One deals with Trotskyism during the final
years of Trotsky's life and the political and organisational collapse of
the Trotskyist movement during the Second World War.

The second part of the pamphlet contrasts Trotskyist opportunism and
desperate search for a mass base at a time of counter-revolution with
the resolute defence of proletarian autonomy and internationalist
principles of the International Communist Left. Although we cannot go
into a detailed history of the Communist Left here, this part is
included in order to show that there were proletarian forces at that
time, which not only defended many of the positions we defend today, but
also made the critique of the degeneration of Trotskyism as it was
happening.

Part Three goes on to analyse some of the more significant splits and
developments of the myriad Trotskyist groups since 1945. This part
underlines that the fundamentally social democratic basis of Trotskyism,
despite all its revolutionary rhetoric, has completely prevented this
movement being the basis for proletarian freedom. None of the
Trotskyists groups has ever stopped to enquire why there have been so
many splits based on minute tactical differences. As we try to show
here, the real problem lies in the framework and methodology which
Trotskyism adopted in the 1930s. This pamphlet isn't simply dedicated to
an abstract ideological critique. To arrive at a classless, moneyless,
stateless society in which "the free development of each is the
condition for the development of all" the working class has to reject
the counter-revolutionary contortions of Trotskyism.

_Communist Workers Organisation, October 2000._

## Trotsky and the origins of Trotskyism

### The Origins of Trotskyism

We begin by examining the basis of the myths manufactured by the
Trotskyist movement and its supporters. Their glowing claims have _bona
fide_ roots in the prestige Trotsky gained as chair of the 1905 St.
Petersburg Soviet, as leader of the Red Army, and as a martyr to
Stalinism in 1940.

A valid criticism of Trotskyism has nothing in common with the Stalinist
method of unearthing his Menshevik past prior to 1917, nor does it deny
the contribution he made, both in theory and practice to the Russian
Revolution itself. Indeed Trotsky's analysis of the 1905 Revolution and
the appearance of Soviets allowed him to foresee the possibilities for
proletarian revolution with a clarity which was to converge with Lenin's
understanding during 1917.

But Trotskyism as a political movement, despite any roots that coincide
with the period of revolution, is essentially a product of a later
period: the period of counter-revolution of which it became an integral
part.

The movement inside Russia associated with Trotsky arose while the
revolution in Europe was in the process of being defeated. White Terror
raged in Hungary, the Fascists were in the act of taking power in Italy
and the last independent efforts of a section of the German working
class to overthrow the bourgeoisie had ended in defeat in March 1921.
Though outbursts of working class resistance occurred after this (e.g.
Germany 1923, Britain in 1926, China in 1927) they were isolated and
fragmented. Inside Russia itself four years of isolation and civil war
had led to the virtual elimination of the old revolutionary working
class. The introduction of NEP, the Communist International's adoption
of the tactic of the "united front" with Social Democracy as well as the
series of political/military alliances with capitalist states (e.g. the
Rapallo Treaty of 1922 with Germany) all showed that the failure of the
European revolution was leading to counter-revolution in Russia just as
night follows day^[Here we cannot go into the whole process of the
decline of the Russian revolution but readers can refer to our next
pamphlet _Russia 1917-24 Revolution and Counter-revolution_.].

Trotsky might be excused for failing to notice this process of
degeneration but he was, in fact, one of its principle architects. It
was he who, having organised the victory of the Red Army in 1920, then
concluded that some form of "militarisation of labour" could be extended
to the entire working class in order to discipline it for the
reconstruction of Russia. It was he who presented the case against the
Workers' Opposition at the 10th Party Congress (March 1921) which
resulted in the banning of all factions in the Party. It was also
Trotsky who engineered the secret military alliance with German
imperialism in 1922. Had the subsequent development of Trotsky's theory
and practice entailed a break with this sorry past the fight for
communism may have taken a different course. In reality, from 1923 on,
Trotsky not only failed to recognise these errors, but even turned them
into the very framework of his subsequent ideas, as an analysis of his
"opposition" to Stalinism shows.

### The Left Opposition and the United Opposition

The so-called Left Opposition which arose late in 1923 was only
indirectly connected with Trotsky, who did not at the time identify with
it, though the Oppositionists welcomed Trotsky's New Course which had
just appeared. Contrary to mythology, this Opposition was in no way
connected with the idea of opposition to "socialism in one country" for
the simple reason that it ended before the theory was announced. The
Left Opposition arose during the "scissors crisis" of 1923, when rising
industrial and falling agricultural prices caused economic dislocation.
The Opposition contended that the bureaucratic leadership of the Party
(at this time Zinoviev, Kamenev, Stalin and Bukharin) was incapable of
solving the crisis -- which it then promptly did! According to the
Oppositionists, a little planning had to be added to the market economy
of the NEP, allowing slow industrialisation through taxation of the
peasantry. For Trotsky, this meant the need to,

>... develop state industry as the keystone of the dictatorship of the
>proletariat and the basis of socialism. - _New Course_, p. 120

Naturally, since it did not control the apparatus, the Opposition called
for "democracy" inside the Party but apart from industrialisation gave
no indication as to what this democracy would serve as a vehicle for.
The Opposition was unconcerned with foreign affairs and criticised none
of the policies since 1921 (united fronts or rapprochements with
capitalist states). Trotsky did write on these matters but, as an
endorser of the united front and National Bolshevism in Germany, was
regarded abroad as on the right of the Party. Meanwhile the "left wing"
in the German Party (Maslow, Fischer and Thälmann) had Zinoviev and
Stalin as their allies!

Trotsky's ventures into foreign policy such as the _Lessons of October_
(1924), were concerned to show that just as they had failed to perceive
it in 1917, Zinoviev and Kamenev had failed to seize the revolutionary
opportunity in Germany in 1923. Slowly being squeezed from power,
Trotsky seized on the failure of the united front government of Saxony
and Thuringia to make a revolution as a stick to beat Zinoviev with. At
this time Trotsky saw Zinoviev as the main enemy rather than Stalin. But
Trotsky had approved of the political manoeuvre (the united front) which
had set these governments up so his polemic lacked force. Earlier in the
summer when there had been a genuine class movement in Germany,
following the collapse of the currency, Trotsky had come out against any
attempt to overthrow the government,

>We do not regard the French invasion of the Ruhr as a revolutionary
>stimulus... it is not at all in our interests that the revolution
>should take place in a Europe drained of blood... [We are] vitally
>interested in the preservation of peace^[Trotsky, quoted in E.H. Carr
>_The Interregnum_ p. 66.].

What was the reason for this? At this time Trotsky was the chief
mediator in the alliance between Germany and Russia against the Entente
(France and Britain). Such a policy meant an alliance with the right
wing in Germany, and with the forces of fascism and nationalism against
the French occupation of the Ruhr. This was called "National
Bolshevism", the brainchild of Radek, one of the Left Opposition
leaders. It was his own gradual slide from power, plus the emergence of
a pro-Entente regime in Germany, that was to convert Trotsky into a
"revolutionary".

In parallel with the poverty, indeed virtual non-existence, of a
political programme, the Left Opposition was devoid of working class
support. This in itself is not a definitive factor; at certain moments
real proletarian organisations can find themselves with little
proletarian support but most of the Opposition were noted for
anti-working class positions on the question of "labour discipline", and
had denounced the mass strike wave which broke out in 1923 over the
continued deterioration in living standards. The appeal of the
Opposition was to Party bureaucrats and industrial managers, rather than
to the working class:

>The section of the rank and file of the Party whom the opposition at
>this time was least successful in rallying to its side was the
>industrial working class. Nothing in either its economics or its
>political platform was likely to catch the imagination of the
>worker^[Carr op. cit. pp. 326-7.].

The bureaucracy made a few concessions to the Left Opposition's demands
but it was condemned at the 13th Congress, and faded away early in 1924.
Such an opposition merits the epithet "left" no more than it merits the
term 'opposition' at all. But let us leave the final word to the Russian
worker who said of the struggle between the bureaucracy and the
opposition in 1923:

>The workers will ask me what your fundamental differences are; to speak
>frankly I do not know how to answer^[Quoted in the Trotskyite academic
>journal _Critique_ 4 p. 44.].

This single proletarian sentence sums up the nature of the Left
Opposition.

After this, manoeuvrings in the Party took on (in light of later events)
some weird contours. Stalin allied with Zinoviev against Trotsky in
1923, and later when Stalin and Bukharin moved against Zinoviev, Trotsky
entered into a tacit alliance with Stalin, since Zinoviev was still the
main enemy. Later, in January 1925, when the Politburo removed Trotsky
from his post as Commissar for War, Stalin repaid Trotsky's earlier
favour by blocking Zinoviev's demand to have Trotsky expelled from the
Party altogether. This was at a time when Stalin had already advanced
the theory of "socialism in one country". So much for Trotsky's struggle
against it. By 1925 this famous struggle had not even begun since
Trotsky's main enemy up to then had not been Stalin but Zinoviev, the
leader of the bureaucratic degeneration.

Gradually, as it became clear that the Stalin-Bukharin group was coming
out on top in the power struggle, Zinoviev and Kamenev moved to form the
Leningrad Opposition. Trotsky at first remained aloof but soon allied
himself with the Zinoviev group. In July 1926 he joined Kamenev,
Zinoviev and Krupskaya to sign the "declaration of the thirteen"
(Central Committee members). This publicly signalled the formation of
the United Opposition which functioned until December 1927. The United
Opposition took up the call for planning and industrialisation, and for
a struggle against the "Nepmen and kulaks". They also called for the
restoration of the Party democracy they had all been instrumental in
suppressing since the 10th Congress in 1921. If the claim that the
United Opposition expressed the real interests of the working class is
legitimate then so too was the policy adopted by Stalin from 1929 to
1934, which took up most of the positions of the Opposition. This
conclusion is not simply deduced from hindsight. The bulk of the
Oppositionists who had not already done so capitulated willingly to
Stalin after 1929, and even Preobrazhensky announced that the continuing
opposition of Trotsky was not justified^[R.V. Daniels _The Conscience of
the Revolution_ pp. 374-5.].

Once again the Opposition had failed to gain a significant working class
following. Once again its main strength lay in the bureaucracy which it
criticised but whose rule it did not question. The final destructive
blow belonged to Trotsky himself. Stalin's "left turn" brought him into
conflict with Bukharin's Right and it was the latter who now joined the
chorus for inner party democracy, offering alliances to Trotsky on this
basis in 1928. Trotsky, who had often "critically supported" the
centrist Stalin against the Right of Bukharin, now shocked his
supporters by accepting this opportunist offer. It is impossible to
gauge the effect of this on the Opposition since Trotsky was exiled by
Stalin in January 1929 and an era of myth-building began in earnest.

### Socialism in One Country

It will be conceded by many of his supporters that Trotsky's opposition
was a loyal one, internal to the bureaucracy from which he sprang, but
that his real saving grace lies in his opposition to "socialism in one
country" (first coherently advanced by Stalin in December 1924) and the
supposed abandoning of internationalism which such a theory implied. No
other single issue has spawned so many myths and mystifications as this
one.

Before 1917 the possibility of a single nation state moving toward
socialism on its own had never before been posed by history itself. Not
surprisingly, therefore, Marx's own comments on this question are vague.
The predominant view of the Second International, founded in 1889, was
that within each bourgeois nation state there would be a peaceful
transition to socialism, and that each new socialist state would
federate with the others into a socialist commonwealth. Though the left
wing of the International rejected the idea of a peaceful transition to
socialism they never rejected the idea that, in the advanced countries
at least, such a transition could be undertaken within national
boundaries. In these states the material prerequisites for such a
transformation were believed to exist. Lenin, at the height of the
imperialist war wrote:

>[The United States of Europe slogan] may be interpreted to mean that
>the victory of socialism in one country is impossible... Uneven
>political and economic development is an absolute law of capitalism,
>hence the victory of socialism is possible, first in several, or even
>one capitalist country taken singly. The proletariat of that country,
>having expropriated the capitalists and organised its own socialist
>production, would stand up against the rest of the world^[Lenin, quoted
>in R.V. Daniels _A Documentary History of Bolshevism_.].

The main area of controversy was Russia itself, and here the discussion
was rooted in the specific question of Russian backwardness. Lenin, and
most of the Bolsheviks, felt until very late in the day that the
bourgeois revolution was still on the agenda in Russia, even if it had
to be brought to its conclusion by the proletariat^[For a fuller
explanation of the "democratic revolution" position of Lenin see
_Revolutionary Perspectives_ 20, "The Democratic Revolution - A
Programme for the Past" and _Revolutionary Perspectives_ 21 "Lenin's
Political Theory" (review).].

Trotsky, with his theory of "permanent revolution" on the other hand,
claimed that if the Russian revolution occurred at the same time as one
in Western Europe, this backwardness would be overcome, and the
revolution could proceed to its socialist phases. Lenin independently
came to similar conclusions in the _April Theses_ of 1917.

From then on the Bolsheviks had few reservations; they were out to build
socialism in Russia ("Let us proceed to build the socialist order" -
Lenin, November 7th, 1917), and to spread the world revolution. It was
not, of course, assumed that a socialist state would turn its back on
the world revolution. In fact, building socialism at home and spreading
revolution abroad were considered synonymous. When it became clear that
NEP Russia was in fact isolated the reservations expressed by some of
the Party leaders were not that it would be impossible to build
socialism in one country. What they felt was that a socialist state
would probably not survive in a hostile capitalist world due to military
attack by the capitalists. Intervention in the Civil War had been the
supreme example of this, and in the 1920s CPSU leaders, first amongst
them Trotsky, remained haunted by fears of a united imperialist front
that would invade Russia in order to effect a bourgeois restoration.
Once the Soviet state had shown its ability to survive in the capitalist
world (mainly by a slow process of capitulation to it), the theory of a
possible isolated socialist regime in Russia emerged as Stalin's
"socialism in one country".

Stalin stood on the right of the Party, along with Bukharin and others
who saw the NEP as a long term concession to the peasantry. At this
point he admitted the bourgeois nature of the Russian economy. In
_Foundations of Leninism_ of 1924 he repudiated the idea that socialism
could be built in Russia, though his Report on the Political Activity of
the Central Committee to the 14th Congress of the CPSU was very similar
to Trotsky's view:

>One can however say that our regime is neither capitalist nor
>socialist. It represents a transition from capitalism to socialism...
>If one takes into account the bureaucratic survivals which we have in
>the management of our enterprises, one cannot yet say that we've
>reached socialism. This is true but it doesn't contradict the fact that
>state industry is a type of socialist production.

Stalin thus felt that as long as the _smytchka_ (alliance between
workers and peasants) could be maintained, socialism could be built in
Russia. At this time Trotsky was unconcerned with Stalin's innovations.
Indeed, his own writings of the period explicitly accept the possibility
of socialism in one country, even a backward one:

>It is clear that under the conditions of a capitalist rebirth in Europe
>and the whole world, possibly enduring for many years, socialism in a
>backward country would find itself eye to eye with colossal
>dangers^[Trotsky _Challenge of the Left Opposition_ p. 295.].

In fact it was the Leningrad Opposition of Zinoviev and Kamenev which
emerged as the first opponent of socialism in one country at the 14th
Party Congress. As we have seen, Trotsky, who saw Stalin as the lesser
danger at this point, remained silent. His later alliance with the
Leningrad Opposition in the United Opposition was a result of the
conversion of Zinoviev and Kamenev to the need for industrialisation in
Russia as the best path to socialism there.

Thus in the whole debate over "socialism in one country" there were only
differences of emphasis. Whilst Stalin believed with Bukharin that under
NEP Russia was slowly "riding to socialism on a peasants nag", Trotsky
stressed the need for a more dynamic industrialisation, not that the
whole thing was impossible in isolation. As he put it in _Toward
Socialism or Capitalism_,

>Unless the productive forces grow, there can be no question of
>socialism^[_Challenge of the Left Opposition_ p. 295.].

Thus Trotsky's attack on "socialism in one country" in 1926 was far from
the stout defence of internationalism that his _post hoc_
rationalisation later maintained. In international terms all Trotsky
called for was a diversification of foreign trade relations in order to
take advantage of the world market, in contrast to Stalin's belief in
autarky and accumulation in isolation. In a letter from exile to the
remnants of the Russian Opposition Trotsky recommended the use of the
growth of unemployment, especially in Britain and Germany, to acquire
credits for agricultural equipment, machinery etc. in exchange for the
produce of collectivised labour. Stalin continued to ignore foreign
trade as a means to initiate industrialisation, especially after the
terms of trade turned sharply against the USSR after 1929^[The value of
Soviet exports shrank to one third and that of imports to a quarter
between 1930 and 1935. For further details see "Theories of State
Capitalism" in _Revolutionary Perspectives_ 19.].

Trotsky, on the other hand, urged Moscow to enhance its trading position
by appealing to the millions of unemployed workers of the West to raise
a clamour for trade with Russia, to assist it with export credits and
so, at the same time to help alleviate unemployment. Trotsky's
"internationalism" then was not entirely abstract. As a call for
capitalist stabilisation it would have done credit to any free-trader of
the nineteenth century! Indeed Trotsky had forged his United Opposition
with Zinoviev only through tacit agreement to jettison his idea of
"permanent revolution" with its connotation of support for world
revolution^[This concept has not been dealt with in detail here since,
for all the noise made about it by Trotskyists, it actually plays little
part in his political analysis.].

In fact it was the Stalin faction which, before 1934, put out more
ritual calls for world revolution -- especially after the "left turn" of
Stalin's so-called "Third Period" robbed the Opposition of its Platform.
As one of Trotsky's supporters, Victor Serge, put it:

>From 1928-29 onwards the Politburo turned to its own use the
>fundamental ideas of the newly-expelled opposition (excepting, of
>course, working class democracy) and implemented them with ruthless
>violence. We had proposed a tax on the rich peasants -- they were
>actually liquidated! We had proposed limitations and reforms of the NEP
>-- it was actually abolished! We had proposed industrialisation -- it
>was done on a colossal scale which we "super-industrialisers" as we
>were dubbed, had never dreamed of... - _Memoirs of a Revolutionary_, p.
>252

By becoming a super-industrialiser himself Stalin did more than rob the
Opposition of its programme, he destroyed the whole basis of their
critique since it was assumed by all the Communist Party oppositions
that the bureaucracy could never carry out their demands. As they all
had their roots in that same bureaucracy they could never challenge its
social basis, even though -- as we shall see -- Trotsky, and others,
glimpsed that it was a new class in the making.

### The Nature of the USSR

#### The Economy

Once in exile in Turkey Trotsky might have begun an examination of his
experiences and, like the hounded Left of the Italian Communist Party,
could have tried to draw up a balance sheet (_bilan_) of the process
which had seen revolutionaries driven into exile or imprisoned by
fascism. But Trotsky saw no reason to enquire more deeply into the
process behind the degeneration of proletarian power in Russia.
Essentially this was because he himself was so bound up with that
process. Even those who supported Stalin in the 1920s saw Trotsky as "a
man of the State, not of the Party" whilst his own role in abolishing
factions in the CPSU and in advocating labour discipline hardly made him
the unsullied champion of proletarian democracy and workers' control
that his present day followers assume. Had Trotsky been able to detach
himself from this past he may have been able to provide the critique of
social relations in Russia which was necessary in order to furnish the
basis of a revolutionary understanding of the nature of Russia. His
failure to do so ultimately led to him abandoning Marxist method.

The problem of what had happened in Russia was in any terms enormous. As
already noted, Marxist theory could not, and did not provide in advance
for a situation in which "a proletarian bastion" (Lenin) was isolated
for any length of time in a hostile capitalist world. After 4 years of
isolation Russia had lost 8 millions of her people, including the cream
of the revolutionary proletariat. The problem was compounded by the fact
that the Russian communists saw defeat only in terms of a military
victory by the capitalist powers. By 1921 such a threat had passed but
so too had the main thrust of the revolutionary upsurge of the European
and world proletariat. What was to happen to an isolated proletarian
bastion in such circumstances? As we have seen, it was in this context
that all factions of the CPSU agreed on the need to build socialism in
Russia alone. Thus, in 1926 Trotsky praised the development of state
industry after 5 years of GOSPLAN as the "marvellous historic music of
growing socialism" and anticipated what the Stalinist planners would
intone to the erection of "real socialism"- the frenzied exploitation of
the proletariat in the 1930s. The common view they shared was the
fiction that state planning and state ownership of the means of
production are the essential bases of socialism. This was despite the
fact that Lenin and Bukharin had already identified the growth of state
capitalism as one of the main features of capitalism in its imperialist
epoch. In _Imperialism and World Economy_ (1915) Bukharin commented on
the changing nature of capitalism as follows:

>The capitalist mode of production is based on the monopoly of the means
>of production in the hands of the capitalists within the general
>framework of commodity exchange. There is no difference in principle
>whether the state power is a direct monopoly or whether the monopoly is
>privately organised. In either case there remains commodity economy (in
>the first place the world market) and, what is more important, the
>class relations between the proletariat and bourgeoisie. - op. cit., p.
>157.

In writing this Bukharin was only echoing Engels' observations of the
1880s,

>... Just as at first the capitalist mode of production displaced the
>workers, so now it displaces the capitalists, relegating them ... to
>the superfluous population even if not in the first instance to the
>industrial reserve army ... Neither the conversion into joint stock
>companies nor into state property deprives the productive forces of
>their character as capital ... The modern state, whatever its form, is
>then the state of the capitalists, the ideal collective body of all the
>capitalists. The more productive forces it takes over as its property,
>the more it becomes the real collective body of the capitalists, the
>more citizens it exploits. The workers remain wage-earners,
>proletarians. The capitalist relationship isn't abolished; it is rather
>pushed to the extreme... - _Anti-Dühring_, pp. 329-330.

And this capital relationship, which is so basic to the Marxist
definition of capitalism, is that between capital and wage labour.
Trotsky could talk of the bureaucracy as a "parasitic caste" but he
could not recognise that it represented a new ruling class in the making
who collectively disposed of the surplus product created by the working
class. For him Russia was basically socialist because:

>The nationalisation of the land, the means of industrial production,
>transport and exchange, together with the monopoly of foreign trade,
>constitute the basis of the Soviet social structure. Through these
>relations, established by a proletarian state revolution, the nature of
>the Soviet Union as a proletarian state is for us basically defined. -
>_The Revolution Betrayed_, p. 235.

Trotsky's attempt to square the circle of a workers' state that was run
by a "parasitic caste" resulted in the theory of the degenerated
workers' state. Lauded by Deutscher as "a creative restatement of
classical Marxist views", it is really a complete rupture with Marxism
as a critique of political economy. The starting point of this concept
is the external characteristics of the social structure of classical
capitalism which had frozen in the mind of Trotsky -- individual
ownership of the means of production, the juridical inalienabilty of
private property, the right of inheritance, etc. This is in keeping with
bourgeois economists -- from Ricardo down to Mandel -- who assume that
the relations of distribution can be transformed without questioning the
relations of production. But for a Marxist it is the relations of
production which determine the nature of the mode of production and of
circulation; they cannot be dissociated from each other. Capitalist
distribution cannot be destroyed without destroying the basis of that
distribution: the relations of production. Thus production determines
the essence of distribution and the ideological forms that justify it.

For Trotsky, obsessed with state planning, the extension of
nationalisations, etc., this primary consideration was turned on its
head to conjure up the following absurdity: "the coexistence of a
socialist mode of production with a bourgeois mode of distribution".
This is simply nonsense from a Marxist standpoint which holds that:

>The relations and modes of distribution thus appear merely as the
>obverse of the relations of production. The structure of distribution
>is completely determined by the structure of production. - Marx,
>_Grundrisse_, p. 95.

Having ignored this fundamental tenet of Marxist political economy,
Trotsky diverged even further with his argument that the Stalinist
superstructure was in contradiction to the proletarian infrastructure of
the economy. He maintained that the bureaucracy was preventing the
transition to socialism in order to maintain its privileges. The fact
that it was precisely this "proto-capitalist bureaucracy" which was
introducing the nationalisation and industrialisation measures which
Trotsky imagined gave Russia its socialist basis was never explained.
Such absurd conclusions only illustrate the contradictory economic
premises on which the whole so-called theory of the "degenerate workers'
state" was erected.

But Trotsky's desperate attempt to find something to defend in the
wreckage of Stalin's Russia was not only revising Marxist method to
cover his past, he was prevented from seeing that the victory of the
working class did not simply mean the "expropriation of the bourgeoisie"
as he put it in his _Transitional Programme_. Without the abolition of
wage labour there can be no talk of socialism. Capital is not merely, in
itself, a mass of machines or means of production, the nature of which
miraculously changes by virtue of it being pronounced the "property of
the masses" after the political abolition of an avaricious or
"parasitic" elite of state officials. Capital is a specific historical
and social relationship based on the deprivation and separation of
labour from all property in the means of production, so making labour
power a commodity to be sold in exchange for a wage.

This social relationship leads to antagonism between producers and _de
facto_ proprietors (irrespective of Soviet legal forms), between those
who control the means of production, distribution and the state
(bourgeoisie) and those who have no alternative but to work for a wage
(proletariat), and bestows on the totality of society's productive
forces the character of capital.

The road to communism is the struggle against the totality of capital
for the abolition of its state, private property, its law of value,
merchandise and wage labour.

#### The Political Revolution

So what did Trotsky give us instead as the road to communism in Russia?
He preached a "political not social revolution", a revolution that would
overthrow the existing Stalinist system of government but which would
leave existing property relations untouched. Indeed, the defence of the
"proletarian basis of the state" was the cardinal point of Trotsky's
political credo until his death and, as we will see repeatedly, was at
the root of all his political errors.

It is fundamental to Marxism that the state is not society though the
state has its basis in society. Every society with a state must be a
class society where the state acts in the interest of the ruling class
to safeguard its exploitation of the dominated class. When trying to
establish the class nature of any society Marxists therefore don't begin
by examining the juridical or legal forms of the State in order to reach
the conclusion that they constitute "the proletarian basis of the
state." Thus, though scores of Trotsky's texts testify to the changing
class composition of the CPSU (part of the process which saw all the
Oppositions annihilated), and despite recognising the "parasitic" nature
of the bureaucracy would require a "political revolution" he still
maintained that a regime which

>... preserves expropriated and nationalised property against
>imperialism -- that, independent of political forms is the dictatorship
>of the proletariat. - _In Defence of Marxism_.

But if there already existed a "dictatorship of the proletariat" what
need was there for "a political revolution" or for an injection of
"soviet democracy". The contradiction only arises because Trotsky did
not deduce the nature of the Russian state from its relations of
production. By ceasing to define social classes in terms of their
antagonistic practices in the productive process Trotsky robbed himself
of the only possibility of a clear analysis of the real nature of the
USSR.

The autarky of the era of the Five Year Plans in the 1930s was at bottom
a form of competition which necessitated a ferocious intensification of
exploitation. More bitter competition on the international level meant
the use of Taylorism and the new techniques of management of alienated
labour to increase its productivity to the upmost. The Party's
administrative control of the relations of production in the USSR had
generated a bureaucracy which, with its establishment of political
independence, acquired the attributes of a motor force in the
development of the national capital, essentially the same as that of the
classic private bourgeoisie. To myopically treat the state-bureaucratic
echelons as merely a privileged "caste", as a "parasitic outgrowth", was
to fundamentally miss its basic class function. The ineluctable need to
serve in the process of the accumulation of capital, the iron necessity
imposed by world capital, determined the objective role of the new
strata, who were class functionaries by virtue of their relation to
reified capital and not as a result of their greed (Trotsky said they
consumed too much of the social product), authoritarian arrogance or
other socio-psychological characteristics. The contradiction between the
social nature of production and the alienation of the social product of
that labour by an exploiting class underlines the domination of the law
of value in the USSR's economy^[See _Revolutionary Perspectives_ 19 loc.
cit. where there is an extended analysis devoted to Trotsky's view on
Russia.].

It also undermines Trotsky's self-contradictory theory of a "degenerated
workers state". At the time of its conception, and even more so after
World War Two, manifestations of the capitalist nature of Soviet society
have been obvious -- the existence of wage labour, the production of
merchandise for exchange, the domination of the planners by the
ineluctable law of value. The theorisation of the existence of a
workers' state in the USSR, however "deformed" it might be, was to
become a central element in the Trotskyist platform which, as we shall
see below, was to lead inevitably to their abandonment of revolutionary
defeatism and participation in the Second World War in defence of both
Soviet and Western imperialism.

### The Transitional Programme and the Fourth International

Trotsky's conception of Russia as a workers' state which, after a purely
political revolution, could become socialist, reveals not only that he
had understood nothing about the nature of capitalism, but that he also
had no conception of socialism in the Marxist sense. This became even
more clear in 1938 when he published the programme of his Fourth
International, _The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the
Fourth International_ or, as it is more commonly known, the
_Transitional Programme_. In dealing with this programme we must first
start with a question of method. Present-day Trotskyists claim, usually
on the basis of a cursory reading of Deutscher, that Trotsky was Lenin's
political heir^[See _Revolutionary Perspectives_ 21 for a brief
explanation of this in "Lenin's Political Thought".].

Unlike Lenin however, Trotsky tended to analyse historical situations
and capitalism in terms of categories which he never questioned. When
fresh events contradicted his analysis, instead of mercilessly
re-examining them on the basis of Marxist principles and revising the
categories accordingly, he distorted them to fit the conclusions he had
already decided on. We have already seen this method at work in regard
to his analysis of the Russian economy. It must be remembered that he
argued initially that Russia was a workers' state because the
proletariat held power, and that only when this argument became too
embarrassing to maintain was the economic one about socialist property
relations concocted.

After the Second World War, when Russian imperialism brought the
countries of Eastern Europe under its domination, Trotsky's epigones in
the Fourth International (Michel Pablo, Ernest Mandel, Ted Grant, James
Cannon etc.), in the best tradition of their mentor, decided that these
countries must also be workers' states, despite the fact that the
working class had never held power there and their regimes were the pure
creation of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Hence they concluded that the
"reactionary proto-capitalist bureaucracy" was also progressive and able
to create workers' states! Thus, in order to maintain the fiction of
Russia as a workers' state, a consistent travesty of the facts and of
Marxism was perpetrated. The 'permanent revolution', which held that the
workers and peasants in the backward countries must carry out the tasks
of the national bourgeoisie because the latter were too feeble, was
similarly defended, as was the theory of permanent crisis. These
theories formed the pillars of Trotsky's analytical framework, and were
simply assumed to be valid. Instead of letting these theories collapse
under the weight of their own contradictions, Trotsky methodically
shored them up, but at the expense of abandoning the political terrain
of the working class.

What Trotsky gave us instead were the assertions of "permanent crisis"
and "permanent revolution" which became facile slogans that failed to
conceal his inability to examine the fundamental social relations of
modern capitalism and the political tasks of the new period. Thus in his
_Transitional Programme_ the correct recognition that capitalism's
historic mission has been completed is completely obscured by the
economic illiteracy and political immediacy of its perspectives which,
politically speaking, take us back to the programme of social democracy.
The most glaring example of this illiteracy is in the economic field.
Trotsky tells us that capitalism is ripe for revolution because
"Mankind's productive forces stagnate" (_Transitional Programme_, p. 11,
WRP pamphlet). This might have been true for the 1930s but it can be
dispelled today by a single statistic. Since it was written the Gross
National Product of the United States (not to mention Western capitalism
as a whole) has increased several times over. The empirical evidence
alone is enough to destroy the validity of that statement but more
seriously is the failure of his method to comprehend the real movement
of capital. Capitalism, as Marx wrote on many occasions:

>cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments of
>production. - _Communist Manifesto_.

The epoch of imperialism, the era of decline of capitalism doesn't
change this essential element^[A forthcoming pamphlet on the economics
of capitalist decadence will explain the concept more fully.].

Nor does it end the capitalist cycle of accumulation which is
periodically punctuated by "commercial crises". The difference in the
imperialist epoch is that the bourgeois resolution of those crises is no
longer a simple matter of a few bankruptcies which allow the survivors
to renew the cycle. This renewal now only comes via the massive
destruction of capital on a global basis that is the product of an
imperialist war. Thus the nineteenth century cycle has in our epoch
become one of boom-slump-war-reconstruction-boom etc. It is not
"stagnation of the productive forces" which explains for Marxists the
present decay of the system but the fact that although it can still
increase production, the costs of this (perpetual famine in the Southern
hemisphere, periodic war throughout the planet, etc.) no longer serve
the interests of humanity in any sense. The fetters of the bourgeoisie's
relations of production and its law of value have to be broken and
destroyed before the productive forces can be set to work for the
benefit of humanity as a whole.

The failure to spell out the nature of capitalism in the era of
imperialism and state capitalism is in fact what wipes out the
_Transitional Programme_ as the basis of the struggle for socialism. By
simply defining capitalism as a system in its death agony, not as a
system based on the law of value which exists only through the
extraction of surplus value from wage labour, Trotsky's _Transitional
Programme_ only gave an immediate picture of a single phase of the
capitalist cycle -- its slump. But having decided in 1938 that
capitalism was in its "death agony", Trotsky had to find some
explanation for the failure of the proletariat to destroy it and provide
a prescription to overcome this failure. It is here that Trotsky
returned to social democracy.

### The Transitional Programme and the Party

Having failed to grasp the inner dynamic of capitalism the _Transitional
Programme_ has a purely voluntarist solution to the problems of
proletarian organisation. Correctly, it states that:

>The economic prerequisite for the proletarian revolution has already in
>general achieved the highest point of fruition that can be achieved
>under capitalism. - loc. cit.

In 1938 this was still true but why then, if the objective conditions
were present did the proletariat still submit to the capitalist yoke?
Trotsky bluntly answered that this was because:

>The world political situation as a whole is chiefly characterised by a
>historical crisis of the leadership of the proletariat.

In the sense that it lacked communist leadership this was true, but
Trotsky did not mean this. In the past quarter of a century the working
class had seen their organisations go over to the political support of
the bourgeoisie. First the Second International parties, with their mass
organisations, the trade unions, had come out in support of their own
governments and had helped the war effort of every imperialism. After
the First World War these parties divided themselves from the workers'
cause by rivers of blood when they assisted or even, as in Germany,
organised the massacre of class conscious proletarians. The most notable
opponent of the imperialist order in 1914 was the Bolshevik Party which,
theoretically armed with Lenin's slogan of "Turn the imperialist war
into a civil war", successfully led the Russian proletariat's seizure of
state power. When in 1919 it founded the Communist International it was
the vanguard of the entire world proletariat. But, as we explained
earlier, a process of decline set in, a process which was much more
insidious than the overnight betrayals of social democracy. The
Communist International's adoption of the united front in 1922 was
obviously a critical moment in its decline, as was its expulsion of any
opposition by 1926 and its disastrous policy in China in 1927. By 1938
even Trotsky could see that:

>the passing over of the Comintern to the side of bourgeoisie had
>occurred. And yet by that curious twist of logic which has remained the
>hallmark of Trotskyism he still saw the parties of the Second and Third
>Internationals as the proletariat's **own** [our emphasis] conservative
>bureaucratic machines.

In other words, despite a history of betrayal and massacre, these
organisations could be won for revolution if only their leaderships
could be changed. This was entirely consistent with his support for
united fronts and for entryism into social democracy in 1935 in order to
gain its leadership. Orthodox Trotskyism has still failed to recognise
the ideological defeat which accompanied the physical defeat of the
revolutionary organisations. Today these social democratic bodies
(Socialist and Labour Parties and their trade unions), though they often
enlist masses of workers and win electoral support of millions, are in
fact nothing but agents of the bourgeoisie and their class system. Their
reason for existence is to defend capitalism by channelling the class
struggle onto the safe grounds of elections or economic strikes isolated
in one industry or factory.

Thus the extremely facile nature of Trotsky's analysis of the political
weakness of the proletariat in the Thirties prevented him from seeing
the fact that the crisis of proletarian leadership arose because the
proletariat had no political party which defended its class independence
and revolutionary aspirations. And failing to understand this, as well
as failing to understand the nature of capitalist relations in the
imperialist epoch, meant that the Fourth International itself was from
its foundation not only ill-equipped to be a class party, but was
actually a stumbling block to its formation since it too operated on the
terrain of the bourgeoisie. What was needed was a pitiless struggle
against the social conservation of the old Socialist and Communist
Parties. Today Trotskyism still talks only of "betrayals" by these
unions and parties and therefore is incapable of exposing the real role
they play inside the working class. As the International Communist Left
(the Italian Fraction) argued at the time, the Fourth International had
no claim to be the party of the proletariat, since it had not carried
out the necessary work of political clarification following the defeat
of the revolutionary wave of the 1920s. Such a clarification, which
Trotsky studiously avoided, was the essential step to the revival of the
revolutionary party of the proletariat and the reconstitution of a
communist programme which took account of the lessons learned. There
could be no class party in 1938 because there was no independent class
movement. Part of the cause was the fact that the proletariat as a whole
still believed in the proletarian nature of "its" organisations. Trotsky
thought the mere declaration of the Fourth International would solve the
problem by a simple effort of will.

But the non-existence of the class party is not only the result of a
lack of will. Whilst the indispensible necessity of the party in its
role as centraliser, leader and guide of the class in action cannot be
questioned, the founding of the Fourth International took place without
the followers of Trotsky having carried out a serious examination of the
experience of revolution and counter-revolution.

The party cannot simply create itself from nothing, regardless of time
or place. The absence of a class party is not simply the result of a
"crisis of the revolutionary leadership" even if such a deficiency was
historically an objective factor in the reversal of the fortunes of the
proletariat, as in Germany in 1918-1919. According to Trotsky's
conception of the party, instead of being a necessary part of the class
struggle, it assumes the idealist form of a _deus ex machina_ which, by
the determination of its members, can and must surmount the historic
impasses of humanity^[See "Class Consciousness in the Marxist
Perspective" in _Revolutionary Perspectives_ 21.].

This becomes even more apparent when we analyse the 'transitional
demands' of the programme.

### The Transitional Programme demands

In his _Critique of the Gotha Programme_, Marx maintained that the
transition from capitalism to socialism presupposed a dictatorship of
the proletariat which would systematically carry out all the measures
necessary to destroy capital. "_The Transitional Programme, death agony
of capitalism, and the duties of the fourth international -- The
mobilisation of the masses around the demands of transition as a
preparation for the seizure of power_", as the title suggests, has
little to do with the Marxist conception of transition.

For Trotsky it was obvious that, since capitalism was in its "death
agony" the "transitional epoch" was already in existence, even though
there had been no revolution in the Thirties. For Marx the transition to
socialism does not begin until the proletariat has smashed the bourgeois
state (this was, after all, the lesson of the Paris Commune in 1871).
Just as he was unable to understand the fundamental framework for
socialism in the USSR, Trotsky now revealed that he was moving away from
Marxist conceptions of socialism in general. Indeed, Trotsky takes us
back to the reformism of the Second International by putting forward
minimum demands, with the simple difference that he now believed that
even minimum demands could not be met within decaying capitalism.

>The present epoch is distinguished not for the fact that it frees the
>revolutionary party from day-to-day work but because it permits this
>work to be carried out indissolubly with the actual tasks of
>revolution.

In short, the old minimum programme of social democracy is now the same
as the maximum programme since, for Trotskyists...

>not even the most elementary demands can be met without revolutionary
>expropriation of the capitalist class^[C. Slaughter in the introduction
>to the WRP edition of the _Transitional Programme_, p. 10.].

This arrant nonsense can be dispelled by even the most cursory glance at
the demands of the _Transitional Programme_.

What Trotsky in fact gives us is a grand plan to reform capitalism by
demanding such things as nationalisation of the banks, workers' control
of industry, public works and a sliding scale of wages in advance of the
seizure of power by the proletariat. Precisely such "radical" demands
were already being advanced by Trotsky's contemporary, Keynes, as an
explicit plan to save capitalism and, in fact, all these measures were
adopted by bourgeois states in order to preserve the capitalist order.
Nationalisation of the banks in Eastern Europe, workers' control in
Yugoslavia -- both of course hailed by modern Trotskyists as "destroying
capitalism"; the sliding scale of wages -- like the _scala mobile_ in
Italy or indexing elsewhere; and public works -- in virtually every
corner of the advanced capitalist world are steps to shore up capital
not destroy it.

Thus Trotsky's failure to understand the nature of the state's role in
Russia had its general corollary in the _Transitional Programme_.
Failing to see the state as collective capitalist meant that Trotsky
still equated nationalisation with socialisation, still saw the prime
task of socialism not as the abolition of wage labour, but as the
"expropriation of the bourgeoisie." In this the _Transitional Programme_
is not even an advance on the Erfurt Programme of 1890 since it doesn't
even possess a "maximum" revolutionary part. The "dictatorship of the
proletariat" is only mentioned once, and that only incidentally, and
there is no statement at all about the nature of socialism. This is what
makes the following statement of the purpose of the _Transitional
Programme_ particularly absurd,

>It is necessary to aid the masses in the process of their daily
>revolutionary struggle to find the bridge between their present demands
>and the programme of the socialist revolution.

But Trotsky had already indicated that the "present demands" were
potentially revolutionary. What was lacking was a party fighting with
the masses for the "programme of the socialist revolution." Trotsky's
abysmal failure was that he hadn't even begun to elaborate this
programme for the present epoch of capitalism.

Revolutionaries recognise the significance of demands but these are the
product of a real, ongoing struggle -- not an abstract schema thought up
in advance, and which, like the demands of the _Transitional Programme_,
are easily recuperable by capitalism. In the aftermath of the 1848
Revolution Marx made it quite clear that each demand formulated by the
proletariat must be a direct response to the existing situation of the
class struggle.

>In the beginning of the movement, the workers will naturally not be
>able to propose any direct communist measures, however... if the petty
>bourgeoisie propose to buy out the railroads and factories... the
>workers must demand that they simply be confiscated by the state
>without compensation. If the demands propose proportional taxes, they
>must demand progressive taxes... the rates of which are so steep that
>capital must soon go to smash as a result; if the Democrats demand the
>regulation of the State debt, the workers must demand its
>repudiation. - _Address to the Central Committee of the Communist
>League_

This dialectical conception is totally divorced from the idea which
Trotsky picked up from the lumber-room of the degenerating CI (notably
its Third Congress) where it was stated that there were a precise...

>set of demands which constitute the stages of the struggle [when the]
>masses do not as yet consciously stand for the dictatorship of the
>proletariat. - Quoted in Frank, op. cit., p. 61.

This bears all the hallmarks of Kautskyism which saw the proletariat
only as a mindless mass which could be called out by the social
democrats in this or that political demonstration to "aid" the
parliamentary struggle of the so-called "workers' representatives". But
the living struggle makes different demands of revolutionaries who, by
being present within it, can lead it on to greater unity and therefore
greater purpose by defining not only demands to achieve that unity, but
the real goal of the struggle -- the dictatorship of the proletariat.
This is something which the _Transitional Programme_ avoids since its
starting point is also its finishing point -- the immediate level of
consciousness of the masses^[For a further discussion of the issue of
demands see _Revolutionary Perspectives_ 17 and 20.].

Trotsky therefore showed that he had not transcended the weaknesses of
the Second, and later the Third, Internationals. Those weaknesses lay
not in their ability to fight with the masses, but in their inability to
provide a leadership which had a clear conception of communism and of
the necessity for the overthrow of the bourgeois state. Instead of
criticising these weaknesses Trotsky made a virtue of them. The
"conquest of the masses" at a time of proletarian defeat was the centre
of his voluntarism and every (failed) tactic to retain the support of
the masses, from united front to minimum programmes was revived by
Trotsky in a vain effort to win a mass base. Following this logic, he
had told his French supporters to "defy reformism within its own
stronghold" and to "carry the revolutionary programme to the masses" by
joining the SFIO, the French section of the Second International. He was
hardly in a position to criticise the Comintern's adoption of the
Popular Front policy in 1935 and his denunciation of the passing of the
Communist International "onto the side of the social democracy" is not
consistent. Whilst there was a certain counter-revolutionary logic to
the CI's policy (it wanted an alliance with French and British
imperialism against the Fascist regimes of central Europe), Trotsky's
entryism into social democracy made no sense at all, especially if -- as
he proclaimed -- revolution was just around the corner.

>we submit: the diagnosis of the Comintern is entirely false. The
>situation is as revolutionary as it can be, granted the
>non-revolutionary policies of the working class parties. More exactly
>the situation is pre-revolutionary. In order to bring the situation to
>its full maturity, there must be an immediate, vigorous, unremitting
>mobilisation of the masses, under the slogan of the conquest of power.
>This is the only way in which a pre-revolutionary situation will be
>changed into a revolutionary one.

Not recognising the defeat of the working class in the 1920s, Trotsky in
1938 was thus unprepared for imperialist war which the bourgeoisie
imposed upon it. It is therefore not surprising that the _Transitional
Programme_ should finish with an explicit rejection of the cardinal
point of Lenin's revolutionary theory in World War One -- revolutionary
defeatism. This led to Trotskyism participating in the Second
Imperialist War on the side of both Russian and Western imperialism.

### The Second Imperialist War

The _Transitional Programme_ states clearly that:

>in the next period a revolutionary party will depend for success
>primarily on its policy on the question of war. - p. 31.

It even repeats the basic communist principle that in imperialist war
"the chief enemy is in your own country". However, in the same breath
Trotsky soon reveals again that his failure to analyse the nature of the
USSR or re-examine the old CI policy of the united front led him to
abandon this principle. On the same page of the _Transitional Programme_
he tells us that not only are oppressed countries "not imperialist" but
also:

>the same duty of **support and defence** applies in regard to aiding
>the USSR or whatever other workers' government might arise...

Thus Trotsky's failure to analyse the relations of production in the
USSR disarmed him in the face of Russia's entry into the network of
imperialist alliances. Despite the evidence of the 1930s, where Stalin's
policy had been to try to win an alliance with Britain and France
against Germany; despite the results of this policy in Spain and
China^[_Revolutionary Perspectives_ 1 and 15 as well as
_Internationalist Communist_ 8 and 12 deal with these episodes more
fully.].

Despite the Pact Stalin signed with Hitler to attack Poland in 1939 and
despite the attack on Finland, Trotsky still clung -- until the day of
his death -- to the fiction that Russia was neither capitalist nor
imperialist. True, in his article _The USSR and War_, written in 1939,
Trotsky criticised

>the politics of Moscow [which] taken as a whole, completely retains its
>reactionary character...

but once again there was no explanation of why it had a reactionary
policy except via the limp argument that the workers' state had been
hijacked by a Bonapartist elite. In the same article Trotsky
out-Stalinised Stalin in his defence of "socialism" in the USSR as
against the interests of the world proletariat.

>We must not lose sight for a single moment of the fact that the
>questioning of the Soviet bureaucracy is for us subordinate to the
>question of preserving state property in the means of production of the
>USSR; ... [and] is subordinate for us to the question of world
>proletarian revolution.

It is not surprising that this led to splits in the Fourth International
with CLR James, Burnham and Shachtman all coming up with different
analyses of the nature of Russia.

Trotsky's writings in this debate were collected and published under the
title _In Defence of Marxism_. Though inappropriately titled they do
reveal the crisis of coherence that had now smitten him. His argument in
this text -- that if the war did not lead to proletarian revolution then
Marxism would be refuted and there would never again be the possibility
of socialism -- was simply a more definite version of what he had
already written in _The USSR and Socialism_ in 1939.

>... if, contrary to all probabilities, the October Revolution [by this
>he meant the USSR - editor] fails during the course of the present war,
>or immediately thereafter to find its continuation in any of the
>advanced countries; and if, on the other contrary the proletariat is
>thrown back on all fronts -- then we should doubtlessly have to pose
>the question of revising our conceptions of the present epoch and its
>driving forces.

This was no defence of Marxism but the logic of an analysis not based on
Marxist categories. Unable to understand the defeat of the proletariat
in the 1920s, he tried to overcome its weakness by an effort of will in
1938 which did credit to idealism but not to Marxism. This was not the
end of Trotsky's failures. In the _Defence of Marxism_ he had gone even
further along the road of support for imperialism in calling not only
for the "defence of the USSR" but also for the defence of the
"democratic swamp" in general^[red texts note: the original text on the
ICT's website includes this 21st note but no corresponding endnote. More
confusing still, the original text swapped the order of notes 20 and 21,
thus making it unclear what endnote 20 actually corresponds to.].

This was before Hitler's attack on Russia in 1941 had brought about the
alliance of imperialist convenience between the USSR, Britain and the
USA. And whilst the US Trotskyists had split over the analysis of Russia
the French Trotskyists also split -- in defence of both German and
Allied imperialism! While the Revolution Francaise of the _Mouvement
National Revolutionnaire_ called for "collaboration without oppression"
with Hitler the "Committees of the 4th International" in _Verite_ called
for the defence

>Of the wealth that generations of French workers and peasants have
>accumulated. - _September 1940_^[Quoted in _Le Gauche Communiste
>d'Italie_, pamphlet of the International Communist Current, p. 166.]

Our survey of the origins of Trotskyism ends with this sorry episode,
the first of many unprincipled splits in a movement which, as we have
shown here, never held clear "conceptions of the present epoch and its
driving forces". However, criticism of Trotsky's failings does not
amount to wiping out the history of the struggle for the communist
programme and the international communist party. It simply means we must
direct our gaze elsewhere.

## Trotsky and the Internationalist Communist Left

Our criticisms of Trotsky are not based on abstract moralising with the
benefit of hindsight. In the 1920s and 1930s there **was** a
revolutionary opposition to the degeneration of the Communist
International which based its critique of that degeneration on the
methodological premises of Marx and Lenin and which used that method to
criticise Trotsky himself. This consisted of founding members of the
Italian Communist Party at Livorno in 1921, revolutionary militants who
fought inside the Communist International against the policy of making a
"united front" with the leaders of the social democratic movement
responsible for the murder of workers and revolutionaries; who inside
Italy opposed so-called _bolshevisation_ of the Communist Party and
ousting of the Left from its leadership despite their representing the
majority of the membership; and who, as a result, were eventually
removed from their positions by the CI.

Persecuted by the Fascists as well as the Stalinists, they carried on
their struggle inside Mussolini's prisons and in exile abroad. In 1928
at Pantin in Paris they formally constituted themselves as the Left
Fraction of the Communist Party of Italy (PCd'I). For a decade, until
1938, they uninterruptedly issued _Prometeo_ (Prometheus), first in
Brussels, then in France. It was by the name of _Prometeo_, their
monthly journal that they were often known. Politically they based
themselves on the _Platform of the Left_ -- the theses Amadeo Bordiga
had presented in 1926 at the 3rd Congress of the PCd'I and which had
been held by force of circumstance outside Italy in Lyons. For the first
time the organisational manoeuvres of the "bolshevised" leadership of
Gramsci and Togliatti resulted in a vote for Gramsci's "Centre" theses
against those of the Left^[Ironically, part of the manoeuvring had
involved a vicious campaign against Bordiga who, in the pages of the
Party newspaper, Unita, was vilified as a Trotskyist throughout 1925-26.
In 1930 Bordiga himself was finally expelled from the PCd'I for his
supposed Trotskyism. For more information in English about the early
struggle of the Italian Left against 'bolshevisation' see the CWO's
pamphlet, Platform of the Committee of Intesa, 1925 -- the start of the
Italian Left's fight against Stalinism as Fascism increases its grip.
Available from the group address.].

At Pantin they passed a resolution which, amongst other things, called
for a 6th Congress of the CI with Trotsky as president to reintegrate
all the oppositions expelled from the CI.

The Italian Left had already solidarised with the Russian Opposition "in
defence of the victorious principles of October" but had underlined that
"there exist differences". Trotsky, for his part, warmly welcomed the
existence of the Italian Left. In his reply to Prometeo of September
25th, 1929 he stated:

>The Platform of the Left (1926) produced a great impression on me. I
>think that it is one of the best documents published by the
>international Opposition and it preserves its significance in many
>things to this very day. - _Writings of Leon Trotsky_, 1929, p. 318.

However, he wanted to leave to "time and events" the verification of
their mutual understanding. This exchange was a reflection of
fundamental differences from the beginning. To start with, the Italian
Left recognised that their physical dispersal was a product of the
international counter-revolution and saw the need to understand what had
happened to the proletariat during this period and to draw up a _bilan_
(balance sheet) for the revival of the working class and its party.
Thus, though they supported the project of Trotsky for an international
centre of all the international oppositions, they could not work
directly under the Trotskyist secretariat since it had no platform of
political positions based on the lessons of the October Revolution. The
negative criteria of anti-Stalinism they saw as an inadequate basis for
action. Their attitude was summarized in a letter by Vercesi (at that
time one of their leading members and editor of _Prometeo_):

>There are many oppositions. That is bad; but there is no other remedy
>than confrontation with their rival ideologies ... If so many
>oppositions exist, it is because there are several ideologies whose
>actual substance must be made clear. And this cannot just be done
>through simple discussion in a common organisation. Our watchword is to
>take our efforts to the ultimate conclusions without being derailed
>into a "solution" that would in reality be a failure. - Letter in
>_Contre Le Courant_ no. 13, August, 1928.

The main difference between the positions of Trotsky and those of the
Italian Left at this time concerned the united front. In the _Rome
Theses_ formulated in 1922 by Bordiga for the PCd'I before the left had
been ousted from leadership, the Italian Communists first raised their
banner against the decline of the Communist International which, at its
Fourth Congress of that year, decisively stepped back toward social
democracy -- a step applauded by Trotsky. The Social Democrats who had
led and organised the massacre of the flower of the German working class
were now re-baptised as "worker's parties" and alliance with them
against the fascist threat was now sought. In the _Rome Theses_ the
Italian Communists opposed the tactic of the united front. Though not
rejecting the necessity for tactics or for "indirect" methods of
struggle when the class was on the defensive the Italian Left rejected
the "expedients" and "manoeuvres" which were intended to win mass
support but only at the cost of undermining the hard-won political
independence of the revolutionary proletariat which the Bolsheviks had
struggled for from 1903 to 1922. This was why the Communist Party of
Italy under Bordiga applied the tactic of "the united front from below",
i.e. working with workers in the Social Democratic Parties where common
struggles were possible, but not with their organisations. This left the
Communist Party of Italy free to mercilessly criticise the leadership of
Social Democracy for its class collaborationism. This was not, however,
how the CI envisaged the united front since they did propose formal
alliances with the old anti-working class leaderships of Social
Democracy and this led only to further confusion.

For Trotsky, however, the united front was the expression of the highest
achievement of the Comintern. He always based his political framework on
its first four congresses whilst the Italian Left based itself on the
first two. The gulf that was to open up between them stemmed from
Trotsky's view that social democracy was essentially proletarian because
it organised a section of the working class. The Communist Left however
recognised that to use this criterion could baptise any
counter-revolutionary force as proletarian. The task of communists is to
fight to make the principles of communism clear to the working class.
The gulf between the Italian Left and Trotsky now became a chasm. In
1933, with Trotsky still refusing to see the need for any more than
organisational consolidation of all the oppositions under his
leadership, the Italian Fraction decided they would have to do the work
of political clarification on their own. In November the first issue of
_Bilan_ was published.

After 1933 Trotsky firmed up his strategic approach which set his
supporters' attention firmly towards seeking accommodation with
anti-proletarian forces rather than a realignment with the remaining
revolutionary fractions.

Three particular decisions show that the implications of that approach
had already led the Trotskyists out of the proletarian camp prior to the
publication of their _Transitional Programme_ in 1938. The three
defining points, to be dealt with in turn, are the entry of the
Trotskyists into Second International organisations; their support for
the Spanish anti-fascist forces during the Civil War and their
interpretations of anti-imperialism in the wars in China and
Abyssinia/Ethiopia.

### The "French turn" of 1934

In 1934 the Trotskyist movement, then known as the International
Communist League, took what Trotsky described as "the most serious turn
in its whole history". Starting with his French section, Trotsky urged
his followers to join the parties of the Second International and other
equivalent organisations _en bloc_. Trotsky's solution to the failure of
Stalinism was to go back to social democracy. This was a rupture with
everything the working class had fought for in the period between 1914
and 1926. It meant going back to supporting imperialist factions, back
to the old trades unions who had supported imperialist war, back to
those who had actively led the murder of communists and workers during
the revolutionary period after 1917. Nevertheless the tactic soon spread
to other sections, notably in Britain, USA and Spain. The idea of
Trotskyist "entryism" by which generations of Trotskyists have
reinforced social-democratic political organisations was thus apparently
born with "the French turn".

The French Trotskyist organisation made its decision to take "the
decisive turn" in the summer of 1934 after heavy political pressure from
Trotsky, then resident in France. A year before, the comrades of the
Left Fraction of the Communist Party of Italy had been bureaucratically
squeezed out of discussion by the Trotskyists. They had anticipated, and
argued against, the trajectory of Trotsky and his followers. In the
journal _Bilan_ (the balance-sheet) our comrades argued that the
Trotskyist strategy was an essentially reactionary substitute for
efforts to draw together an analysis of the decline of the proletarian
revolutionary wave. Writing in August 1933 they assessed the approaches
of Trotsky to the left-wing Social Democrats as being a move "Towards
the Two and Three-Quarters International". They argued that:

>Trotsky is committing a colossal error in advocating common work with
>the left socialists with the aim of building a new communist party.

The contrasting approach of the Left Fraction as against the Trotskyists
was precisely around the question of the need for analysis and
understanding of the nature of the period rather than to engage in
organisational manoeuvres to try to create a mass party when there was
no material possibility to do so.

>The proletariat suffered in 1927 a terrible defeat in not succeeding in
>countering the counter-revolutionary success of Centrism. [Stalinism
>would be a more normal shorthand today although many riders would need
>to be added to stress that the historic process can not be dictated by
>an individual within the communist parties, ed.]
>
>To state today that we wish to establish new parties upon the basis of
>the first four congresses of the International is to command history to
>pedal backwards ten years. It is to abstain from the understanding of
>events taking place after these congresses and **it is eventually to
>wish to place new parties in an historic setting not their own**. The
>setting in which we would wish the new parties to be placed tomorrow is
>already defined by the experience gained from the exercise of
>proletarian power and by all the experience of the world communist
>movement. The first four congresses were, in this work, an object of
>study which must be submitted to the most intense examination and
>critique. If we were to accept them evangelistically we would come to
>the following conclusion: the death of Lenin, or the removal of
>Trotsky, were the causes of the victory of capitalism in a number of
>countries and the success of Centrism in the USSR and the
>International.

The writers of _Bilan_, however, understood that the Trotskyist attempts
to woo Social Democracy would only end in ignominious failure. They
correctly forecast the point at which the Trotskyists would find
themselves in 1938:

>The immaturity of the situation [i.e. the lack of an understanding of
>the historical epoch] gives us an inkling of the strong probability
>that the currently gestating "two and three quarters" International"
>will be reduced to nothing more than a simple change to the label of
>the ILO [the Trotskyists International Left Opposition, ed.].

For Trotsky and his followers the "French turn" and the reorientation
towards Second Internationalist and other parties of capital was a
further practical application of the policy of the "United Front" which
had developed as Comintern policy during the decline of the
revolutionary wave (1920-22). During the 1930s, both Stalinists and
Trotskyists alike were to draw out counter-revolutionary conclusions
from that position.

At this point Trotsky, and Trotskyism ceased to be a proletarian current
for the Italian Left (as it was now to be known). It announced that now

>... it is necessary to lead an unpitying and merciless struggle against
>him and his partisans who have crossed the Rubicon and rejoined social
>democracy. - _Bilan_.

A year earlier Stalin had formally taken the USSR back into the theatre
of competing imperialism's by joining that "den of robbers" (Lenin), the
League of Nations. His aim was simple. Hitler's aim of a "Drang nach
Osten" (Drive to the East) was obvious to all. Stalin realised that an
attack on the USSR was inevitable, and thus he tried to win an alliance
with France and Britain. The Comintern's role in this was to come at the
7th Congress in 1935 and relegated its temporary radicalism (since 1928)
against social democracy to the history books. It not only baptised the
socialists as friends of democracy but also every Liberal, Radical or
otherwise anti-fascist party in Western Europe. The united front had now
reached its apogee in the Popular Front. The response of the Italian
Fraction was to disown any links -- even remotely oppositional ones --
with the Comintern and to state that the 7th Congress had placed a
tombstone on the existing CPs. Meanwhile, Trotsky denounced the Popular
Front as a perversion of the united front but his criticism lacked force
since he accepted the essential rationale of the Popular Front --
defence of the USSR from the fascist menace. And yet the forces which
had "laid the bed for fascism" in the revolutionary upheaval after World
War One were precisely the organisations Trotsky had encouraged his
followers to enter -- the Socialist parties.

After the rise of Hitler anti-fascism -- i.e. opposition to a particular
aspect of capitalist imperialism, meant increasing support for its other
aspect -- capitalist democracy. This expressed itself in Spain, in China
and ultimately worldwide in World War Two. It was the ideology which
masked the traditional appetites of the capitalist powers and which
enabled them to dragoon millions of proletarians into their armies. As
we have seen, Trotsky also called for support for this crusade in terms
of the defence of the USSR. A year after his murder the USSR finally
achieved what it sought -- an alliance with the Western imperialist
powers, including the USA "in defence of democracy".

### The Spanish Civil War

The first step in legitimising anti-fascism as a motive for defending
Western and Stalinist imperialism came in Spain.

As we have already seen, Trotsky had specifically declined invitations
from leaders of the Italian Communist Left to re-examine the
degeneration of the Russian revolution within the context of the overall
reflux of the revolutionary wave. Trotsky's refusal to come to terms
with the extent of that reflux allowed him to misunderstand the nature
of events and consequently what the Marxist response to them should be.
In April, 1936 he wrote that:

>The situation in Spain has again become revolutionary^[_The Spanish
>Revolution (1931-39)_, Leon Trotsky, (1973), Pathfinder Press, p.
>211.].

In fact, within months his own supporters, far from seeking independent
proletarian positions -- the most basic prerequisite to recover after
fifteen years of defeat, were being urged to fight for the Spanish
bourgeois democracy against Franco's army.

Modern day Trotskyists try to muddy the positions that were taken so let
there be no confusion. In February 1937 Trotsky wrote,

>Only cowards, traitors or agents of fascism can renounce aid to the
>Spanish republican armies. The elementary duty of every revolutionist
>is to struggle against the bands of Franco, Mussolini and Hitler^[op.
>cit. p. 242.].

Again, in September of the same year,

>Everywhere and always, wherever and whenever revolutionary workers are
>not powerful enough immediately to overthrow the bourgeois regime, they
>defend even rotten bourgeois democracy from fascism^[op. cit. p. 282.].

Later in the same article he dealt with a possible objection:

>... during a war between two bourgeois states, the revolutionary
>proletariat .... must take the position that 'the defeat of our own
>government is the lesser evil.' Is this rule not applicable also to the
>civil war in which two bourgeois governments are fighting against one
>another? It is not applicable .... In the Spanish civil war, the
>question is: democracy or fascism ... the revolutionaries can be
>successful by dealing military blows to the number one foe:
>fascism^[op. cit. p. 283.].

### China and Abyssinia

Having touched on the early Trotskyist adaptations to social democracy
and anti-fascism, the cases of China and Abyssinia provide further
evidence of the Trotskyist support for "the lesser evil" in times of
imperialist war.

A series of quotes from 1937 serve to show the extent and thoroughness
with which Trotsky urged his followers to take part in the Sino-Japanese
wars. Many of the articles from which the quotations are drawn were, at
least in part, polemics against non-Trotskyist Left Communist
oppositionists who correctly argued against such concessions to
"defencism".

>... the duty of all the workers' organisations of China was to
>participate actively and in the front lines of the present war against
>Japan...^[_Writings of Leon Trotsky (1937-38)_, (1970), Pathfinder
>Press, p. 107.].

-

>.. we must carefully distinguish between the imperialist countries and
>the backward countries, colonial and semi-colonial. The attitude of the
>working class organisations cannot be the same. The present war between
>China and Japan is a classic example ... Only conscious or unconscious
>agents of Japanese imperialism can put the two countries on the same
>plane.^[op. cit. p. 109.].

-

>A Japanese victory will serve reaction. A Chinese victory would have a
>progressive character. That is why the working class of the world
>supports by all means China against Japan.^[op. cit p. 111.].

In the case of Abyssinia, a different source shows an exactly parallel
stance being taken by Trotskyists in Britain. C.L.R. James, then (1936)
an entryist in the Independent Labour Party (ILP) argued,

>... that the I.L.P., in its obligation to the colonial peoples must
>assist them in their struggle against Italian Fascism^[_Against the
>Stream_, Sam Bornstein and Al Richardson, (1986), Socialist Platform,
>p. 183.].

James made the position even clearer. He replied to a taunt that:

>you [James and the Trotskyists, ed.] support war by the use of
>Abyssinian lives and refuse to use your own bodies for the war which
>you back,

by volunteering to take service under Haile Selassie^[Op. cit. p. 186.].

These examples illustrate the process by which the Trotskyists left the
proletarian camp in the 1930s. They are not produced to detract from the
heroism of the Trotskyists who were slaughtered in Siberia (along with
members of the Russian Communist Left) during the late 1930s. Neither do
we seek to suggest that Trotsky himself was ever a conscious agent of
imperialism. What we are trying to show is that the positions taken up
by later Trotskyists are not aberrations. They are part of the
methodology of Trotsky and Trotskyism. The move to counter-revolutionary
positions was prepared and completed during Trotsky's lifetime.

### The Internationalist Communist Party since World War Two

Whilst Trotsky was developing his own small contribution to the defence
of capitalism the International Communist Left was at first reduced to
small scattered groups, its members dispersed or imprisoned. However,
with the first stirrings of the proletariat against the war in Italy in
1942-43 it was able to reconstitute itself into a party, the
Internationalist Communist Party. This has continued to exist to the
present-day holding fast to the basic revolutionary principles of the
Communist International's first two Congresses. Defending a
revolutionary defeatist position toward fascist and anti-fascist alike,
it was the only political party thrown up by World War Two to do so,
both in theory and in practice^[For more on the early years of the
PCInt., see the series in _Workers Voice_ nos. 73-74 and no. 78. Back
issues available from CWO address.].

It won away many young militants from the ranks of the Stalinist
partisans and for a time led thousands of workers in struggle in
post-war Italy. The restrictions of this struggle to Italy and the
capitalist recovery after World War Two ensured that the new party did
not exist outside Italy after 1952^[By this time the PCInt had survived
the crisis of the return of Bordiga to revolutionary activity after 20
years away from politics. Like Trotsky he brought enormous prestige to
revolutionary politics in view of his past contribution -- but he also
brought with him the baggage of the past. Unable to comprehend the real
nature of the USSR, vacillating on the necessity of the Party in this
period, incapable of seeing that the progressive era of national
struggles was over and failing to understand the nature of the trade
unions as bulwarks of capitalism in the imperialist epoch, he threatened
to overturn the patient work of theoretical appraisal by the Italian
Left over two decades. Bordiga never joined the PCInt. but his
reappearance cost it many cadres and it was not until 1952 that his
opposition was finally overcome.].

In this year the PCInt produced a platform which was at the time the
clearest expression of the revolutionary methods and goals of the
October Revolution.

In 1977 it made a significant contribution to the growth of a future
world party of the proletariat by initiating the series of international
conferences of groups of the Communist Left and since 1983 has inspired
the formation of the International Bureau for the Revolutionary Party to
which the CWO adheres. With the formation of this Bureau a new stage in
the process towards the reformation of the Party, based on the lessons
of proletarian revolutionary experience began. In contrast to this work
of reconstruction, Trotskyism, with its myriads of splits (at least 20
in Britain since 1945), goes from crisis to crisis in which "purer"
Trotskyisms succeed one another at a dizzy rate. Trotskyism is a
cul-de-sac for state capitalists, those critical supporters of the
former USSR and of imperialist war, who are running round in circles
trying to find a way forward.

The profusion of Trotskyist sects in existence today is witness to the
mass of contradictions which make up the elements of Trotskyism, and
objectively these groupings represent the left wing of the bourgeoisie's
political apparatus. They stand, not for the emancipation of the
proletariat, but for a state capitalist order in which they will be the
new bosses. Objectively they function as the left wing of the social
democratic or Stalinist parties, providing these parties with cover from
attacks by revolutionary political positions and most importantly giving
them credibility in the eyes of the working class. By sticking slavishly
to the formula that the proletariat has only a crisis of leadership they
fail to recognise the real conditions for the revival of the
revolutionary party. These lie in the objective need to struggle of the
mass of the proletariat and the party's own programmatic clarity. Unable
to perceive these basic conditions, the Trotskyists cannot escape from
their historical cul-de-sac without retracing the road back to the
revolutionary lessons of the proletariat has taken. In doing this they
would, of course, cease to be Trotskyists since they would not only have
to abandon their fundamental confusions but would also have to recognise
the bourgeois, anti-revolutionary nature of Trotskyism itself.

## Trotskyism after Trotsky

### The crisis of Trotskyist analysis since 1989

By the end of the 1960s the boom years of capitalism which followed the
mass destruction of the Second World War were giving way to the
accumulation crisis which continues to plague the world economy today.
Since that time forces of consistent Marxist internationalism have
revived and strengthened themselves, seeking to maintain and defend the
programme of proletarian revolution and take that programme back into
the heart of the working class. In opposition to this process, varieties
of leftism have proliferated in different parts of the world. Each of
the variants have acted as a roadblock to a coherent revolutionary
_praxis_. Each has also served the bourgeoisie by reinforcing the left
wing of capitalism and leaving those layers attracted to them as further
sources of confusion and disillusion for anyone groping towards
revolutionary clarity.

Particularly after the collapse of the USSR, certain currents of leftism
-- especially those emanating from Western academia whose pseudo-marxist
careers had also shattered -- have explicitly abandoned the Marxist
project. They now join in the general bourgeois chorus of denouncing the
past struggles of the working class (particularly the revolutionary wave
around the end of the First World War) and declaring that the
proletariat is no longer the force for social change and future human
progress.

More confusingly for aspiring revolutionaries, tendencies have developed
and thrived who deny the central role of the working class in the
revolutionary process but who lay claim to the heritage of Marxism and
even to be the heirs of the forces which gave birth to the Communist
International in 1919. One of these trends was Maoism. But Maoism had
nothing to do with either marxism or the working class. The Mao faction
only took over the Chinese Communist Party after the massacres of the
workers in Shanghai and Canton in 1926-7.

Mao based the CCP on the "bloc of four classes" and his takeover of
China in October 1949 was not a proletarian revolution. What Mao did was
copy the brutal planning aspects of Stalinist state capitalism and
institute an arbitrary regime which resulted in the massacre of
millions. (Over 30 million died in the "Great Leap Forward" of 1958
alone.)

From the late Sixties on Maoism claimed to be a Marxist current and made
some inroads into the petty bourgeois student milieu in the metropoles.
Both here and in capitalism's periphery the Maoists encouraged their
followers to act as cheerleaders for the Chinese ruling class as they
struggled to establish their place in the imperialist order. In Asia,
Africa and South America their adherents joined armed factions
supporting national liberationist and/or left democratic warlords as
factions of the bourgeoisie struggled to carve up the capitalist cake.
Luckily, the twists and turns of the Chinese rulers have meant that they
and their followers have become less and less credible in their efforts
to present their political positions as stemming from a Marxist
understanding.

Trotskyism, having experienced a renaissance during the ideological
disruptions at the end of the 1960s, has proved to be a more robust
phenomenon. Unlike the Maoists, the Trotskyists were without their "own"
state power to look towards and attempt to justify and follow. This has
allowed latter-day Trotskyists to adopt chameleon-like positions,
adapting to this or that bourgeois faction or ideological trend. This
section will give some examples of that behaviour.

The Trotskyists' willingness to assimilate elements of politics from
other tendencies in order to patch together an eclectic and
kaleidoscopic programme is not accidental. The first part of this
pamphlet helps to uncover the roots of these politics and reveal that
they are not aberrations from a revolutionary norm but are actually a
consistent extension of the theory and practice codified in the
Trotskyist programme of 1938. That programme in turn reflected a method
which failed to recognise the implications of an epoch in which
capitalism had exhausted all its progressive possibilities and in which
the task of revolutionists was not to link to "progressive" factions of
the enemy class (democratic, anti-fascist or those supporting state
capital against private capital) but to develop a programme in
remorseless opposition to all such elements.

### Trotskyism's core confusion

The rotten core at the centre of Trotskyism is the refusal of that
tendency, or family of tendencies to adopt a rigorous analysis of the
failure of the revolutionary wave at the end of the First World War and
its consequent impact on the isolated Soviet power in Russia. Clinging
to their erroneous analysis of the Soviet Union which marked it as
having non-capitalist economic foundations, Trotskyists^[Certain
elements have reassessed Trotsky's description of the Stalinist
formations. Two of the main tendencies to do so have their origins in
the 1940s crisis of the Trotskyist movement. The first was grouped
around Max Shachtman, an American Trotskyist whose Workers' Party broke
away from official Trotskyism in 1940 and defined the Soviet Union as an
expression of "bureaucratic collectivism". [Comments on latter-day
Shachtmanites can be found in _Internationalist Communist_ 17]. Faced
with the spread of Stalinism at the end of the Second World War others
developed Shachtman's positions. C.L.R. James, who later moved to
positions which he called "Marxist Humanism" published his booklet on
_The Invading Socialist Society_ and the British-based Trotskyist, Tony
Cliff, published _Russia -- A Marxist Analysis_ shortly afterwards.
Cliff, not wishing to be branded a Shachtmanite, adopted the label of
"state capitalism" without abandoning any of the features of the
Trotskyist method. He and his followers, now the Socialist Workers Party
(SWP) in Britain, continued to call for state ownership as opposed to
private capital and continue to portray the "labour movement" (Labour
Party, trade unions, etc.) as a progressive force. They also, of course,
adhere to other Trotskyist confusions and adaptations of national
liberationism and other bourgeois tendencies. The "Lutte Ouvriere" group
in France hold similar political positions to the SWP but with a
stronger element of independent electoral activity (as against the SWP's
traditional cheer-leading for the British Labour Party). They added
another element to the kaleidoscope of confusion by combining the
orthodox Trotskyist "degenerated workers' state" label for the Soviet
Union with Cliff's version of "state capitalism" for the rest of the
pre-1989 Russian bloc in Eastern Europe.] urged their followers to
support the Stalinist states against their other imperialist rivals.

Struggling to deal with the reality of the reactionary transformation of
Russian society in the 1920s, Russian Communists in opposition to the
official party/state machine explored analogies with the years following
the 1789 French Revolution.

In February, 1935 Trotsky wrote about that discussion,

>"It would be no easy task today to establish who resorted first to the
>historical analogy of Thermidor. In any case, the positions on this
>issue in 1926 were approximately as follows: the group of "Democratic
>Centralism"^[A group of non-Trotskyist Left Communists.] (V.M. Smirnov,
>Sapronov and others who were hounded to death in exile by Stalin)
>declared, "Thermidor is an accomplished fact!". The adherents to the
>platform of the Left Oppositionist, the Bolshevik-Leninists [i.e. the
>Trotskyists] categorically denied this assertion"^[_Writings of Leon
>Trotsky (1934-35)_, 2nd Edition (1974), Pathfinder Press, p. 167.].

Without accepting the Thermidorian analogy, that quote shows very
clearly that Russian Oppositionists outside Trotsky's group had an
earlier and clearer view of the extent of the reaction than Trotsky and
his followers.

In the same article Trotsky belatedly comes to the same conclusion,

>The Thermidor of the Great Russian Revolution is not before us but very
>far behind. The Thermidoreans can celebrate, approximately, the tenth
>anniversary of their victory^[op.cit. p. 182.].

However, instead of having used the intervening years to refine and
develop Sapronov's position, Trotsky departs from basic and essential
Marxist understandings. For him, Russia remained a workers' state and
the Stalinist counter-revolutionaries were its defenders,

>The present political regime in the USSR is the regime of "Soviet" (or
>anti-Soviet) Bonapartism... In its social foundation and economic
>tendencies, the USSR still remains a workers' state"^[op.cit. p. 182.].

Trotsky went on to develop the same analysis at greater length in
_Revolution Betrayed_ published in 1936.

Since Trotsky's death the strange confusion whereby the nationalised
Russian economy was somehow a gain for the working class has expanded
into an even bigger methodological nonsense. During the post-war
economic expansion, with the adoption of extensive state capitalist
measures throughout the world, the Trotskyists came to identify any or
all state intervention, ownership or delivery of welfare and other
services as being progressive. (If not explicitly "socialist"!)

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union the poisonous culmination of the
Trotskyist analysis and misrepresentations has tragically, but
appropriately, been shown in all its counter-revolutionary implications
in Russia. The various groups, including the International Committee of
the Fourth International led by David North's Socialist Equality Party
(SEP) in the USA, the British SWP, and the Committee for a Workers
International headed by the British Socialist Party (ex-Militant
tendency) have competed to spawn their own organisations in Russia. In a
series of conferences the Trotskyists, including the followers of Hillel
Ticktin's non-orthodox Trotskyist _Critique_, have provided platforms
for all manner of supporters of state-based solutions, ranging from
Social Democrats to former leaders of Zhyuganov's party. All of them
share with the Trotskyists an inability to understand the reactionary
nature of any form of "state socialism" in the imperialist epoch.

At these conferences the leading speakers systematically hide the
contribution of non-Trotskyist oppositions to an understanding of and
resistance to the Russian Revolution's degeneration -- and in the case
of Ticktin, have gratuitously slandered Rosa Luxembourg for good
measure. The worst aspects of Trotskyism have thus returned to the land
of its origin to play a reactionary and confusing role.

### As unchanging as a chameleon, as consistent as a kaleidoscope

One of the features of Trotskyist political practice is its tendency,
helped by the movement's split into numerous factions and tendencies, to
adapt its politics to different and diverse anti-revolutionary interests
and trends.

As will be seen later, the Trotskyist movement lost its connections with
the proletarian revolutionary movement during the 1930s. Following
Trotsky's death and the political disappearance of his Fourth
International as a coherent force during the Second World War, the stage
was set for post-war Trotskyism to set a pattern of adopting and
adapting to bourgeois movements and simultaneously generating scores of
rival tendencies, fractions and organisations -- some nationally-based,
many claiming to be yet another incarnation of the Fourth International.

A short overview such as this pamphlet does not provide enough scope to
fully detail the bourgeois movements to which the Trotskyists have
adapted. A few examples will, however, serve to illustrate the range of
those developments.

In the second half of the 1940s, as the Soviet Union became the second
pillar of worldwide imperialist domination, the Trotskyists struggled to
assimilate that reality to their view that the statified Russian economy
remained a "gain for the working class". By the end of the decade the
majority of Trotskyists had decided that the satellite states in Eastern
Europe and (subsequently) Mao's China were likewise states in which the
nationalised economy was "progressive" and worthy of support. This
depiction implied that significant parts of the world had experienced
the end of capitalist property relations courtesy of the post-war
imperialist settlement and Mao's victory in the war against Chiang
Kai-Shek's KuoMinTang .

The gross departure from Marxism expressed in that confusion laid the
basis for decades of calling for support for the Moscow-centred bloc
against the U.S. dominated bloc during the Cold War. Within that trend
another tendency appeared as the Trotskyists threw their propaganda
support behind Stalinist forces who tactically expressed independence
from Moscow from time to time. The first example was when the Trotskyist
movement adopted Tito as an "unconscious Trotskyist" when he led his
Yugoslav state away from direct economic, political and military control
by Moscow. Later, differing factions were to repeat similar tragi-comic
confusion with other national Stalinist leaderships, notably the Cuban,
Chinese and Vietnamese^[The followers of Ted Grant's RSL, later the
"Militant" tendency managed to reach new heights of theoretical idiocy
when they discovered in the 1960s and 1970s that states such as Syria
and Burma were "deformed workers states" because of the percentage of
the national economy which was nationalised.].

Other national leaderships were similarly applauded to a greater or
lesser extent. During the 1970s and 80s a variety of governments were
awarded the Trotskyist stamp of approval. These included the military
regime in Ethiopia, the Sandinistas in Nicaragua and the New Jewel
Movement in Grenada. The support and applause for such governments or
oppositions overlapped very clearly with another Trotskyist
anti-proletarian position -- support for National Liberationism.

Trotskyists take their inspiration from the weaknesses of the positions
adopted between 1920 and 1922 by the Communist International as the
Revolutionary wave ebbed away. In parallel with their general united
frontist approach they offer their support to "oppressed" capitalist
states against their (equally capitalist) "oppressors". This practice
was sanctified by the Trotskyists during the 1930s when they supported
Abyssinia/Ethiopia against Italy and China against Japan. Trotsky and
his followers failed, and continue to fail, to recognise the fundamental
nature of the imperialist epoch -- that national bourgeoisies, and
aspiring national bourgeoisies, can only survive as part of, and are
entirely dependent on, the worldwide imperialist nexus. That failure has
led them to act as cheer-leaders for anti-proletarian national
liberation factions and figureheads, ranging from the Algerian FLN, to
Nkrumah's pan-Africanism, the bourgeois-led Fretilin movement struggling
for an independent East Timorese state and, of course, the forces who
now run the governments in all the major Southern African states.

Nearer home the various Trotskyist factions offer, usually vicarious,
support to the IRA and other Irish nationalist elements.

Having identified the Trotskyist support for national liberation
movements as a feature distinguishing them from the revolutionary camp,
it is easy to see how their support for and involvement with other
liberal movements marks another point of separation. In their never
ending search for "transitional" routes into mainstream bourgeois
political life the Trotskyists accommodate themselves to any fashionable
reformist trend the liberal bourgeoisie happen to throw up.

This is most obvious in two examples from the periphery of capitalism.
In 1951 in Bolivia the POR (Workers Revolutionary Party, led by
Guillermo Lora and part of the Pabloite International Secretariat) took
up support for the newly elected, and US-backed, Movement of National
Resistance government of Paz Estenssoro. For the US Government the
reformist programme of the MNR was the only way to "prevent the rise of
communism and chaos". The POR was a large party but having degenerated
alongside other Trotskyist organisations could only manage to cheer on
the bourgeois nationalist MNR's programme of nationalisation of the tin
mines and redivision of the land. It also called for such radical things
as ministerial posts for the corrupt COB trades union confederation
leaders. In 1954 this trajectory was complete when the majority of the
POR took up membership of the MNR. Thus, they wiped out any pretence at
having an independent class agenda and paved the way for the military
coup of 1964. If there was a "crisis of leadership" in the trades unions
then the Trotskyists were part of it.

Similarly, in the 50s and 60s the LSSP of Sri Lanka made its social
democratic credentials both concrete and obvious by their electoralism
and trades union aspirations. After the front with the Stalinists and
others in 1963 it finally went into the Bandaranaike government in 1964.
Again, the result was to persuade workers that the democratic system had
something to offer them or could be reformed to improve their conditions
of life. It did nothing to provide a basis for understanding the
capitalist relations which perpetuated their misery, much less organise
independently against the state.

With their resurgence, particularly in North America and Europe, at the
end of the 1960s the Trotskyists absorbed many of the political
positions of the various "liberation" movements -- all of which
counterposed themselves to the Marxist project. Prime amongst these are
feminism and "black liberation"/anti-racism.

Trotskyism's desire to ingratiate itself with such tendencies has
brought a stream of confusing alliances and shared positions.
Particularly in their beloved "Labour Movement" (primarily the Labour
Party and the Trade Unions -- both agents for the preservation of
capitalism in the current period) the Trotskyists become cheer-leaders
for a radical "equal opportunities" policy, often based around "positive
action" or "positive discrimination". With their left Labour movement
allies the Trotskyists keep the struggle for equality firmly within a
reformist framework. Even where they pay lip service to the indissoluble
link between capitalism and chauvinism/discrimination their practice is
centred around reformist demands aimed at proving that "liberation" can
be achieved via the left of capital. Many who want to destroy oppression
end up trapped by the Trotskyists in institutional and political
structures which are essential parts of the capitalist framework which
is the very source of that oppression.

For many Trotskyists their "anti-racist" antics are linked to positions
of united-frontist anti-fascism^[The most obvious example of this in
Britain is the SWP-inspired Anti-Nazi League which has reappeared to
stress the joys of democratic capitalism at various times during the
last 20 years.], the implications of which we will return to shortly.
Here, it is worth expanding briefly on the two areas of the "Labour
Movement" in which Trotskyism remains trapped and in turn entraps those
who encounter it. These are the left of the trade unions together with
the Labour Party -- or its more recent cheap imitations.

For the vast majority of Trotskyists the trade unions, at all levels,
remain a key area to which they send their cadres and contacts. Starting
from an inability and unwillingness to recognise the role of the unions
in the imperialist epoch the Trotskyists try to get themselves into
positions of power and influence up to and including the national
leaderships^[For example, see the 30th April, 1999 edition of
_Socialist_ in which pet members of the National Executive Committee of
the NUT and UNISON Trade Unions send their May Day greetings.].

In all cases the Trotskyists serve to confuse those they address that
the unions can once again become instruments for the working class to
defend itself, rather than the instruments of control in the workplace
and direct agents of the state and capital, they really are.

The Trotskyists also have consistently put great effort into boosting
the credentials and backing their other left reformist friends who seek
positions of authority in the trade unions. Such activities, claimed as
the high-point of political intervention -- all of which served to
maintain the grip of the trade unions -- included the encouragement of
the dockers "blue union" by the (then) Socialist Labour League during
the 1960s and the construction of the Rank and File Mobilising Committee
(IS/SWP - 1970s) and the Broad Left Organising Committee (1980s -
Militant). As the unions continue to divide the working class the
Trotskyists continue to try to act as their left wing.

Alongside the unions the other twin pillar of the Trotskyists' Labour
Movement (in Britain) has traditionally been the Labour Party. The
political origins of the orientation towards Second International-type
parties will be shown later in the comments on Trotsky's departure from
revolutionary politics during the 1930s.

In Britain the vast majority of Trotskyists were members of the Labour
Party from the late 1940s until the radicalisation around 1968. This
strategy of "entryism", particularly around the Labour Party's youth
wing allowed Gerry Healey's Socialist Labour League (later the Workers
Revolutionary Party) to take control of the Labour Party Young
Socialists in the early 1960s. Ted Grant's "Militant", refusing to leave
their Labour Party haunts during the radicalisation of 1968-74, repeated
the feat during the 1970s and early 80s. The latter's persistence also
paid off when their Liverpool base, with roots traceable back to the
1930s, was able to politically direct the City Council between 1983 and
1987.

From the mid 1970s until the late 1980s many Trotskyists rediscovered
entryism and moved back to operate amongst, and often as, the Labour
left. The main exceptions to that rule were Tony Cliff's International
Socialists who recreated themselves as the Socialist Workers Party (SWP)
and Gerry Healey's WRP, since exploded into numerous fragments, who
became mouthpieces for Gaddafy and simultaneously sponsors of a
newspaper, the _Labour Herald_, which gave a platform to such worthies
of the Labour Left as Ken Livingstone. It needs to be emphasised that
even where the fractions organisationally separated from Labour, there
was, in general no political reassessment. Both the SWP and the WRP in
that period continued to call for electoral support for Labour -- except
on the very few occasions where they stood their own candidates,
achieving negligible impact and number of votes.

Since the late 1980s the Trotskyists have found it more and more
difficult to thrive in the left of the Labour Party. This process is
driven both by increasing bureaucratic control from a Party machine
firmly controlled by the Labour right wing and the increasing refusal of
the Party leadership to abide by the traditional Labourist
state-interventionist mantras. The result has been an increasing number
of Trotskyist organisations outside the Labour Party, a number of splits
and realignments^[Perhaps the most dramatic transformation has been the
moves by the former "Militant" who ditched their long-time guru, Ted
Grant, and transformed themselves into the "Socialist Party" --
abandoning the Labour Party, standing their own candidates and seeking
alliances with other radical interest groups.], and increasing
appearances of Trotskyist candidates standing on left reformist
platforms, particularly in elections during 1999^["Scottish Socialist"
candidate, Tommy Sheridan, attained the dubious distinction of becoming
the lone Trotskyist in the British bourgeoisie's latest state
institution, the Scottish Parliament.].

Perhaps the most nauseating example of the current realignments took
place in 1999 when the SWP (the biggest Trotskyist group in Britain)
allied itself in a mutual admiration society with the Stalinist
Communist Party of Britain (CPB -- publishers of the _Morning Star_) and
a rag-bag of left Labour MPs such as Tony Benn and Alice Mahon to build
a pro-Serbian strand to head off any internationalist opposition to the
developing war in the Balkans.

On the other hand, there were many Trotskyists intent on showing their
followers that, in war, they can make whatever choice they wish -- so
long as its in accord with a bourgeois fraction. Groups such as Workers
Power, the Alliance for Workers Liberty (AWL) and Socialist Party all
supported the Kosovan Liberation Army (KLA) and the would-be Kosovan
state/protectorate. They prefer the machinations of the pro-German or
pro-American Kosovan nationalists to the SWP's Russian-backed Serbian
nationalists.

The question of the move towards a Third World War and the role of the
Trotskyists is an opportunity to comment not only on their general
methodology (select a bourgeois fraction, ignore internationalism) but
also to return to their obsessive anti-fascism.

For internationalists, fascism is a product of imperialism. It is part
of the price which the proletariat paid as a result of the profound
crisis following the defeat of the revolutionary struggles. In no way,
however, do we believe that 20th century bourgeois democracy (the
preferred form of imperialist domination in the metropolitan countries)
is one jot less an imperialist formation. The historic solution to both
fascism and the democratic form of imperialism is working class
revolution. Not so for the Trotskyists!

Time and again the Trotskyists will highlight the role of the
insignificant fascist organisations -- ignoring, for example, the fact
that far more black people have died or suffered injury at the hands of
the democratic British state. The Trotskyists, together with their
Stalinist and other leftist allies have fought long and hard to maintain
anti-fascism as a significant element in their armoury of confusion.

Anti-fascism is not merely one amongst many other bourgeois confusions
prevalent amongst the working-class. It was the single strongest
ideological tool used to dragoon the working-class into the Second
Imperialist War. Having prepared the ground during the Spanish Civil
War, the Trotskyists and Stalinists systematically prepared their
followers to fight alongside the democratic powers against the
German-led Axis. The official "Communist Party" leaderships were to make
up for their departure from that line, during the Hitler-Stalin pact of
August 1939-May 1941, with their out and out support for the
Anglo-Russian-American imperialist alliance during Stalin's "Great
Patriotic War".

Anti-fascism remains a significant weapon in the bourgeoisie's
ideological armoury. The "struggle against a dictator" was used to
generate support for the wars against Iraq. Clinton and Blair's verbal
tirades against the Milosevic Serbian government use many features of
imperialism's democratic anti-fascist terminology. We have already shown
how modern-day Trotskyists elect to support one or other bourgeois
fraction, even in time of war. Their use of anti-fascism helps give
their bourgeois bigger siblings even more scope to pull workers towards
imperialist slaughter.

### Conclusion

This short pamphlet has been about Trotsky in the face of the
counter-revolution. It might seem ungenerous that we have not dwelled on
his activity in 1905 as the second chair of the St. Petersburg Soviet.
It might also appear that we have short-changed him by not quoting at
length his brilliant writings such as 1905, _The History of the Russian
Revolution_ or _Results and Prospects_. We might even have credited him
with being more far sighted than Lenin on the course of the future
Russian Revolution in the years before the First World War. But that was
not our focus. We are trying to analyse the last revolutionary wave in
order to clarify what our tasks are for the future. The highpoint of
Trotsky's legacy is the 1917 Russian Revolution. And here it is no
accident that Trotsky's greatest success as a revolutionary was as
Commissar for War. His ruthlessness was a significant factor in the
creation of the Red Army. But this strength was also a weakness. As a
contemporary said "Trotsky was a man of the state not of the party".
This is a telling comment. It underlines that Trotsky after 1918 was
less concerned with the question of working class self-activity and more
concerned with building a state power. This is why he could advocate the
"militarisation of labour" in 1920. It was thinking of this that Lenin,
in the very same _Testament_ where he called for the removal of Stalin
also criticised Trotsky for...

>a disposition to be too much attracted by the purely administrative
>side of affairs.

It was no wonder then that as the Party became the State Trotsky
reserved his criticisms to an internal struggle which was both feeble
and inconsistent. He confined his fight to a struggle amongst the
leadership which both confused and disoriented the young workers who had
been educated in the struggle to create the young Soviet republic.

In the final analysis Trotsky himself was the architect of Trotskyism.
Had he survived the imperialist war of 1939-45 he might have avoided
support for "degenerated workers' states". He might even have
re-assessed the class nature of the Soviet Union. But history is not
about what might have happened. It is about what **did** happen. Trotsky
left a method which created a counter-revolutionary movement. It was no
accident that Trotsky refused to unite with any other Opposition, either
inside Russia or inside the International. Radek, a leading Trotskyist,
complained in 1928 that many young workers could not understand why
Trotsky did not link up with the Democratic Centralists (a Russian
Communist Left-led organisation by V. Smirnov and T. Sapronov) to form a
new communist party^[See "The Left Communist Opposition in the USSR in
the Late 20s" by A.V. Gusev (_Otechestvennaia Istoriia_,
January/February 1996).].

The Trotskyist leaders dismissed the "Decists" as "ultra-left, sectarian
and adventurist". Similarly, Trotsky rejected links with other
oppositions such as our political forerunners in the Left Fraction of
the Communist Party of Italy, but also with others politically closer to
him like the KPO (Communist Party Opposition) and SAP (Socialist
Workers' Party) in Germany.

Why? Because Trotsky was obsessed with what he thought would be "staying
in touch with the masses". And when the masses were defeated and under
the control of the counter-revolution, whether in its Stalinist guise in
Russia or its Social Democratic guise in the rest of Europe, Trotsky
preferred to keep on terms with the counter-revolution. Hence his
"French turn" in 1934 when he urged his followers back into Social
Democracy. Whether they have espoused entryism or not, every Trotskyist
tendency since has been infected with the same methodology. By rejoining
Social Democracy they have done their bit to bury the banner of the
communist programme. It is the task of the current generation of
revolutionaries to once again unfurl that flag of working class
independence so that the coming century fulfils the failed promise of
freedom and equality offered by the October Revolution.

## Appendix A: Natalya Trotsky breaks with the Fourth International

We reproduce below the statement made by Trotsky's widow, Natalya, when
she broke from the Trotskyist movement. Her reasoning was that their
concessions to Stalinism had resulted in their definitive abandonment of
proletarian revolution. The two key factors which she refers to are the
Trotskyists' decision to categorise the Moscow-dominated states in
Eastern Europe as "deformed workers' states" and their support for the
Russian, Chinese and North Korean Stalinists during the Korean War.

Sedova Trotsky's letter is based on quite different premises from the
tradition of the Internationalist current which the CWO and the IBRP
adhere to. Although she correctly argues that "the Stalinist state" is
not a workers' state she fails to trace the roots of this Trotskyist
illusion -- quite simply because they go back to Trotsky himself.
Trotsky's declaration of support for "the Socialist Fatherland" (sic) in
1927 illustrate the concessions he made to Stalinism early on during the
faction fight amongst the leaders of the Russian Communist Party and, of
course, the Communist International. Sedova's implied support for
anti-fascism and Trotskyist "united-frontism" during the 1930s clearly
also shows that the author had not made a deep enough critique to
unearth the roots of Trotskyism's counter-revolutionary position.

Nevertheless we consider the letter worthy of re-publication in order to
add to a historical record which the Trotskyists would prefer to forget
and conceal from those coming into contact with them. The document shows
conclusively the distance which the Trotskyist movement had travelled
away from revolutionary theory and practice. During the half century
since the statement was written the Trotskyists have continued further
and further along that counter-revolutionary trajectory.

It should be noted that the SWP (the Socialist Workers Party) referred
to in the letter is the party in the USA of that name, at that time
effectively the US section of the Fourth International although to
comply with US law they chose to describe themselves as a sympathising
section. During the 1980s they led a further split amongst the
Trotskyists to become unashamed cheerleaders for the Castro regime in
Cuba. They are not to be confused with the British-based organisation of
the same name whose origins were in one of the many splits within the
British Trotskyist movement in the years immediately before Sedova
Trotsky's statement.

### Letter to the Executive Committee of the Fourth International

Comrades,

You know quite well that I have not been in political agreement with you
for the past five or six years, since the end of the war and even
earlier. The position you have taken on the important events of recent
times shows me that, instead of correcting your earlier errors, you are
persisting in them and deepening them. On the road you have taken, you
have reached a point where it is no longer possible for me to remain
silent or to confine myself to private protests. I must now express my
opinions publicly.

The step which I feel obliged to take has been a grave and difficult one
for me, and I can only regret it sincerely. But there is no other way.
After a great deal of reflections and hesitations over a problem which
pained me deeply, I find that I must tell you that I see no other way
than to say openly that our disagreements make it impossible for me to
remain any longer in your ranks.

The reasons for this final action on my part are known to most of you. I
repeat them here briefly only for those to whom they are not familiar,
touching only on our fundamentally important differences and not on the
differences over matters of daily policy which are related to them or
which follow from them.

Obsessed by old and outlived formulas, you continue to regard the
Stalinist state as a workers' state. I cannot and will not follow you in
this.

Virtually every year after the beginning of the fight against the
usurping Stalinist bureaucracy, L D Trotsky repeated that the regime was
moving to the right, under conditions of a lagging world revolution and
the seizure of all political positions in Russia by the bureaucracy.
Time and again, he pointed out how the consolidation of Stalinism in
Russia led to the worsening of the economic, political and social
positions of the working class, and the triumph of a tyrannical and
privileged aristocracy. If this trend continues, he said, the revolution
will be at an end and the restoration of capitalism will be achieved.

That, unfortunately, is what has happened even if in new and unexpected
forms. There is hardly a country in the world where the authentic ideas
and bearers of socialism are so barbarously hounded. It should be clear
to everyone that the revolution has been completely destroyed by
Stalinism. Yet you continue to say that under this unspeakable regime,
Russia is still a workers' state. I consider this a blow at socialism.
Stalinism and the Stalinist state have nothing whatever in common with a
workers' state or with socialism. They are the worst and the most
dangerous enemies of socialism and the working class.

You now hold that the states of Eastern Europe over which Stalinism
established its domination during and after the war, are likewise
workers' states. This is equivalent to saying that Stalinism has carried
out a revolutionary socialist role. I cannot and will not follow you in
this.

After the war and even before it ended, there was a rising revolutionary
movement of the masses in these Eastern countries. But it was not these
masses that won power and it was not a workers state that was
established by their struggle. It was the Stalinist counter-revolution
that won power, reducing these lands to vassals of the Kremlin by
strangling the working masses, their revolutionary struggles and their
revolutionary aspirations.

By considering that the Stalinist bureaucracy established workers'
states in these countries, you assign to it a progressive and even
revolutionary role. By propagating this monstrous falsehood to the
workers' vanguard, you deny to the Fourth International all the basic
reasons for existence as the world party of the socialist revolution. In
the past, we always considered Stalinism to be a counter-revolutionary
force in every sense of the term. You no longer do so. But I continue to
do so.

In 1932 and 1933, the Stalinists, in order to justify their shameless
capitulation to Hitlerism, declared that it would matter little if the
fascists came to power because socialism would come after and through
the rule of fascism. Only dehumanised brutes without a shred of
socialist thought or spirit could have argued this way. Now,
notwithstanding the revolutionary aims which animate you, you maintain
that the despotic Stalinist reaction which has triumphed in Europe is
one of the roads through which socialism will eventually come. This view
marks an irremediable break with the profoundest convictions always held
by our movement and which I continue to share.

I find it impossible to follow you in the question of the Tito regime in
Yugoslavia. All the sympathy and support of revolutionists and even of
all democrats, should go to the Yugoslav people in their determined
resistance to the efforts of Moscow to reduce them and their country to
vassalage. Every advantage should be taken of the concessions which the
Yugoslav regime now finds itself obliged to make to the people. But your
entire press is now devoted to an inexcusable idealisation of the
Titoist bureaucracy for which no ground exists in the traditions and
principles of our movement.

This bureaucracy is only a replica, in a new form, of the old Stalinist
bureaucracy. It was trained in the ideas, the politics and morals of the
GPU. Its regime differs from Stalin's in no fundamental regard. It is
absurd to believe or to teach that the revolutionary leadership of the
Yugoslav people will develop out of this bureaucracy or in any way other
than in the course of struggle against it.

Most insupportable of all is the position on the war to which you have
committed yourselves. The third world war which threatens humanity
confronts the revolutionary movement with the most difficult problems,
the most complex situations, the gravest decisions. Our position can be
taken only after the most earnest and freest discussions. But in the
face of all the events of recent years, you continue to advocate, and to
pledge the entire movement, to the defence of the Stalinist state. You
are even now supporting the armies of Stalinism in the war which is
being endured by the anguished Korean people. I cannot and will not
follow you in this.

As far back as 1927, Trotsky, in reply to a disloyal question put to him
in the Political Bureau by Stalin, stated his views as follows: "For the
socialist fatherland, yes! For the Stalinist regime, no!" That was in
1927! Now, twenty-three years later Stalin has left nothing of the
Socialist fatherland. It has been replaced by the enslavement and
degradation of the people by the Stalinist autocracy. This is the state
you propose to defend in the war, which you are already defending in
Korea.

I know very well how often you repeat that you are criticising Stalinism
and fighting it. But the fact is that your criticism and your fight lose
their value and can yield no results because they are determined by and
subordinated to your position of defence of the Stalinist state. Whoever
defends this regime of barbarous oppression, regardless of the motives,
abandons the principles of socialism and internationalism.

In the message sent me from the recent convention of the SWP you write
that Trotsky's ideas continue to be your guide. I must tell you that I
read these words with great bitterness. As you observe from what I have
written above, I do not see his ideas in your politics. I have
confidence in these ideas. I remain convinced that the only way out of
the present situation is the social revolution, the self-emancipation of
the proletariat of the world.

-- Natalya Sedova Trotsky Mexico, D.F. 9 May 1951

## Appendix B: Trotsky and Trotskyism: the chronology (1879-1943)

As can be seen in the pamphlet, our method is not to argue against
Trotsky the man. This is not simply because _argumentum ad hominem_ is
useless as a way to understand revolutionary history but also because we
absolutely reject the bourgeois idea that history is really the history
of great men. The life of Trotsky (and indeed of Lenin) is adequate
testimony to the fact that individuals are not superior to material
circumstances. We are aware, therefore, that the case we have presented
here requires some understanding of the main historical events
surrounding both Trotsky and the workers' movement as a whole. This
chronological outline is intended to provide the context for our
arguments.

* **1879 October 26th** Lev Davidovich Bronstein, fifth son of Anna and
  David Leontevich Bronstein born at Yanovka, Southern Ukraine.
* **1881** Assassination of Tsar Alexander II by Populists who believe
  Russia can avoid an industrial revolution on Western lines if they
  adopt the peasant _mir_ as their social unit. Populism became the most
  favoured political movement for Russian intellectuals at this period.
* **1883** George Plekhanov with Vera Zazulich and Pavel Axelrod founded
  the Emancipation of Labour group, the first Russian Marxist
  organisation.
* **1895** Lenin and Martov founded the League of Struggle for the
  Emancipation of the Working Class. Its leaders were immediately
  arrested and sent to Siberia.
* **1897** The Southern Russian Workers Union founded by L.D. Bronstein
  and other former Narodniks (Populists) who now embraced Marxism and
  began leafletting factories.
* **1898** Bronstein was arrested and moved around several prisons. In
  Odessa a gaoler, Trotsky, gave him the idea for the pen name by which
  he will be known.
* **1900** The Russian Social Democratic Labour Party founded. Sentenced
  to four years in Siberia Trotsky married Alexandra Lvovna Sokolovskaya
  (who had earlier introduced him to Marxism) so that they could remain
  together.
* **1902** Lenin wrote _What is to be Done_. Establishment of _Iskra_,
  for which Trotsky wrote (nicknamed Piero, 'The Pen'). Trotsky's first
  escape from Siberia.
* **1903** Split in the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party into
  Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. Trotsky sided with Mensheviks.
* **1904** Trotsky resigned from Menshevik fraction.
* **1905 January 22nd** "Bloody Sunday": Massacre of peaceful
  demonstration of workers began a year of revolution. Trotsky (with
  Natalya Sedova) returned to Russia.
* **November** Trotsky became the second Chairman of the St. Petersburg
  Soviet (after the arrest of Khrustalev-Nosar). Lenin wrote _Two
  Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution_ in which he
  advocated "uninterrupted revolution". Trotsky arrested in December
  when the revolution collapsed.
* **1907** Made his second escape from Siberia and settled in Vienna
  where he edited Pravda which preached re-uniting of the Bolshevik and
  Menshevik factions. Lenin described him as "that windbag Trotsky" at
  this time.
* **1908** Stuttgart Conference of the Second International passes the
  motion proposed by Luxemburg, Lenin etc. to call for a general strike
  in the event of a European war. The Bosnian Crisis nearly led to war
  between Russia and Austria-Hungary. German support for Austria forced
  the Russian Empire to back down.
* **1912** Basle Conference of the Second International repeated the
  same call.
* **1914** Start of First World War. Leaders of Social Democracy ignore
  the resolutions of the Second International and support "their" own
  governments. Only the Russian, Bulgarian and Serbian parties oppose
  the war. Trotsky went to Switzerland and wrote _The War and the
  International_ which condemned the war before moving to France to work
  with Martov's anti-war paper, _Golos_ (_The Voice_) and writing for
  _Kievan Thought_.
* **1915 February** Trotsky denounced Menshevism in _Nashe Slovo_.
* **September** 38 Socialist delegates from eleven countries met at
  Zimmerwald to oppose the war. Trotsky wrote the Zimmerwald Manifesto
  against the war but did not join the Left who supported Lenin's
  internationalist position calling for "the imperialist war to be
  turned into a civil war."
* **1916** The Kienthal Conference confirms the split between the "Left"
  and the pacifists. The French state prevent Trotsky's attendance.
* **September** Trotsky expelled from France, arrived in the USA via
  Spain.
* **1917 March** On hearing of the outbreak of the February Revolution
  Trotsky headed back to Russia but the steamer docked at Halifax, Nova
  Scotia so that he British interned him as a prisoner of war with 800
  Germans. Trotsky's speeches to them on the Zimmerwald Conference were
  halted by the prison authorities.
* **April** Lenin arrived in Petrograd. His _April Theses_ called for
  proletarian revolution, all power to the soviets, a new International
  and the adoption of the name communist by the Bolsheviks. Many
  Bolshevik leaders (including Trotsky's brother in law Kamenev) refused
  to accept them.
* **May** "The July Days". Kronstadt sailors under the influence of
  Bolshevik slogans tried prematurely to get the Bolsheviks to take over
  from the Provisional Government. Trotsky rescued the leader of the
  SRs, Victor Chernov, from the angry sailors. The Provisional
  Government could muster enough military support to gun down the
  demonstrators and the Bolsheviks were proscribed. Trotsky announced
  his support for Lenin and was imprisoned.
* **August** The attempted coup d'etat by General Kornilov forces
  Kerensky to _de facto_ relegitimise the Bolsheviks in order to
  mobilise popular support against his own Chief of Staff.
* **September** Trotsky elected to the Bolshevik Party Central
  Committee. On 23rd September he was elected Chairman of the Petrograd
  Soviet.
* **October** Trotsky supported Lenin's call for the overthrow of the
  Kerensky Government.
* **October 24th** As Chairman of the Military Revolutionary Committee
  of the Petrograd Soviet (originally set up to organise the fight
  against Kornilov) Trotsky organised the takeover of power when
  Kerensky attempted a pre-emptive strike against the working class.
  Trotsky not only announced the overthrow of Kerensky but also on the
  25th pronounced the famous final epitaph on the Mensheviks and
  Socialist Revolutionaries that they now should go to where they
  belonged "the dustbin of history".
* **November** Debate in the Bolshevik Central Committee on the nature
  of the new power had Trotsky turning down Lenin's proposal that he, as
  Chair of the Soviets, should become head of the new government. When
  discussing what to call the new government Trotsky suggests the name
  'peoples Commissars' to avoid the capitalist-sounding 'ministers'.
  Trotsky was made Commissar for Foreign Affairs. As Commissar for
  Foreign Affairs Trotsky says he will simply publish the secret
  treaties between the imperialist Entente powers (Russia, France and
  Britain) then "shut up shop". He does publish the treaties
  demonstrating that the war is also a war of conquest on the Entente
  side. But he was given the task of negotiating the nature of the peace
  with the German Imperial High Command.
* **December** Trotsky (with Kamenev and Joffe) arrived in Brest-Litovsk
  to negotiate the terms of the peace treaty with the German General
  Staff. The delegation distributed leaflets to the German troops urging
  them to revolution. Trotsky tried to stall on accepting the German
  terms. He accepted Lenin's offer that if he voted for Trotsky's
  "neither war nor peace" line then Trotsky would support Lenin's
  recognition that the Bolsheviks had no choice but to accept
  Brest-Litovsk.
* **1918 March 3rd** The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk signed costing the
  Soviet Republic Finland, the Ukraine and its best grain lands. By this
  time Trotsky had resigned. He now became Commissar for War. For the
  next two and half years he organised the Red Army.
* **August 27th** Trotsky began to live on his famous train which went
  from front to front rallying the Red Army in the civil war against the
  Whites. He virtually did not leave it for two years. Trotsky wrote
  _Terrorism and Communism_ in reply to Mensheviks' criticisms of the
  Red Terror.
* **1920 December** With three million proletarians dead and famine and
  apathy now stalking the Soviet republic it was clear that "war
  communism" would have to be replaced. In the debate on what to replace
  it with Trotsky proposed "the militarisation of labour".
* **1921 January** Italian Socialist Party split when Serrati refused to
  expel reformists. Communist Party of Italy formed with Amadeo Bordiga
  as leading figure.
* **March** At the Tenth Party Congress the New Economic Policy (NEP)
  was adopted to replace "war communism". Factions such as the Workers
  Opposition were formally banned. Before it had finished the Kronstadt
  revolt brought the "tragic necessity" (Trotsky) of its suppression by
  Tukhachevsky. The failure of the March Action in Germany brought an
  end to the hopes of immediate relief for the beleaguered Soviet
  Republic.
* **1922 March** Zinoviev proposed Stalin as General Secretary of the
  Communist Party.
* **1923 February** In Italy Bordiga arrested.
* **May** Lenin's first stroke. Lenin wrote his _Testament_ criticising
  both Stalin and Trotsky but urging removal of Stalin.
* **June** Third Enlarged Executive of the Comintern installed new,
  'mixed' leadership in PCd'I.
* **1924 January** The death of Lenin. Trotsky was absent from the
  funeral after Stalin told him there would not be enough time for him
  to return to Moscow.
* **May** Gramsci returned to Italy to take up leadership of PCd'I after
  two years under the tutelage of the Comintern in Moscow.
* **June** Fifth Congress of Communist International called for
  'bolshevisation' of Communist Parties.
* **November** The KPD led the German working class to defeat for the
  final time. Publication of Trotsky's _The Lessons of October_.
* **1925** Trotsky removed as Commissar for War.
* **1926** Failure of the General Strike in Britain. Bordiga's last
  attendance at a Comintern meeting to challenge Stalin about the
  direction of the USSR.
* **1927** Defeat of the Chinese working class. Trotsky now joined by
  Zinoviev and Kamenev in the United Opposition. All three expelled from
  the Party.
* **1928** Trotsky sent to Alma Ata. Stalin now in total control of
  Party and state in the USSR. The Left Fraction of the Communist Party
  of Italy formally reconstituted in Pantin, Paris. _Prometeo_ published
  in Brussels.
* **1929** Trotsky exiled to Prinkipo Island, Turkey. The first issue of
  the Bulletin of the Oppposition issued in Paris. The Wall Street Crash
  started the Depression.
* **1930** Formal expulsion of Bordiga from the Communist Party of Italy
  for "Trotskyism".
* **1933** Trotsky's The Permanent Revolution completed. Nazism came to
  power in Germany. Trotsky obtained a visa to France where the
  International Left Opposition was based. This took the name
  International Communist League (Bolshevik Leninist). Italian Fraction,
  after failed discussions with Trotsky, began to publish _Bilan_.
* **1934** Murder of Kirov in Leningrad began the Purges in the USSR.
  The so-called "French turn" when Trotsky urged his supporters in
  France to rejoin Social Democracy. Entryism became a Trotskyist
  trademark.
* **1935** Trotsky moved to Norway. _The Revolution Betrayed_ published.
* **1936** The Spanish Civil War began. Trotsky arrived in Mexico.
* **1937** Japan invaded China.
* **1938** Leon Sedov, Trotsky's son, murdered in Paris by Stalin's
  agents. Trotsky wrote _The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of
  the Fourth International_ (now known as the _Transitional Programme_).
  James Burnham and Max Shachtman of the Socialist Workers' Party urged
  Trotsky to abandon the degenerated workers' state formula.
* **1939** The Hitler-Stalin Pact and the invasion of Poland that began
  the second imperialist war.
* **1940** The murder of Trotsky by a Stalinist agent. The Fourth
  International continued to defend the USSR as a "degenerated workers'
  state" even after the invasion of Finland.
* **1943 May** Stalin dissolved the Comintern as part of the imperialist
  wartime deal with the USA and Britain.
* **July** Mussolini government collapses. Wave of strikes in Italy. The
  Italian Left, led by Onorato Damen formed the Internationalist
  Communist Party (Battaglia Comunista) clandestinely in Fascist Italy.
* **November** First issue of revived _Prometeo_.
