---
title: "On Reading Trotsky's Book \"The Third International After Lenin\""
author: Kantorovitch, Haim
date: 1936
description: An interesting critique of the insufficiency of Trotsky's response to Stalinism, written by a figure on the left of the Socialist Party of America. First published in _American Socialist Monthly_, August 1936. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/kantorovich/1936/review-trotsky.htm>.
...

The book was written at the time of the Sixth Congress of the Communist
International, that is, 1928, before the Third Period madness, before
the capitulation of the German Communist Party, and of course before the
full liquidation of Communism at the Seventh Congress. Yet, one who has
read Trotsky's criticism of the programme of the CI could foresee the
further development of Stalinist Communism all through the Third Period
to the Seventh Congress.

Trotsky does not indulge in prophecies (p. 137) but his analysis of the
mistakes of the CI clearly indicates its further development.

The downfall of the CI is the result of the theory of "socialism in one
country." It is contrary to all Communist theory and tactics. Once this
theory is accepted, it leads necessarily towards "a collaborationist
policy towards the foreign bourgeoisie with the object of averting
intervention." Since this theory is accepted not only by the leaders of
the USSR, who could at least plead national emergency as cause or excuse
for their betrayal of internationalism, but also by the Communist
International, its only excuse can be the "defence of the Soviet Union,"
using the word "defence" in the simple traditional way in which it is
used in every capitalist state. Where does it lead? In 1928 Trotsky
prophesied that in view of this theory: "The task of the parties in the
CI assumes therefore an auxiliary character. Their mission is to protect
the USSR from intervention and not to fight for the conquest of power"
(p. 61).

He clearly foresaw the fate that was in store for the CI as an
organisation. Once this theory is accepted:

>Then the international is partly a subsidiary and partly a decorative
institution, the congress of which can be convoked every four years,
once every ten years or perhaps not at all... The International
according to this scheme must play the role of a pacifist instrument.
Its main role, the role of an instrument of world revolution, is then
inevitably relegated to the background (p. 62).

In 1928 it was easy to raise the cry that Trotsky was slandering the CI
and the Communist movement generally. In 1936 no one but a blind man can
deny that Trotsky's predictions came true to the letter. The CI has
become nothing more than a subsidiary of the foreign office of the
Soviet government, a pacifist instrument. Its congresses are convoked
once in four years and once in seven years, and God knows when the
Eighth Congress will be held, if ever.[^fn-1] The Communist parties have
even gone further in their degeneration than Trotsky predicted. It is
not only that they have relegated the idea of world revolution to the
background; they have given it up completely. Along with the world
revolution went the class struggle.

His criticism of the mistakes and vacillations of the CI is brilliant
and well substantiated. The implications, however, that if not for these
mistakes, the failures of the proletarian revolution would have been
victories, is not convincing. He places altogether too much reliance on
leadership. There seems to be something divine about true, real leaders;
all defeats of the European working class were mainly due to the lack of
leadership. Yet some of the worst defeats suffered by the Communist
movement happened at the time when the CI was headed by Lenin and
Trotsky, and the opposition in the CPUSSR was defeated, though at its
head was no less a leader than Trotsky himself!

No one will of course deny the true role of leadership. We all know the
price many a party has paid for incorrect leadership. Yet, leaders do
not create parties and certainly make no revolutions, though correct
leadership is of course necessary in order to utilise and take advantage
of favourable situations. According to Trotsky, leadership is of first
importance, everything else secondary. "Would we have seized power in
October had not Lenin arrived in Russia in time?," Trotsky asks and
answers: "There is much to indicate that we might not have been able to
seize power" (p. 85). Let us however ask the same question differently:
Would the proletarian revolution have triumphed in Germany if it had had
Lenin as its leader? From all we know about the German situation at the
time of the revolution, the answer must be in the negative. No, Lenin
would have been defeated just as Liebknecht and Luxemburg were. Why did
Liebknecht and Luxemburg fail? Not because they were bad leaders, but
because the German masses did not follow them. The German masses
followed the Social Democratic Party, which was bent on liquidating
revolution instead of deepening it, and Lenin could have done under
these circumstances no more than Liebknecht did. Or, let us apply the
same question to England. Suppose Lenin would have been in England
during the time of the general strike -- could he have turned it into a
social revolution? One must have an exceedingly rich imagination to
believe this. One may say, it is the fault of the German SPD, of the
British Labour Party, etc. Admitted. But taking the situations as they
were, could a Lenin have changed it? The answer is evident, he could
not.

"To lead is to foresee," Trotsky declares. Applied to the two greatest
leaders, Lenin as well as Trotsky, there can be no doubt that both are
guilty of often, too often, "foreseeing" wrongly; often, too often,
mistaking their own subjective wishes for objective foreseeing. They
both foresaw a world revolution which has not come; wars, intervention
and crises that failed to materialise. They even foresaw inevitable
disaster for the Soviet Union if the world revolution did not come soon
enough, a "foreseeing" that fortunately was wrong, knowing well enough
that the victory of the proletariat was not possible without a well
organised, well prepared revolutionary party. Trotsky "foresaw," as he
admits, that such parties would be created, and in the fire of
revolution and civil war mature rapidly and be able to lead the
proletariat in its great "final battle" against capitalism. That was of
course pure wishful thinking. Revolutionary parties of this calibre do
not spring up and mature rapidly within a few months or a year. They
grow up slowly and gather strength from their own experiences and
wisdom; from their own failures. Yet, Trotsky based his entire strategy
at one time on this false belief. In 1928 Trotsky foresaw that "the
Communist International will not survive five years more of similar
mistakes, but if the Comintern crumbles, neither will the USSR long
endure" (pp. 255-56). It seems to us in 1936 that he "foresaw" wrongly,
again. In 1928 Trotsky foresaw that the workers would "begin to pass _en
masse_ from Social Democracy to the Communist Party" and he assures us
that "the arrival of such a moment is inevitable" (p. 262). But in 1936,
it seems again that he made a mistake. Instead of the workers passing
_en masse_ from the Socialist to the Communist parties, the followers of
Trotsky are joining _en masse_ the existing Socialist parties.

And yet, in spite of the many mistakes that Trotsky has made, in spite
of his serious mistakes in estimating objective situations and therefore
drawing wrong conclusions (something of which not only Lenin, but also
Marx and Engels were equally guilty), Trotsky is a great leader. But the
presence of a Trotsky or a Lenin, or many Trotskys and Lenins is no
guarantee for a successful revolution, just as their absence does not
necessarily mean failure. It is this exaggeration of the role of the
leader that is really the basis of the worst features of Stalinism. The
entire disgusting system of the "beloved leaders" from Stalin to
Browder, which has reduced the Communist parties to mechanical
automatons that are capable of nothing else than becoming enthusiastic
when ordered, is the practical application of this theory.

Brilliantly and convincingly, Trotsky shows that Stalinism is nothing
but a perversion of Leninism. In fact, it is its opposite. The victory
of Stalinism is the defeat of Leninism. Leninism has been abandoned by
the Russian Communist Party and following it, by the entire Stalinist
International. In vain will the reader, however, look to Trotsky for an
explanation of how it happened. Leninism has been abandoned. True. But
was it because Stalin is a bad man? A traitor? Trotsky himself spurns
such a "simple" explanation. What then conditioned the defeat of
Leninism? Trotsky really has no answer to it. He can't have an answer.
He _is_ a Leninist, and the sad truth, which Trotsky will not admit, is
that Leninism failed because the subsequent developments of the Russian,
as well as the world revolution, have shown it to be wrong.

The basic idea of Lenin (and of Trotsky) on the Russian revolution was
that Russia was not only not ripe for socialism, it was not even ripe
for a socialist revolution. But he firmly believed that Europe was ripe
for the revolution. The Russian revolution was to be only the signal for
the world revolution:

>It was clear to us \[Lenin declared in 1921\] that without aid from the
international world revolution, a victory of the proletarian revolution
is impossible. Even prior to the revolution as well as after it, we
thought that the revolution will also occur, either immediately or at
least _very soon_ in other backward countries, and in the more highly
developed countries; _otherwise we would perish_.

Lenin never tired of repeating his formula -- either a world revolution
or we perish. His conviction was based not only on his belief that
socialism in one country, and a most backward country at that, was not
possible, but also on his belief that if the world revolution did not
destroy the capitalist states of other countries, these states would
never tolerate the existence of Soviet Russia for any length of time.
"We do not live merely in a state," Lenin reasoned, "but in a system of
states and the existence of the Soviet Republic side by side with
imperialist states _for any length of time_ is inconceivable." And on
another occasion Lenin assures us that "as long as capitalism and
socialism remain side by side, we cannot live peacefully -- the one or
the other will be victor in the end. An obituary will be sung either
over the death of world capitalism or the death of the Soviet Republic"
(quoted by Trotsky). It was either a world revolution or war against
Soviet Russia, one of the two had to happen. The tactics and strategy of
the Soviet government as well as of the Comintern were based on this
belief.

Years passed. The prospect of a world revolution grew dimmer and dimmer.
The revolutionary movement suffered defeat after defeat. It became clear
that it would take a long time before the world revolution would come.
But neither did the prophesied war of intervention come. The Communist
press, it is true, every day uncovered plots for such intervention. But
still the war of intervention did not come off. The imperialist states
had plenty of troubles of their own. Instead of making war on Soviet
Russia, they saw it as a good customer; they wanted to do business with
it.

Meanwhile Russia had to live. It could not go on living simply in the
hope of world revolution or fear of capitalist intervention. The Russian
people wanted rest and peace, even if they could not as yet have enough
bread. The Soviet government had to turn more and more to domestic
problems. Life itself forced on it the gigantic constructive plans of
which it is now so proud. But for its constructive work it needed the
help of exactly those imperialist states, whose very existence side by
side with the Soviet government, according to Lenin, was impossible. The
Soviet government had to enter into new relations with the capitalist
states, business relations, friendly relations. The old tactic of pure
hostility, of inciting revolution had to be scrapped, if normal business
relations were to be established. Old Leninism was in the way and it
also had to be scrapped. Soviet Russia had to find a place for itself
among capitalist nations, it had to find allies for itself among them.
It succeeded, but had to pay the price. That price was Leninism and
revolutionary internationalism, generally. The victory of Stalinism was
the defeat of world revolution. But this defeat was not the result of
Stalinism; it was its cause.

The tragedy of the Communist International is that when Soviet Russia
was compelled, in the interests of its national state, to abandon
revolutionary communism, it could not disassociate itself from
Stalinism, and continue its own independent life as a revolutionary
international. It became nothing more than a cog in the Stalinist
machine and an instrument of bourgeois pacifism and people's front
class-collaborationism, instead of an instrument for world revolution.
But then, the Comintern, as well as the Communist national sections
everywhere, were always nothing but subsidiaries of the Soviet
government. They could not according to their tradition be anything
else.

[^fn-1]: In _Soviet Communism_ by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, one reads:
"The supreme authority rests... with the world congress, meeting every
two to four or seven years," thus giving the impression that it is part
of the CI programme to meet every two to four or seven years. Which is
of course not true (Volume 1, p. 409). The book is full of just such
"authoritative" information.
