---
title: "Karl Kautsky: From Marx to Hitler"
author: Mattick, Paul
date: 1939
description: Published in June 1939 in Living Marxism, vol. 4, no. 7. Later collected in the Mattick anthology Anti-Bolshevik Communism. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/mattick-paul/1939/kautsky.htm>.
...

In the fall of 1938, Karl Kautsky died in Amsterdam at the age of 84
years. He was considered the most important theoretician of the Marxist
labour movement after the death of its founders, and it may well be said
that he was its most representative member. In him were very clearly
incorporated both the revolutionary and the reactionary aspects of that
movement. But whereas Friedrich Engels could say at Marx's grave that
his friend "was first of all a revolutionist," it would be difficult to
say the same at the grave of his best-known pupil. "As a theoretician
and politician, he will always remain an object of criticism," wrote
Friedrich Adler in memory of Kautsky, "but his character lies open, his
whole life he remained true to the highest majesty, his own
conscience."[^01]

Kautsky's conscience was formed during the rise of the German Social
Democracy. He was born in Austria, the son of a stage painter of the
Imperial Theatre in Vienna. As early as 1875, though not as yet a
Marxist, he contributed to German and Austrian labour papers. He became
a member of the German Social Democratic Party in 1880, and "only now,"
he said of himself, "began my development towards a consistent
methodical Marxism."[^02] He was inspired, like so many others, by
Engels' _Anti-DÃ¼hring_ and was helped in his orientation by Eduard
Bernstein, who was then the secretary to the 'millionaire' socialist
Hoechberg. His first works were published with Hoechberg's help and he
found recognition in the labour movement through his editorship of a
number of socialist publications. In 1883 he founded the magazine _Neue
Zeit_, which under his direction became the most important theoretical
organ of the German Social Democracy.

Kautsky's literary and scientific work is impressive not only because of
the scope of his interests but also because of its volume. Even a
selected bibliography of his writings would fill many pages, In this
work comes to light all that seemed and all that was of importance to
the socialist movement during the last 60 years. It reveals Kautsky was
first of all a teacher, and that, because he looked upon society from a
schoolmaster's perspective, he was well suited to his role as the
leading spirit of a movement which aimed at educating workers and
capitalists alike. Because he was an educator concerned with the
'theoretical side' of Marxism, he could appear more revolutionary than
was consistent with the movement he served. He appeared an 'orthodox'
Marxist who tried to safeguard the Marxian inheritance as a treasurer
who desires to preserve the funds of his organisation. However, what was
'revolutionary' in Kautsky's teaching appeared revolutionary only in
contrast to the general pre-war capitalist ideology. In contrast to the
revolutionary theories established by Marx and Engels, it was a
reversion to more primitive forms of thinking and to a lesser
apperception of the implications of bourgeois society. Thus, though he
guarded the treasure-chest of Marxism, he had not beheld all it
contained.

In 1862, in a letter to Kugelmann, Marx expressed the hope that his
non-popular works attempting to revolutionise economic science would in
due time find adequate popularisation, a feat that should be easy after
the scientific basis had been laid. "My life work became clear to me in
1883," wrote Kautsky; "it was to be designated to the propagandising and
popularisation, and, as far as I am able to, the continuation of the
scientific results of Marx's thinking and research".[^03] However, not
even he, the greatest populariser of Marx, has fulfilled Marx's hope;
his simplifications turned out to be new mystifications unable to
comprehend the true character of capitalist society. Nevertheless, even
in their watered form, Marx's theories remained superior to all the
social and economic bourgeois theories and Kautsky's writings gave
strength and joy to hundreds of thousands of class conscious workers. He
gave expression to their own thoughts and in a language nearer to them
than that of the more independent thinker Marx. Though the latter
demonstrated more than once his great gift for cogency and clarity, he
was not schoolmaster enough to sacrifice to propaganda the enjoyment of
his intellectual caprice.

When we said that Kautsky represented also what was 'reactionary' in the
old labour movement, we are using that term in a highly specific sense.
The reactionary elements in Kautsky and in the old labour movement were
objectively conditioned, and only by a long period of exposure to an
inimical reality was developed that subjective readiness to turn
defenders of the capitalist society. In Capital Marx pointed out that "a
rise in the price of labour, as a consequence of accumulation of
capital, only means, in fact, that the length and weight of the golden
chain the wage-worker has already forged for himself, allow of a
relaxation of the tension of it."[^04] The possibility, under conditions
of a progressive capital formation, of improving labour conditions and
of raising the price of labour transformed the workers' struggle into a
force for capitalist expansion. Like capitalist competition, the
workers' struggle served as an incentive for further capital
accumulation; it accentuated capitalist 'progress'. All gains of the
workers were compensated for by an increasing exploitation, which in
turn permitted a still more rapid capital expansion.

Even the class struggle of the workers could serve the needs not of the
individual capitalists but of capital. The victories of the workers
turned always against the victors. The more the workers gained, the
richer capital became. The gap between wages and profits became wider
with each increase of the 'workers\' share'. The apparently increasing
strength of labour was in reality the continuous weakening of its
position in relation to that of capital. The 'successes' of the workers,
hailed by Eduard Bernstein as a new era of capitalism, could, in this
sphere of social action, end only in the eventual defeat of the working
class, as soon as capital changed from expansion to stagnation. In the
destruction of the old labour movement, the sight of which Kautsky was
not spared, became manifest the thousands of defeats suffered during the
upswing period of capitalism, and though these defeats were celebrated
as victories of gradualism, they were in reality only the gradualism of
the workers' defeat in a field of action where the advantage is always
with the bourgeoisie. Nevertheless, Bernstein's revisionism, based on
the acceptance of appearance for reality and suggested by bourgeois
empiricism, though at first denounced by Kautsky, provided the basis for
the latter's own success. For without the non-revolutionary practice of
the old labour movement, whose theories were formed by Bernstein,
Kautsky would not have found a movement and a material basis on which to
rise as an important Marxian theoretician.

This objective situation, which, as we have seen, transformed the
successes of the labour movement into just so many steps toward its
destruction, created a non-revolutionary ideology which was more in
harmony with the apparent reality, and which was later denounced as
social-reformism, opportunism, social-chauvinism, and outright betrayal.
However, this 'betrayal' did not very much bother those who were
betrayed. Instead, the majority of the organised workers approved of the
change of attitude in the socialist movement, since it conformed to
their own aspirations developed in an ascending capitalism. The masses
were as little revolutionary as their leaders, and both were satisfied
with their _participation_ in capitalist progress. Not only were they
organising for a greater share of the social product, but also for a
greater voice in the political sphere. They learned to think in terms of
bourgeois democracy; they began to speak of themselves as consumers;
they wanted to take part in all that was good of culture and
civilisation. Franz Mehring's _History of the German Social Democracy_
typically ends in a chapter on 'Art and the Proletariat'. Science for
the workers, literature for the workers, schools for the workers,
participation in all the institutions of capitalist society -- this and
nothing more was the real desire of the movement. Instead of demanding
the end of capitalistic science, it asked for labour scientists; instead
of abolishing capitalistic law, it trained labour lawyers; in the
increasing number of labour historians, poets, economists, journalists,
doctors and dentists, as well as parliamentarians and trade-union
bureaucrats, it saw the socialisation of society, which therewith became
increasingly its own society. That which one can increasingly share in
one will soon find defendable. Consciously and unconsciously the old
labour movement saw in the capitalist expansion process its own road to
greater welfare and recognition. The more capital flourished, the better
were the working conditions. Satisfied with action within the framework
of capitalism, the workers' organisations became concerned with
capitalism's profitability. The competitive national capitalistic
rivalries were only verbally opposed. Although the movement was at first
striving only for a 'better fatherland', and was later willing to defend
what had already been gained, it soon reached the point where it was
ready to defend the fatherland 'as it is'.

The tolerance that Marx's 'followers' displayed towards the bourgeois
society was not one-sided. The bourgeoisie itself had in its very
struggle against the working class learned to 'understand the social
question'. Its interpretation of social phenomena became increasingly
more materialistic; and soon there was an overlapping of ideologies in
both fields of thought, a condition increasing still further the
'harmony' based on the actual disharmony of class frictions within a
rising capitalism. However, the 'Marxists' were more eager than the
bourgeoisie to 'learn from the enemy'. The revisionist tendencies had
developed long before the death of Engels. The latter, and Marx himself,
had wavered and displayed moments in which they were carried away by the
apparent success of their movement. But what with them was only a
temporary modification of their essentially consistent thinking became
'belief' and 'science' for that movement which learned to see progress
in larger trade-union treasures and greater election votes.

After 1910 the German social democracy found itself divided into three
essential groups. There were the reformists, openly favouring German
imperialism; there was the 'left', distinguished by such names as
Luxemburg, Liebknecht, Mehring and Pannekoek; and there was the
'centre', trying to follow traditional paths, that is, only in theory,
as in practice the whole of the German social democracy could do only
what was possible, i.e. what Bernstein wanted them to do. To oppose
Bernstein could mean only to oppose the whole of the social democratic
practice. The 'left' began to function as such only at the moment it
began to attack social democracy as a part of capitalist society. The
differences between the two opposing factions could not be solved
ideationally; they were solved when the Noske terror murdered the
Spartacus group in 1919.

With the outbreak of the war, the 'left' found itself in the capitalist
prisons, and the 'right' on the General Staff of the Kaiser. The
'centre', led by Kautsky, simply dispensed with all problems of the
socialist movement by declaring that neither the social democracy nor
its International could function during periods of war, as both were
essentially instruments of peace. "This position," Rosa Luxemburg wrote,
"is the position of an eunuch. After Kautsky has supplemented the
_Communist Manifesto_ it now reads: Proletarians of all countries unite
during peace times, during times of war, cut your throats."[^05]

The war and its aftermath destroyed the legend of Kautsky's Marxist
'orthodoxy'. Even his most enthusiastic pupil, Lenin, had to turn away
from the master. In October 1914 he had to admit that as far as Kautsky
was concerned, Rosa Luxemburg had been right. In a letter to Shlyapnikow,[^06] he wrote, "She saw long ago that Kautsky, the servile
theoretician, was cringing to the majority of the Party, to Opportunism.
There is nothing in the world at present more harmful and dangerous for
the ideological independence of the proletariat than this filthy, smug
and disgusting hypocrisy of Kautsky. He wants to hush everything up and
smear everything over and by sophistry and pseudo-learned rhetoric lull
the awakened consciences of the workers."

What distinguished Kautsky from the general run of intellectuals who
flocked to the labour movement as soon as it became more respectable and
who were only too eager to foster the trend of class collaboration, was
a greater love for theory, a love which refused to compare theory with
actuality, like the love of a mother who prevents her child from
learning the 'facts of life' too early. Only as a theoretician could
Kautsky remain a revolutionist; only too willingly he left the practical
affairs of the movement to others. However, he fooled himself. In the
role of a mere 'theoretician', he ceased to be a revolutionary
theoretician, or rather he could not become a revolutionist. As soon as
the scene for a real battle between capitalism and socialism after the
war had been laid, his theories collapsed because they had already been
divorced in practice from the movement they were supposed to represent.

Though Kautsky was opposed to the unnecessarily enthusiastic chauvinism
of his party, though he hesitated to enjoy the war as Ebert, Scheidemann
and Hindenburg did, though he was not in favour of an _unconditional_
granting of war credits, nevertheless, up to his very end, he was forced
to destroy with his own hands the legend of his Marxian orthodoxy that
he had earned for himself in 30 years of writing. He who in 1902 had
pronounced that we have entered a period of proletarian struggles for
state power, declared such attempts to be sheer insanity when workers
took him seriously.[^07] He who had fought so valiantly against the
ministerialism of Millerand and JaurÃ¨s in France, championed 20 years
later the coalition policy of the German social-democracy with the
arguments of his former opponents. He who concerned himself as early as
1909 with 'The Way to Power', dreamed after the war of a capitalist
'ultra-imperialism' as a way to world peace, and spent the remainder of
his life re-interpreting his past to justify his class collaboration
ideology. "In the course of its class struggle," he wrote in his last
work, "the proletariat becomes more and more the vanguard for the
reconstruction of humanity, in which in always greater measure also
non-proletarian layers of society become interested. This is no betrayal
of the class struggle idea. I had this position already before there was
bolshevism, as, for instance, in 1903 in my article on 'Class -- Special
and Common Interests' in the _Neue Zeit_, where I came to the conclusion
that the proletarian class struggle does not recognise class solidarity
but only the solidarity of mankind."[^08]

Indeed, it is not possible to regard Kautsky as a 'renegade'. Only a
total misunderstanding of the theory and practice of the social
democratic movement and of Kautsky's activity could lead to such a view.
Kautsky aspired to being a good servant of Marxism; in fact, to please
Engels and Marx seemed to be his life profession. He referred to the
latter always in the typical social-democratic and philistine manner as
the 'great master', the 'Olympian', the 'Thunder God', etc. He felt
extremely honoured because Marx "did not receive him in the same cold
way in which Goethe received his young colleague Heine."[^09] He must
have sworn to himself not to disappoint Engels when the latter began to
regard him and Bernstein as 'trustworthy representatives of Marxian
theory', and during most of his life he was the most ardent defender of
'the word'. He is most honest when he complains to Engels "that nearly
all the intellectuals in the party ... cry for colonies, for national
thought, for a resurrection of the Teutonic antiquity, for confidence in
the government, for having the power of 'justice' replace the class
struggle, and express a decided aversion for the materialistic
interpretation of history -- Marxian dogma, as they call it."[^10] He
wanted to argue against them, to uphold against them what had been
established by his idols. A good schoolmaster, he was also an excellent
pupil.

Engels understood this early 'degeneration' of the movement only too
well. In answering Kautsky's complaints, he stated, "that the
development of capitalism proved itself to be stronger than the
revolutionary counter-pressure. A new upsurge against capitalism would
need a violent shock, such as the loss by England of its domination of
the world market, or a sudden revolutionary opportunity in France."[^11]
But neither the one nor the other event occurred. The socialists no
longer waited for revolution. Bernstein waited instead for Engels'
death, to avoid disappointing the man to whom he owed most -- before
proclaiming that "the goal meant nothing and the movement everything."
It is true that Engels himself had strengthened the forces of reformism
during the latter part of his life. However, what in his case could be
taken only as the weakening of the individual in his stand against the
world, was taken by his epigones as the source of their strength. Time
and again Marx and Engels returned to the uncompromising attitude of the
_Communist Manifesto_ and _Capital_ as, for instance, in the _Critique
of the Gotha Programme_, which was delayed in its publication in order
not to disturb the compromisers in the movement. Its publication was
possible only after a struggle with the party bureaucracy, which
circumstance led Engels to remark that, It is in fact a brilliant
thought to have German socialist science present, after its emancipation
from the Bismarckian socialist laws, its own socialist laws, formulated
by the officials of the Social Democratic Party.[^12]

Kautsky defended an already emasculated Marxism. The radical,
revolutionary, anti-capitalist Marxism had been defeated by capitalist
development. At the Congress of the Workers' International in 1872 in
The Hague, Marx himself had declared: "Some day the workers must conquer
political supremacy, in order to establish the new organisation of
labour ... Of course, I must not be supposed to imply that the means to
this end will be the same everywhere ... and we do not deny that there
are certain countries, such as the United States and England in which
the workers may hope to secure their ends by peaceful means." This
statement allowed even the revisionists to declare themselves Marxists,
and the only argument Kautsky could muster against them, as, for
instance, during the Social Democratic Party congress in Stuttgart in
1898, was the denial that the democratisation and socialisation process
claimed by the revisionists as in progress in England and America, also
held good for Germany. He repeated Marx's position as regards the
eventuality of a more peaceful transformation of society in some
countries, and added to this remark only that he, too, "wishes nothing
else but to obtain socialism without a catastrophe." However, he doubted
such a possibility.

It is understandable that on the basis of such thinking it was only
consistent for Kautsky to assume after the war that with the now
possible more rapid development of democratic institutions in Germany
and Russia, the more peaceful way to socialism could be realised also in
these countries. The peaceful way seemed to him the surer way, as it
would better serve that 'solidarity of mankind' that he wished to
develop. The socialist intellectuals wished to return the decency with
which the bourgeoisie had learned to treat them. After all, we are all
gentlemen! The orderly petty-bourgeois life of the intelligentsia,
secured by a powerful socialist movement, had led them to emphasise the
ethical and cultural aspects of things. Kautsky hated the methods of
bolshevism with no less intensity than did the white guardists, though
in contrast to the latter, he was in full agreement with the goal of
bolshevism. Behind the aspect of the proletarian revolution the leaders
of the socialist movement correctly saw a chaos in which their own
position would become no less jeopardised than that of the bourgeoisie
proper. Their hatred of 'disorder' was a defence of their own material,
social and intellectual position. Socialism was to be developed not
illegally, but legally, for under such conditions, existing
organisations and leaders would continue to dominate the movement. And
their successful interruption of the impending proletarian revolution
demonstrated that not only did the 'gains' of the workers in the
economic sphere turn against the workers themselves, but that their
'success' in the political field also turned out to be weapons against
their emancipation. The strongest bulwark against a radical solution of
the social question was the social democracy, in whose growth the
workers had learned to measure their growing power.

Nothing shows the revolutionary character of Marx's theories more
clearly than the difficulty to maintain them during non-revolutionary
times. There was a grain of truth in Kautsky's statement that the
socialist movement cannot function during times of war, as times of war
temporarily create non-revolutionary situations. The revolutionist
becomes isolated, and registers temporary defeat. He must wait till the
situation changes, till the subjective readiness to participate in war
is broken by the objective impossibility to serve this subjective
readiness. A revolutionist cannot help standing 'outside the world' from
time to time. To believe that a revolutionary practice, expressed in
independent actions of the workers, is always possible means to fall
victim to democratic illusions. But it is more difficult to stand
'outside this world', for no one can know when situations change, and no
one wishes to be left out when changes do occur. Consistency exists
only in theory. It cannot be said that Marx's theories were
inconsistent; it can, however, be said, that Marx was not consistent,
i.e. that he, too, had to pay deference to a changing reality and, in
non-revolutionary times, in order to function at all, had to function in
a non-revolutionary manner. His theories were limited to the essentials
of the class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat, but his
practice was continuous, dealing with problems 'as they came up',
problems which could not always be solved with essential principles.
Unwilling to retire during the upswing period of capitalism, Marxism
could not escape functioning in a manner contrary to a theory resulting
from the recognition of a real and always present revolutionary class
struggle. The theory of the everpresent class struggle has no more
justification than the bourgeois concept of progress. There is no
automatism keeping things rolling uphill; instead, there is combat with
changing fortunes; there is the deathlock of the struggle and the utter
defeat. Mere numbers of workers opposed to the powerful capitalist state
at times when history still favours capitalism do not represent the
giant on whose back the capitalist parasites rest, but rather the bull
who has to move in the directions his nose-stick forces him to go.
During the non-revolutionary period of the ascending capitalism,
revolutionary Marxism could exist only as ideology, serving an entirely
different practice. In this latter form it was again limited by actual
occurrences. As a mere ideology it had to cease existing as soon as
great social upheavals demanded a change from an indirect to a direct
class collaboration ideology for capitalistic purposes.

Marx developed his theories during revolutionary times. The most
advanced of the bourgeois revolutionists, he was the closest to the
proletariat. The defeat of the bourgeoisie as revolutionists, their
success within the counter-revolution, convinced Marx that the modern
revolutionary class can be only the working class, and he developed the
socioeconomic theory of their revolution. Like many of his
contemporaries, he underestimated the strength and flexibility of
capitalism, and expected too soon the end of bourgeois society. Two
alternatives opened themselves to him: he could either stand outside the
actual development, restricting himself to inapplicable radical
thinking, or participate under the given conditions in the actual
struggles, and reserve the revolutionary theories for 'better times'.
This latter alternative was rationalised into the 'proper balance of
theory and practice', and the defeat or success of proletarian
activities became therewith the result of 'right' or 'wrong' tactics
once more; the question of the proper organisation and of correct
leadership. It was not so much Marx's earlier connection with the
bourgeois revolution that led to the further development of the
Jacobinic aspect of the labour movement called by his name, but the
non-revolutionary practice of this movement, because of the
non-revolutionary times.

The Marxism of Kautsky, then, was a Marxism in the form of a mere
ideology, and it was therewith fated to return in the course of time
into idealistic channels. Kautsky's 'orthodoxy' was in truth the
artificial preservation of ideas opposed to an actual practice, and was
therewith forced into retreat, as reality is always stronger than
ideology. A real Marxian 'orthodoxy' could be possible only with a
return of real revolutionary situations, and then such 'orthodoxy' would
concern itself not with 'the word', but with the principle of the class
struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat applied to new and changed
situations. The retreat of theory before practice can be followed with
utmost clarity in Kautsky's writings.

The many books and articles written by Kautsky deal with almost all
social problems, in addition to specific questions concerning the labour
movement. However, his writings can be classified into Economy, History
and Philosophy. In the field of political economy, not much can be said
about his contribution. He was the populariser of the first volume of
Marx's _Capital_ and the editor of Marx's "Theories of Surplus Value",
published during the years from 1904 to 1910. His popularisations of
Marx's economic theories do not distinguish themselves from the
generally accepted interpretation of economic phenomena in the socialist
movement -- the revisionists included. As a matter of fact, parts of his
famous book "The Economic Doctrines of Karl Marx" were written by Eduard
Bernstein. In the heated discussion waged at the turn of the century
concerning the meaning of Marx's theories in the second and third volume
of _Capital_, Kautsky took very small part. For him the first volume of
_Capital_ contained all that was of importance to the workers and their
movement. It dealt with the process of production, the factory and
exploitation, and contained all that was needed to support a workers'
movement against capitalism. The other two volumes dealing in greater
detail with capitalist tendencies towards crises and collapse did not
correspond to immediate reality and found little interest not only by
Kautsky but by all Marxian theoreticians of the upswing period of
capitalism. In a review of the second volume of _Capital_, written in
1886, Kautsky expressed the opinion that this volume is of less interest
to the workers, as it deals largely with the problem of the realisation
of surplus value, which after all should be rather the concern of the
capitalists. When Bernstein, in the course of his attack upon Marx's
economic theories, rejected the latter's theory of collapse, Kautsky
defended Marxism by simply denying that Marx ever had developed a
special theory pointing to an objective end of capitalism, and that such
a concept was merely an invention of Bernstein. The difficulties and
contradictions of capitalism he searched for in the sphere of
circulation. Consumption could not grow so rapidly as production and a
permanent over-production would lead to the political necessity of
introducing socialism. Against Tugan-Baranowsky's theory of an
unhampered capitalist development proceeding from the fact that capital
creates its own markets and can overcome developing
disproportionalities, a theory which influenced the whole reformist
movement, Kautsky set his underconsumption theory to explain the
unavoidability of capitalist crises, crises which helped to create the
subjective conditions for a transformation from capitalism to
socialism.[^13] However, 25 years later, he openly admitted that he had
been wrong in his evaluation of the economic possibilities of
capitalism, as "from an economic viewpoint, capital is much livelier
today than it was 50 years ago."[^14]

The theoretical unclarity and inconsistency that Kautsky displayed on
economic questions, were only climaxed by his acceptance of the once
denounced views of Tugan-Baranowsky.[^15] They were only a reflection of
his changing general attitude towards bourgeois thought and capitalist
society. In his book "The Materialistic Conception of History," which he
himself declares to be the best and final product of his whole life's
work, dealing as it does in nearly 2000 pages with the development of
nature, society and the state, he demonstrates not only his pedantic
method of exposition and his far-reaching knowledge of theories and
facts, but also his many misconceptions as regards Marxism and his final
break with Marxian science. Here he openly declares "that at times
revisions of Marxism are unavoidable."[^16] Here he now accepts all that
during his whole life he had apparently struggled against. He is no
longer solely interested in the interpretation of Marxism, but is ready
to accept responsibility for his own thoughts, presenting his main work
as his own conception of history, not totally removed but independent
from Marx and Engels. His masters, he now contends, have restricted the
materialistic conception of history by neglecting too much the natural
factors in history. He, however, starting not from Hegel but from
Darwin, "will now extend the scope of historical materialism till it
merges with biology."[^17] But his furthering of historical materialism
turns out to be no more than a reversion to the crude naturalistic
materialism of Marx's forerunners, a return to the position of the
revolutionary bourgeoisie, which Marx had overcome with his rejection of
Feuerbach. On the basis of this naturalistic materialism, Kautsky, like
the bourgeois philosophers before him, cannot help adopting an
idealistic concept of social development, which, then, when it deals
with the state, turns openly and completely into the old bourgeois
conceptions of the history of mankind as the history of states. Ending
in the bourgeois democratic state, Kautsky holds that "there is no room
any longer for violent class conflict. Peacefully, by way of propaganda
and the voting system can conflicts be ended, decisions be made."[^18]

Though we cannot possibly review in detail at this place this tremendous
book of Kautsky, we must say that it demonstrates throughout the
doubtful character of Kautsky's 'Marxism'.[^19] His connection with the
labour movement, seen retrospectively, was never more than his
participation in some form of bourgeois social work. There can be no
doubt that he never understood the real position of Marx and Engels, or
at least never dreamed that theories could have an immediate connection
with reality. This apparently serious Marxist student had actually never
taken Marx seriously. Like many pious priests engaging in a practice
contrary to their teaching, he might not even have been aware of the
duality of his own thought and action. Undoubtedly he would have
sincerely liked being in reality the bourgeois of whom Marx once said,
he is "a capitalist solely in the interest of the proletariat." But even
such a change of affairs he would reject, unless it were attainable in
the 'peaceful' bourgeois, democratic manner. Kautsky "repudiates the
Bolshevik melody that is unpleasant to his ear," wrote Trotsky, "but
does not seek another. The solution is simple: the old musician refuses
altogether to play on the instrument of the revolution."[^20]

Recognising at the close of his life that the reforms of capitalism that
he wished to achieve could not be realised by democratic, peaceful
means, Kautsky turned against his own practical policy, and just as he
was in former times the proponent of a Marxian ideology which,
altogether divorced from reality, could serve only its opponents, he now
became the proponent of bourgeois _laissez faire_ ideology, just as much
removed from the actual conditions of the developing fascistic
capitalist society, and just as much serving this society as his Marxian
ideology had served the democratic stage of capitalism. "People love
today to speak disdainfully about the liberalistic economy," he wrote in
his last work; "however, the theories founded by Quesnay, Adam Smith and
Ricardo are not at all obsolete. In their essentials Marx had accepted
their theories and developed them further, and he has never denied that
the liberal freedom of commodity production constituted the best basis
for its development. Marx distinguishes himself from the Classicists
therein, that when the latter saw in commodity production of private
producers the only possible form of production, Marx saw the highest
form of commodity production leading through its own development to
conditions allowing for a still better form of production, social
production, where society, identical with the whole of the working
population, controls the means of production, producing no longer for
profit but to satisfy needs. The socialist mode of production has its
own rules, in many respects different from the laws of commodity
production. However, as long as commodity production prevails, it will
best function if those laws of motion discovered in the era of
liberalism are respected."[^21]

These ideas are quite surprising in a man who had edited Marx's
"Theories of Surplus Value", a work which proved exhaustively "that Marx
at no time in his life countenanced the opinion that the new contents of
his socialist and communist theory could be derived, as a mere logical
consequence, from the utterly bourgeois theories of Quesnay, Smith and
Ricardo."[^22] However, this position of Kautsky's gives the necessary
qualifications to our previous statement that he was an excellent pupil
of Marx and Engels. He was such only to the extent that Marxism could be
fitted into his own limited concepts of social development and of
capitalist society. For Kautsky, the 'socialist society', or the logical
consequence of capitalist development of commodity production, is in
truth only a state-capitalist system. When once he mistook Marx's value
concept as a law of socialist economics if only applied consciously
instead of being left to the 'blind' operations of the market, Engels
pointed out to him that for Marx, value is a strictly historical
category;[^23] that neither before nor after capitalism did there exist
or could there exist a value production which differed only in form from
that of capitalism. And Kautsky accepted Engels' statement, as is
manifested in his work "The Economic Doctrines of Karl Marx" (1887),
where he also saw value as a historical category. Later, however, in
reaction to bourgeois criticism of socialist economic theory, he
re-introduced in his book "The Proletarian Revolution and its Programme"
(1922) the value concept, the market and money economy, commodity
production, into his scheme of a socialist society. What was once
historical became eternal; Engels had talked in vain. Kautsky had
returned from where he had sprung, from the _petite-bourgeoisie_, who
hate with equal force both monopoly control and socialism, and hope for
a purely quantitative change of society, an enlarged reproduction of the
_status quo_, a better and bigger capitalism, a better and more
comprehensive democracy -- as against a capitalism climaxing in fascism
or changing into communism.

The maintenance of liberal commodity production and its political
expression were preferred by Kautsky to the 'economics' of fascism
because the former system determined his long grandeur and his short
misery. Just as he had shielded bourgeois democracy with Marxian
phraseology, so he now obscured the fascist reality with democratic
phraseology. For now, by turning their thoughts backward instead of
forward, he made his followers mentally incapacitated for revolutionary
action. The man who shortly before his death was driven from Berlin to
Vienna by marching fascism, and from Vienna to Prague, and from Prague
to Amsterdam, published in 1937 a book which shows explicitly that once
a 'Marxist' makes the step from a materialistic to an idealistic concept
of social development, he is sure to arrive sooner or later at that
borderline of thought where idealism turns into insanity.[^24] There is
a report current in Germany that when Hindenburg was watching a Nazi
demonstration of storm troops he turned to a General standing beside him
saying, "I did not know we had taken so many Russian prisoners."
Kautsky, too, in this his last book, is mentally still at 'Tannenberg'.
His work is a faithful description of the different attitudes taken by
socialists and their forerunners to the question of war since the
beginning of the fifteenth century up to the present time. It shows,
although not to Kautsky, how ridiculous Marxism can become when it
associates the proletarian with the bourgeois needs and necessities.

Kautsky wrote his last book, as he said, "to determine which position
should be taken by socialists and democrats in case a new war breaks out
despite all our opposition to it."[^25] However, he continued, "There is
no direct answer to this question before the war is actually here and we
are all able to see who caused the war and for what purpose it is
fought." He advocates that "if war breaks out, socialists should try to
maintain their unity, to bring their organisation safely through the
war, so that they may reap the fruit wherever unpopular political
regimes collapse. In 1914 this unity was lost and we still suffer from
this calamity. But today things are much clearer than they were then;
the opposition between democratic and anti-democratic states is much
sharper; and it can be expected that if it comes to the new world war,
all socialists will stand on the side of democracy." After the
experiences of the last war and the history since then, there is no need
to search for the black sheep that causes wars, nor is it a secret any
longer why wars are fought. However, to pose such questions is not
stupidity as one may believe. Behind this apparent naÃ¯vetÃ© lies the
determination to serve capitalism in one form by fighting capitalism in
another. It serves to prepare the workers for the coming war, in
exchange for the right to organise in labour organisations, vote in
elections, and assemble in formations which serve both capital and
capitalistic labour organisations. It is the old policy of Kautsky,
which demands concessions from the bourgeoisie in exchange for millions
of dead workers in the coming capitalistic battles. In reality, just as
the wars of capitalism, regardless of the political differences of the
participating states and the various slogans used, can only be wars for
capitalist profits and wars against the working class, so, too, the war
excludes the possibility of choosing between conditional or
unconditional participation in the war by the workers. Rather, the war,
and even the period preceding the war, will be marked by a general and
complete military dictatorship in fascist and anti-fascist countries
alike. The war will wipe out the last distinction between the democratic
and the anti-democratic nations. And workers will serve Hitler as they
served the Kaiser; they will serve Roosevelt as they served Wilson; they
will die for Stalin as they died for the Tsar.

Kautsky was not disturbed by the reality of fascism, since for him,
democracy was the natural form of capitalism. The new situation was only
a sickness, a temporary insanity, a thing actually foreign to
capitalism. He really believed in a war for democracy, to allow
capitalism to proceed in its logical course towards a real commonwealth.
And his 1937 predictions incorporated sentences like the following: "The
time has arrived where it is finally possible to do away with wars as a
means of solving political conflicts between the states."[^26] Or, "The
policy of conquest of the Japanese in China, the Italians in Ethiopia,
is a last echo of a passing time, the period of imperialism. More wars
of such a character can hardly be expected."[^27] There are hundreds of
similar sentences in Kautsky's book, and it seems at times that his
whole world must have consisted of no more than the four walls of his
library, to which he neglected to add the newest volumes on recent
history. Kautsky is convinced that even without a war fascism will be
defeated, the rise of democracy recur, and the period return for a
peaceful development towards socialism, like the period in the days
before fascism. The essential weakness of fascism he illustrated with
the remark that "the personal character of the dictatorships indicates
already that it limits its own existence to the length of a human
life."[^28] He believed that after fascism there would be the return to
the 'normal' life on an increasingly socialistic abstract democracy to
continue the reforms begun in the glorious time of the social democratic
coalition policy. However, it is obvious now that the only capitalistic
reform objectively possible today is the fascistic reform. And as a
matter of fact, the larger part of the 'socialisation programme' of the
social democracy, which it never dared to put into practice, has
meanwhile been realised by fascism. Just as the demands of the German
bourgeoisie were met not in 1848 but in the ensuing period of the
counter-revolution, so, too, the reform programme of the social
democracy, which it could not inaugurate during the time of its own
reign, was put into practice by Hitler. Thus, to mention just a few
facts, not the social democracy but Hitler fulfilled the long desire of
the socialists, the Anschluss of Austria; not social democracy but
fascism established the wished-for state control of industry and
banking; not social democracy but Hitler declared the first of May a
legal holiday. A careful analysis of what the socialists actually wanted
to do and never did, compared with actual policies since 1933, will
reveal to any objective observer that Hitler realised no more than the
programme of social democracy, but without the socialists. Like Hitler,
the social democracy and Kautsky were opposed to both bolshevism and
communism. Even a complete state-capitalist system as the Russian was
rejected by both in favour of mere state control. And what is necessary
in order to realise such a programme was not dared by the socialists but
undertaken by the fascists. The anti-fascism of Kautsky illustrated no
more than the fact that just as he once could not imagine that Marxist
theory could be supplemented by a Marxist practice, he later could not
see that a capitalist reform policy demanded a capitalist reform
practice, which turned out to be the fascist practice. The life of
Kautsky can teach the workers that in the struggle against fascistic
capitalism is necessarily incorporated the struggle against bourgeois
democracy, the struggle against Kautskyism. The life of Kautsky can, in
all truth and without malicious intent, be summed up in the words: From
Marx to Hitler.

[^01]: _Der Sozialistische Kampf_. Paris, November 5, 1938, p. 271.

[^02]: K. Kautsky, _Aus der FrÃ¼hzeit des Marxismus_. Prague, 1935, p.
  20.

[^03]: _Ibid_., p. 93.

[^04]: _Capital. Vol_ I, p. 677 (Kerr ed.).

[^05]: _Die Internationale_. Spring 1915.

[^06]: _The Letters of Lenin_. London 1937, p. 342.

[^07]: _The Social Revolution._

[^08]: K. Kautsky, _Sozialisten und Krieg_. Prague, 1937, p. 673.

[^09]: _Aus der FrÃ¼hzeit des Marxismus_, p. 50.

[^10]: _Ibid_., p. 112.

[^11]: _Ibid_., p. 155.

[^12]: _Ibid_., p. 273.

[^13]: _Neue Zeit_, 1902, No. 5

[^14]: K. Kautsky, _Die Materialistische Geschichtsauffassung_. Berlin,
  1927. Vol. II, p. 623.

[^15]: The limitations of Kautsky's economic theories and their
  transformations in the course of his activities are excellently
  described and criticised by Henryk Grossman in his book _Das
  Akkumulations- und Zusammenbruchsgesetz des kapitalistischen Systems_
  (Leipzig, 1929), to which the interested reader is referred.

[^16]: K. Kautsky, _Die Materialistische Geschichtsauffassung_. Vol. II,
  p. 630.

[^17]: _Ibid_., p. 629.

[^18]: _Ibid_., p. 431.

[^19]: The reader is referred to Karl Korsch's extensive criticism of
  Kautsky's work, _Die Materialistische Geschichtsauffassung. Eine
  Auseinandersetzung mit Karl Kautsky_. Leipzig, 1929.

[^20]: L. Trotsky, _Dictatorship vs. Democracy_.

[^21]: _Sozialisten und Krieg_. p. 665.

[^22]: K. Korsch, _Karl Marx_. New York, 1938, p.92. See also: Engels'
  Preface to the German edition of _The Poverty of Philosophy_, 1884;
  and to the second volume of _Capital_, 1895.

[^23]: _Aus der FrÃ¼hzeit des Marxismus_, p. 145.

[^24]: _Sozialisten und Krieg_.

[^25]: _Ibid_., p. VIII.

[^26]: _Ibid_., p. 265.

[^27]: _Ibid_., p. 656.

[^28]: _Ibid_., p. 646.
