---
title: "Karl Marx: Man and Fighter"
author: Nicolaievsky, Boris
date: 1936
description: Based on Archive.org's scan of the 1936 original British edition, as translated by Otto Maenchen-Helfen, and available at <https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.210638>. The only intentional changes were to fix obvious typos; to swap the placement of non-English passages and their translations (previously the English translations were relegated to footnotes, with the French and German originals in the body); and to exclude the index, title page, and colophon.
...

## Foreword

Strife has raged about Karl Marx for decades, and never has it been so
embittered as at the present day. He has impressed his image on the time
as no other man has done. To some he is a fiend, the arch-enemy of human
civilisation, and the prince of chaos, while to others he is a
far-seeing and beloved leader, guiding the human race towards a brighter
future. In Russia his teachings are the official doctrines of the state,
while Fascist countries wish them exterminated. In the areas under the
sway of the Chinese Soviets Marx's portrait appears upon the bank-notes,
while in Germany they have burned his books. Practically all the parties
of the Socialist Workers' International, and the Communist parties in
all countries, acknowledge Marxism, the eradication of which is the sole
purpose of innumerable political leagues, associations and coalitions.

The French Proudhonists of the sixties, the followers of Lassalle in
Germany of the seventies, the Fabians in England before the War produced
their own brand of Socialism which they opposed to that of Marx. The
anti-Marxism of to-day has nothing in common with those movements. He
who opposes Marxism to-day does not do so because, for instance, he
denies the validity of Marx's theory of the tendency of the rate of
profit to fall. Similarly there are millions to-day who acknowledge Marx
as their leader, but not because he solved the riddle of capitalist
society. Perhaps one Socialist in a thousand has ever read any of Marx's
economic writings, and of a thousand anti-Marxists not even one. The
strife no longer rages round the truth or doctrine of historical
materialism or the validity of the labour theory of value or the theory
of marginal utility. These things are discussed and also not discussed.
The arena in which Marx is fought about to-day is in the factories, in
the parliaments and at the barricades. In both camps, the bourgeois and
the Socialist, Marx is first of all, if not exclusively, the
revolutionary, the leader of the proletariat in its struggle to
overthrow Capitalism.

This book is intended to describe the life of Marx the fighter. We make
no attempt to disguise the difficulties of such an undertaking.
Marxism--to use the word in its proper sense, embracing the whole of
Marx's work--is a whole. To divide theory from practice was completely
alien to Marx's nature. How, then, can his life be understood except as
a unity of thought and action?

'The man of science was not even half the man,' Engels said in his
speech at the grave-side of his dead friend. 'For Marx science was an
historically moving, revolutionary force. Marx was above all a
revolutionary. To co-operate in one way or another in the work of
bringing about the downfall of capitalist society and the state
institutions which were its creations, to co-operate in the liberation
of the modern proletariat, to make it conscious of its situation and its
needs, and conscious of the conditions for its own emancipation--that
was his real life-work.'

Marx was a Socialist before he reached real and complete understanding
of the laws of development underlying bourgeois society. When he wrote
the Communist Manifesto at the age of thirty he did not yet appreciate
the many different forms which surplus value could assume, but the
Communist Manifesto contained the whole doctrine of the class-war and
showed the proletariat the historical task that it had to fulfil. We
have written the biography of Marx as the strategist of the
class-struggle. The discoveries made by Marx in the course of his
explorations of the anatomy of bourgeois society will only be mentioned
in so far as they directly concern our subject. But the word 'directly'
need not be taken too literally. A complete picture of Marx's economic
doctrines would not be consistent with our theme, which was dictated to
us by the time in which we live.

To some periods of Marx's life we have given far more space than others.
In writing his biography our standard was not mere length of time but
the importance of events in Marx's life. Once, when Marx was asked what
his idea of happiness was his answer was 'to fight.' The years of
revolution in 1848-9 and those of the First International are two or
three times as important as the rest. We do not believe we have left out
anything of importance. To the important things we have given the space
that they deserve.

Many new documents have been discovered since the end of the Great War.
They put many things in a new light and reveal links and connections the
very existence of which was not suspected before. To mention all the
sources we have used would take up too much space. Suffice it to say
that apart from printed material--incidentally we discovered a great
deal of hitherto unsuspected material from old newspapers and
periodicals--we have succeeded in extracting a great deal of new matter
from archives. In particular the archives of the German Social
Democratic Party, which contain the manuscripts of Marx and Engels left
at their death, as well as those of many of their contemporaries and
fellow-fighters, and a vast number of documents relating to the history
of the First International were put at our disposal. They remained at
our disposal even in the present difficult circumstances, when they have
been taken abroad, and for this we have to thank the Party leaders (at
present in Prague). We found a great deal of material in the secret
state archives at Berlin-Dahlem and in the Saxon state archives at
Dresden.

We were also enabled to use some documents from the archives of the
British Foreign Office, preserved in the Record Office, more
particularly documents regarding the attempt made by the Prussian
Government to secure Marx's expulsion from England in 1850. We wish to
express our thanks to Mr. E. H. Carr, who drew our attention to these
documents and sent us copies.

We have intentionally quoted a great deal. We obviously could not recoin
phrases coined by Marx which have long become familiar in our everyday
speech. We have quoted Marx himself wherever the subject demanded it,
and often let him speak for himself, because the particular turn he gave
his thoughts, the way he fitted his sentences together, the adjectives
he chose, reveal the nature of the man more clearly than any analysis.
For the same reasons we have quoted his contemporaries whenever
possible. Half the contents of a police agent's report is the way he
writes it. To quote a letter of Bakunin's without using his own words in
the important passages would be to misrepresent him. The fact that we
give the source of our quotations will be welcome to many readers.

June 1936

B. NICOLAIEVSKY
OTTO MAENCHEN-HELFEN

## Contents

* Chapter 01: Origins and Childhood
* Chapter 02: A Happy Year at Bonn
* Chapter 03: Jenny von Westphalen
* Chapter 04: Student Years in Berlin
* Chapter 05: Philosophy under Censorship
* Chapter 06: The Germans Learn French
* Chapter 07: The Communist Artisans of Paris
* Chapter 08: The Life-long Friend
* Chapter 09: Clarification
* Chapter 10: Face to Face with Primitive Communism
* Chapter 11: The Communist League
* Chapter 12: The Revolutionary Tempest
* Chapter 13: The 'Mad Year' in Cologne
* Chapter 14: Defeat with Honour
* Chapter 15: The End of the Communist League
* Chapter 16: The Sleepless Night of Exile
* Chapter 17: The International Working Men's Association
* Chapter 18: Michael Bakunin
* Chapter 19: The Franco-Prussian War
* Chapter 20: The Downfall of the International
* Chapter 21: The Last Ten Years

## Chapter 01: Origins and Childhood

Trier deservedly enjoys the reputation of being the oldest town in
Germany. Its origins are lost in the mists of antiquity. A metropolis
under the Roman Empire, it was brought to ruin in the stormy times of
the migration of the peoples, but rose and flourished again in the
Middle Ages under the mild sway of its bishops, whose diocese extended
to Metz, Toul and Verdun. Its position at the extreme edge of
German-speaking territory made of it an intermediary between German
culture and French. It changed its overlords more than once. It belonged
to the German Holy Roman Empire, then to the Kingdom of France, then it
became German once again. After the outbreak of the French Revolution a
stream of French _émigrés_ poured into Trier as into other frontier
towns, and for some years it was the outpost of the Coblenz Reaction.
The White detachments were formed in Trier, where conspiracies were
hatched and emissaries forgathered going into or coming out of France.

In the autumn of 1793, just a quarter of a century before the birth of
Marx, when the Allies were retreating to the Rhine before the armies of
the Revolution, Goethe came to Trier with the Duke of Weimar's troops.
'The town has one striking characteristic,' he wrote in his _French
Campaign_. 'It claims that it possesses more religious buildings than
any other place of the same size. Its reputation in this respect could
scarcely be denied. For within its walls it is burdened, nay oppressed,
with churches and chapels and cloisters and colleges and buildings
dedicated to chivalrous and religious orders, to say nothing of the
abbacies, Carthusian convents and institutions which invest, nay
blockade, it.'

The waves of the Reformation never reached Trier, and the political and
economic power of the Church remained unbroken. For all that its
clerical Electors did a good deal for culture and for art. The last,
Clement Wenceslaus, who was forced to flee before the victorious troops
of the Convention in 1794, was a liberal-minded man and his prebendary,
Dalberg, a vigorous patron of public instruction, belonged to the order
of the Illuminati.

Nevertheless the inhabitants of Trier received the French with
enthusiasm. The Revolution released the peasants from the trammels of
feudalism, gave the bourgeoisie the administrative and legal apparatus
they required for their advancement, freed the intelligentsia from the
tutelage of the priests. The men of Trier danced round their 'tree of
freedom' just like the inhabitants of Mainz. They had their own Jacobin
club. Many a respected citizen in the thirties still looked back with
pride to his Jacobin past.

Trier remained French for two decades. But as the novelty wore off the
things wrought by the Revolution--the dividing-up of Church property in
particular--and as the burdens that came in its train increased, the
first revolutionary ardour faded, and indifference grew. In the last
years of the Napoleonic Empire indifference was replaced by open
hostility. Every year the taxes grew more oppressive. The sons of the
artisans of Trier and the peasants of the Moselle bled to death on the
battlefields of Spain, Germany and Russia. In January, 1815, Trier
greeted the Allies as deliverers from an intolerable yoke.

The Congress of Vienna awarded Trier to Prussia. The Prussian Government
appreciated the necessity of handling its new-won territory with care.
It zealously avoided coming into conflict with the Catholic Church and
kept on its guard against injuring the religious susceptibilities of its
newly acquired subjects. But it refrained from laying hands on the
possessions of those who had grown rich by the acquisition of Church
property during the Revolution. In all its essentials the _Code
Napoléon_, the French statute-book, remained in force as far as the
Rhineland was concerned. Public and oral court proceedings were
retained. The pick of Prussian officialdom was sent to the Rhineland
provinces, charged with the duty of scrupulously respecting local
idiosyncrasies. For a number of years the Rhineland was sheltered from
the full ultra-reactionary blast which set in everywhere else in Prussia
immediately after the conclusion of peace.

The Government, tolerant to the Catholic masses, took pains to win over
the intelligentsia too. It did a great deal, among other things, for
archaeological research. The inhabitants of Trier were proud of the
wealth of Roman remains in their town. Scarcely a doctor, lawyer or
schoolmaster but was also an historian and archaeologist. The Government
provided ample sums of money to subsidise their researches. Instead of
agitating against Prussian absolutism, ex-Jacobins burrowed for Mithraic
altars and gravestones. In those years the Trier of antiquity, _Augusta
Treverorum_, rose once more from its ruins.

The culture of the vine, mainspring then as now of the agricultural
economy of the Moselle, flourished mightily, thanks to the tariff which
came into force in 1818. High, almost prohibitive duties closed the
Prussian market to foreign wines and provided the peasants of the
Moselle with a vast and assured outlet for their produce.

Among those who received the Prussians with the greatest enthusiasm were
the Rhineland Jews. In 1815 the economic position of the Jews was
incomparably more favourable in the kingdom of Prussia than in most of
the departments of France. The Prussian Decree of March 11, 1812, gave
them rights that they had enjoyed for only a few years under Napoleon;
for practically everything that the Revolution had given them was taken
away by the '_décret infâme_' of March 17, 1808. Extensive restrictions
were placed upon their liberty of movement, and their freedom to trade
or earn a living as they wished was as good as abolished. The Jews, at
any rate economically, were cast back into the ghetto which they had
been preparing to leave. And now the yoke they groaned under was heavier
than before. Hitherto the Rhineland Jews had been money-lenders,
insisting rigorously upon their bond. But Napoleon compelled them to
usury that was secret and obscure. The decree was to last in the first
instance for ten years, until 1818. But in 1815 Napoleon fell, and the
Jews expected that with him his decree would fall too.

They were disappointed. Article Sixteen of the statutes of the new
German Federation of Princes specified that legal rights everywhere
should remain as they had been before. Prussia, glad at being able to
drop the Liberal mask she had been forced to adopt in the War of
Liberation, entered unabashed upon Napoleon's inheritance in so far as
it was sufficiently reactionary for her. There was no need whatever to
have any consideration for the Jews. So she piled Pelion upon Ossa and
superimposed her Old Prussian special Jewish regulations upon those of
Napoleon. Under the French Empire it had been possible in exceptional
cases for Jews to enter the service of the State; in Prussia, even after
the so-called emancipation, it was impossible under any circumstances.
So the Rhineland Jews who had entered the State service under Napoleon
were compelled to leave it as soon as Frederick William III became their
overlord.

The number of those affected was only three, and one of them was a Trier
lawyer, Hirschel Marx, the father of Karl. The chairman of the
commission which carried out the transfer from French to Prussian
authority described him as a 'learned, very industrious and thoroughly
conscientious man' and warmly recommended him to be taken over into the
Prussian service, but this helped him not at all. In June, 1815, he
wrote a memorial in which he expressed his confidence in Prussian
justice in moving terms, but he did not receive so much as a reply.
Confronted with the choice of changing his faith or his occupation, he
had himself baptised and adopted the name of Heinrich.

To abandon the Jewish faith was no great wrench. He did object to the
coercion. He was incensed by the narrow intolerance that forced him to
this step. No ties bound him to the synagogue, or, for that matter to
the church either. True, his ancestors, on his father's and his mother's
side alike, had been rabbis as far back as his family-tree can be
traced. Hirschel's father, Marx Levy, later known as Marx only, who died
in 1798, was a Trier rabbi. The family-tree of Hirschel's mother, Eva
Moses Lvov (1753-1823) included a number of celebrated rabbis, including
Meir Katzenellenbogen, head of the Talmud School at Padua, who died in
1565, Joseph Ben Gerson ha-Cohen, who died in 1591, and the honoured
teacher, Josua Heschel Lvov (1693-1771). The family lived in Hessia,
later emigrated to Poland (Lvov is the Polish name for Lemberg) and had
been settled in Trier since the seventeenth century. The eldest of
Levy's three sons, Samuel, became a rabbi like his fathers before him.
He died in Trier in 1827 in his fiftieth year.

Hirschel Marx was born at Saarlouis in 1782. The scanty indications
available point to his having early cut himself adrift from his
hereditary environment. In a letter to his son he once wrote that but
for his existence itself he had received nothing from his family,
'except, to be fair, my mother's love.' His writings contain no word to
indicate even the faintest spiritual link with the Jewish faith. Edgar
von Westphalen, who spent many hours of his boyhood in the Marxes'
house, remembered Heinrich Marx in his old age as a 'Protestant _à la_
Lessing.' A 'real eighteenth-century Frenchman, who knew his Voltaire
and Rousseau inside out,' a Kantian like most of the educated people of
his town, professing 'a pure belief in God, like Newton, Locke and
Leibnitz,' he had nothing whatever in common with the world of rabbinic
Jewry. Alienated from his family from his youth up, he had a stony path
to tread. In later years he confessed that his 'strong principles' had
been his 'only possession.'

His baptism, which took place between the summer of 1816 and the spring
of 1817, cut the last loose tie that bound him to his family. If he had
hoped before to bring light into the darkness of the ghetto, in spite of
being misunderstood, suspected and practically alone, henceforward the
task was an impossibility. It was an impossibility not because of his
baptism alone. For had the emancipation of the Jews not proved illusory?
Was not the dream of their becoming equals among equals over? Now that
the door that led from the ghetto to the outer world was once more shut
and bolted, the Jews of the ghetto retired into themselves more
fanatically than ever. They rejected everything that they had longed for
not so long before. They became hyper-orthodox; everything that was
traditionally Jewish was sacrosanct, good and bad alike.

We do not know how Marx's father came to terms with it all. But there is
an echo in the unwilling words: 'The Hebrew faith is repellent to me,'
that Marx wrote at the age of twenty-five. What Marx thought in his
young years of the Jewry of his time and country we know from what he
wrote in 1844 in the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_. 'Let us not
search for the secret of the Jews in their religion, but for the secret
of their religion in the living Jews,' he wrote. 'What is the worldly
foundation of Jewry? Self-interest and the satisfying of practical
wants. What is the worldly worship of the Jews? Huckstering. What is
their worldly god? Money. Very well. The emancipation from huckstering
and money, that is, from real, practical Jewry, would be the real
self-emancipation of our time.'

On August 24, 1824, Heinrich Marx's children--Sophie, Karl, Hermann,
Henriette, Louise, Emilie and Karoline--were received into the national
evangelical church. Their mother, Henriette, waited till her parents
were dead before being baptised on November 20, 1825. Her maiden name
was Pressburg and she came of a family of Hungarian origin which had
been settled in Holland for generations.

In the pages that follow there will be little to say about Marx's mother
and his brothers and sisters. His mother was a devoted housewife,
lovingly concerned for the minor things of life, engrossed in the
health, feeding and clothing of her children, narrow-minded if not
actually stupid, without any understanding for the daemon of her son.
She never forgave him for not becoming a lawyer like his father. She
regarded his activities as suspicious from an early age. Measured by her
dreams about his future, he was a failure, a genius maybe, but a
scapegrace, incompetent, the black sheep of the family, entirely lacking
in sense for the only things that she thought sensible, that is to say,
a quiet, comfortable life in a narrow circle, respected by the
respectable, the well-to-do and the well-bred. When Marx looked back
upon his life at the age of fifty he still remembered her saying, in the
execrable German that she spoke all her life:

'If Karl had only _made_ capital instead of...'

Not very much is known about Marx's brothers and sisters. The
first-born, Moriz David, died soon after birth. The next child was
Sophie, born on November 13, 1816. She was, as far as we know, the only
one of Karl's brothers and sisters who was at all close to him in his
youth. In later years, however, he scarcely even kept in touch with this
sister, who married a lawyer named Schmalhausen and lived at Maastricht.
Karl was born at half-past one on the morning of May 5, 1818. Of Karl's
two younger brothers, Hermann died at the age of twenty-three and Eduard
at the age of eleven. Both succumbed to tuberculosis, the hereditary
family disease, as did two others \[sic\] sisters, Henriette and
Karoline. Louise, born in 1821, married Jan Karl Juta, a Dutchman, and
settled in Cape Town with him. She and her husband twice visited Marx in
London, and in 1853 Marx wrote some articles for the _Zuid-Afrikaan_,
which his brother-in-law edited. Emilie, born in 1822, married an
engineer named Conradi and lived in Trier until her death in 1888.

In 1815, when the Moselle country became Prussian, Heinrich Marx was a
lawyer attached to the Trier court. In 1820 he was attached to the newly
founded Trier provincial court. Later he acquired the title of
_Justizrat_ and was for many years _bâtonnier du barreau_. He occupied a
respected position in the social life of the town. The family lived in a
beautiful old house in the Rhineland baroque style in the
_Brückenstrasse_, one of the best parts of the town. Trier was a small
place. In 1818, the year of Marx's birth, it numbered 11,400
inhabitants, of whom the overwhelming majority were Catholic. The
Protestant community, to which the Marxes now adhered, consisted of
barely three hundred souls, mainly officials transferred to the Moselle
from other provinces. In these circumstances the origins of the rabbi's
son did not matter. 'Here everyone who conducts himself well is
respected,' Ernst von Schiller, the son of Friedrich Schiller, at that
time _Landgerichtsrat_ at Trier, wrote at the end of 1820.

At the beginning of 1830 Heinrich Marx was the leader of the moderate
constitutional party in Trier. He did not share the francophilia which
was still fairly widespread in the Rhineland and became accentuated as
the Old Prussian reaction established itself more and more firmly in the
new territories.

'Only the hybrid Liberals of to-day could idolise a Napoleon,' he wrote
to his son in 1837. 'I assure you that under him no one dared even to
think aloud the kind of thing that is daily written in Germany to-day,
without hindrance or impediment, in Prussia in particular. He who has
studied Napoleon's history and his crazy system of ideas may rejoice
with a good conscience at his fall and the victory of Prussia.' He
advised the composition of an ode which should extol the victory of the
_Belle Alliance_. The motif he suggested is interesting. 'Its failure
would have laid humanity, and the intellect especially, in everlasting
chains.' Heinrich Marx preferred enlightened monarchy to military
dictatorship, but he was no defender of absolutism.

As the bureaucratic absolutist Prussian régime increasingly demonstrated
its incompetence, his antipathy to it grew. Towards the end of the
twenties the condition of the peasants of the Moselle took a turn for
the worse. In 1828 Prussia formed a Customs Union with Hessia, and in
1834 the German Zollverein was formed. The competition of non-Prussian
wine-growing peasants deprived the Moselle of the hitherto certain
outlet for its produce, and prices rapidly fell, to the accompaniment of
rising taxes. The pauperisation of the peasants of the Moselle proceeded
at such a rate that within a few years contemporaries compared their
state with the distress of the weavers of Silesia. Trade slumped, the
position of the artisans went from bad to worse. The Revolution of July,
1830, in Paris, the setting up of the Bourgeois Kingdom, the September
rising in Brussels and the Belgian Declaration of Independence made a
profound impression in the Rhineland. In Germany there was unrest in
Brunswick, Saxony and Kurhessen. Vintagers from the Moselle area
actually took part in the famous Hambacher Fest held by the Liberals on
May 27, 1832.

In the Rhineland the old francophile tendencies underwent a mighty
revival. New, fantastic, shocking and unprecedented ideas came winging
their way across the frontier from France. Saint-Simonism gained so many
adherents on the Moselle that the archbishop was compelled to issue an
emphatic warning against the new heresy. In 1835 a pamphlet of Ludwig
Gall, who has been called the first German Socialist, appeared in Trier.
In it he declared that labour was the source of all wealth and that
millions owned nothing but their power to work. The pamphlet also
contained the following phrases: 'The privileged, moneyed class and the
labouring classes, sharply divided as they are by diametrically opposing
interests, are in sharp conflict. As the position of the former
improves, so does that of the latter worsen, become more wretched and
distressed.' The police were aware of Gall's 'very suspicious way of
thinking' and perceived that he 'required a specially sharp watch to be
kept on him.'

At first the local State officials scarcely altered their policy. Better
acquainted than the central authorities in Berlin with conditions in the
newly acquired territories, they kept them in ignorance of oppositional
utterances for fear of intensifying the situation. This went on until
events compelled them to intervene, and in these events Heinrich Marx
occupied a prominent place.

The 'Literarische Kasino-Gesellschaft,' a club that dated back to the
time of French suzerainty, was the hub of the social life of Trier.
Differences of social status were of no account in it. 'Any upright and
educated man, without regard to rank or occupation,' was eligible for
membership. The club premises consisted of a big, two-storey house,
containing a library, a reading-room, in which the principal French and
German newspapers were kept, a number of social rooms and a hall in
which concerts, theatrical performances and balls were given. 'The
Society for Practical Research' (_Gesellschaft für nützliche
Forschung_), which retained strong traditions dating from the time of
its foundation in 1802, met at the club. One of its joint founders and
most active members was Hugo Wyttenbach, headmaster of Karl Marx's
school.

On January 12, 1834, a banquet was held at the club in honour of the
deputies to the Rhineland Diet, thus associating the men of Trier with
the campaign of banquets which swept South Germany in the winter of
1833-4 under the battle-cry of a constitution. In the opinion of the
Prussian authorities this ceremony was quite superfluous; but they did
not really become alarmed about it until they discovered that it was not
intended to honour all the deputies to the Diet but only the
liberal-minded and 'little commendable' Valdenaire, Kaiser and Mohr,
while Handel, representative of the Trier nobility, was omitted.

Heinrich Marx was one of the organisers of the banquet and he proposed
the toast of the deputies. He paid a glowing tribute to the king 'to
whose magnanimity we are indebted for the first institutions of popular
representation. In the fullness of his omnipotence he arranged that
Diets should assemble so that truth might arrive at the steps of the
throne.' He concluded with the words: 'So let us look confidently
forward to a serene future, for it rests in the hands of a worthy
father, an upright king, whose noble heart will always remain open and
well-disposed to the just and reasonable wishes of his people.'

A very loyal speech, to be sure, yet the voice of the opposition was
plainly to be discerned in it. The party of ultra-reaction in Berlin
wanted to have the Rhenish Diet abolished, or at least have its
privileges circumscribed as far as possible. Therefore praising the king
for having sanctioned the Diet was equivalent to protesting against the
royal plan to suppress it. The president of the administrative district
was forced to abandon his previous practice and report the matter to
Berlin. There could be no good purpose behind the banquet, which was a
small-scale imitation of similar affairs in the Southern German States.
But it was the only one of its kind in Prussia. The Trier Press was not
allowed to report it, but the newspapers of Cologne and Coblenz carried
detailed descriptive reports of it, and even the Paris
_Constitutionnel_, the organ of the Left, announced that the inhabitants
of Trier had held a 'brilliant banquet' at which 'speeches of the most
Liberal purport' were delivered. Kamptz, the Minister of justice,
rightly interpreted the pious words. 'They imagine themselves not just
deputies to the Diet but representatives of the people, and accordingly
receive the civic crown.'

Soon afterwards, to crown the intense disapproval with which the
Government regarded the banquet and the speeches made at it, a new
sensation arose. On January 20 the club anniversary celebrations were
held and became exuberant. The company drank, sang and made merry. They
grew over-bold and started singing not just German songs but French--the
_Marseillaise_ and the _Parisienne_. An officer reported the matter.
Heinrich Marx was among those who sang and made depreciatory references
to the Prussians. At this the whole official apparatus was set in
motion. The ministry in Berlin intervened, the Crown Prince, Frederick
William, wrote an indignant letter to the burgomaster, describing the
songs that were sung as 'heinous, the apotheosis of ancient and modern
perfidy,' and a detailed report of the matter was made to the king
himself. Officers and State officials who had been members of the club
resigned and the premises were placed under police supervision. From
that day on Heinrich Marx was regarded by the Government as thoroughly
unreliable politically. Young Karl, then aged sixteen, cannot have
failed to follow these events, in which his father was so closely
concerned, with great attention.

Karl Marx was devoted to his father. His daughter Eleanor recalled that
he never tired of talking about him. 'He always carried with him a
photograph of his father which was taken from an old daguerreotype. But
he was never willing to show it to strangers, because, he said, it bore
so little resemblance to the original. To me the face appeared very
fine. The eyes and forehead resembled those of his son, but the part of
the face round the mouth and the chin were gentler. His features as a
whole were of a definitely Jewish, but fine Jewish type. When Karl Marx
started the long, sorrowful journey in search of health after his wife's
death, this photograph, an old photograph of my mother on glass and a
photograph of my sister, Jenny, went with him. We found them in his
breast-pocket after his death. Engels laid them in his coffin.'

More detailed knowledge of Marx's boyhood would be welcome, but all that
has come down to us is a few meagre, disconnected reminiscences by his
sisters. They show him as an unruly companion at play. He seems to have
been a fearful tyrant. He drove the girls at full gallop down the
Marxberg and insisted on their eating the cakes he made with his dirty
hands out of still dirtier dough. But they put up with it all without a
protest because he told them such marvellous stories in return. His
schoolmates loved him and feared him at the same time--loved him because
he was always up to tricks and feared him because of the ease with which
he wrote satirical verses and lampoons upon his enemies. He retained
this ability during the whole of his life.

Karl Marx was sent to the high grammar school, in 1830. He was a
moderate pupil. The best pupils were singled out at the end of each
school year. Marx once received an 'honourable mention' for ancient and
modern languages, but he was only tenth on the list. Another time he was
singled out for his good performances at German composition. This was
not much for five years at school. He passed his examinations without
distinction. There is some evidence to indicate that he had the
reputation, among schoolfellows and masters alike, of being a poet.
After Karl's departure to Bonn University, when his father gave
Wyttenbach, his old headmaster, his son's greetings and told him that
Karl intended to write a poem in his honour, 'it made the old man
happy.'

Whether the poem was ever written is unknown. The intention alone points
to a definite political outlook. Wyttenbach was the life and soul of a
group of Kantians which had been formed in Trier in the first years of
the new century. Marx's father belonged to it himself. Wyttenbach,
scholar, historian, archaeologist and humanist, educated his pupils in a
free, cosmopolitan spirit, entirely dissimilar to that prevailing in the
royal Prussian high schools. He had a high conception of his calling, as
is demonstrated by the speeches he made each year at the ceremonial
departure to the university of the pupils who were leaving. These were
always fully reported in the Trier newspapers. 'A teacher cannot alter a
child's individuality,' he said. 'But he can thwart or help it, cripple
or develop it.' The wearisome phrases about throne and altar, prevalent,
nay, actually prescribed at the time, were never used by him.

The police did not concern themselves with the high school until 1830.
The Prussian authorities, in conformity with the duty incumbent upon
them of winning over their new subjects, shut their eyes and let
Wyttenbach do as he liked. After 1830 this state of affairs altered. The
persecution of the 'demagogues' began. A commission 'for the suppression
of politically dangerous groups' had been established in Berlin. It
directed its attention to Trier. Schnabel, the administrative head of
the district of Saarbrucken, with whom denouncing was a passion, had all
and sundry spied upon by his agent, a degenerate individual named Nohl.

Nohl sent his denunciations to Berlin by way of Schnabel week by week.
No one was safe, neither doctor nor artisan nor innkeeper nor official,
nor even the wife of the president of the administrative district. All
were demagogues and Jacobins. The Coblenz school committee tried to
defend their traduced colleagues, but it helped them little. The local
officials, intimidated, dismayed, unsure what course to steer, admitted
that there were some partially 'ill-disposed' members of the high school
staff. Many of them were said to exercise a 'bad influence' upon the
boys. One master, Steininger, who taught Marx natural science and
mathematics, had 'an innate propensity to opposition' and Wyttenbach was
too weak and, moreover, protected his colleagues when anything against
them was ventured upon. A deplorable lack of discipline was to be
observed among the pupils. Boys of the top forms were sometimes to be
seen sitting about in the taverns until after midnight and, what was far
worse, forbidden literature circulated among them. A copy of the
speeches made at the Hambacher Fest in 1833 was found in a boy's
possession. In 1834 it was discovered that the boys actually wrote poems
with political implications. One was arrested and was in the remand
prison for months.

Henceforth the Coblenz school committee and the Trier officials kept the
school under zealous observation. Between 1833 and 1835 it was the
subject of dozens of official reports.

These were Marx's last years at school. There can be no doubt of the
interest with which he must have followed these events, which so closely
concerned his masters, his schoolfellows and himself. True, his name
does not occur in the official correspondence, but the official
correspondence contains the names of no schoolboys at all. He is certain
to have made rich use of his gift of writing lampoons upon his enemies.

The essays he wrote at his final examination cast a light upon his
mentality at the time. The influence of the French liberal intelligence,
particularly that of Rousseau, imparted by his father and Wyttenbach, is
plain enough. Of greater significance are these phrases from an essay
called 'Observations of a young man before choosing a career.'

'If we choose the career in which we can do humanity the most good,
burdens cannot overwhelm us, since they are nothing but sacrifices for
the benefit of all. ... Experience rates him as the happiest who has
made the greatest number happy, and religion itself teaches us the ideal
for which all strive, to sacrifice oneself for humanity.'

The only upholders of these ideals at that time were the Left, the
members of the 'Burschenschaft,' and the revolutionaries who hungered in
exile. In their appeals to youth the words: be ready to sacrifice
yourself, renounce your well-being for humanity's sake, constantly
recur. They remained the fundamental maxim of Marx's life. Paul Lafargue
records that 'to work for humanity' was his favourite motto.

The spy's reports about the masters at his school turned out to be
grossly exaggerated. Investigation showed that 'no good spirit was
prevalent' among the boys, but that there was nothing tangible against
the staff Wyttenbach was not dismissed, as the more extreme among his
enemies demanded. But he was given a joint headmaster, Loers, the Latin
master, a 'well-disposed man,' whose duty it was to preside over the
school discipline.

Loers's appointment became known just as Karl left school. It gave him a
welcome opportunity of making a demonstration--an innocuous
demonstration, it is true, but the Prussian Government allowed no
others. The Government were not blind to the state of mind expressed in
such demonstrations, nor were they intended to be.

It was usual for young men just going to the university to call on their
old masters to say good-bye. Marx visited every one of them but Loers.
'Herr Loers took it very much amiss that you did not go and see him,'
Heinrich Marx wrote to his son at Bonn. 'You and Clemens were the only
ones.' He told a white lie and said that Karl had gone with him to call
on Loers, but unfortunately he had been out.

In the middle of October, 1835, Karl Marx went to Bonn.

## Chapter 02: A Happy Year at Bonn

It had long ago been decided by the Marx family council that Karl should
go to the university. His father's circumstances were quite comfortable,
but he was not rich enough to allow all his sons to study. Hermann,
Karl's moderately gifted younger brother, was indentured to a Brussels
business house. But, however difficult it might occasionally be, means
must be found for Karl, the favourite child, the son in whom his father
lived again, the son who should achieve what his father had been denied.

The university he should go to had been chosen too. Most students from
Trier went to Bonn as the nearest university town. In 1835 and 1836 the
association of Trier students at Bonn numbered more than thirty members.
Later Karl was intended to spend a few terms at another university--at
Berlin, if it could possibly be managed.

What he should study had also been decided for him. He was to study law;
not because at the age of sixteen he was particularly attracted to the
subject; he was equally interested in literature, philosophy and
science, especially physics and chemistry. As he had no particular
preference for any one branch of knowledge, because he wanted to embrace
them all, he accepted his father's advice without question. Practical
motives were undoubtedly Heinrich Marx's chief consideration in making
the choice for his son. New courts were being established in the Trier
area, and intending lawyers had excellent prospects of finding good and
well-paid posts. Of the seven students from Trier who matriculated at
Bonn University in 1834, four studied law.

Parents, brothers, sisters and friends accompanied Karl to the 'express
yacht' which left Trier at four o'clock in the morning. Halley's comet
was in the sky. The covered boat so grandiosely styled took him down the
Moselle--the river was almost the only link with the east of Germany--as
far as the Rhine, and then one of the recently introduced Rhine steamers
took him upstream to Bonn, where he arrived on Saturday, October 17, and
entered his name at the University on the same day.

Bonn, a town of nearly forty thousand inhabitants, was distinctly bigger
than Trier. Although it did not number many more than seven hundred
students, the University dominated the life of the town. In the twenties
and the thirties the University of Bonn could rightly boast of the great
freedom it enjoyed. Students' associations had no need for concealment.
This did not apply only to associations of students from the same town
or district; it applied equally to the definitely Liberal
'Burschenschafter,' who drank and duelled and sang, regarded with esteem
by the citizens and benevolence by the authorities. 'They act so freely
and openly,' an examining magistrate later wrote, 'that the existence of
the societies is a secret to no one'--least of all to the university
authorities, who were not in the least perturbed by them. On the
contrary, they practically sanctioned them. As the State officials did
not wish to disturb the university, they respected its independence and
let things take their course.

A stop, and a very thorough stop, was put to this state of affairs
shortly before Marx came to Bonn. In April, 1835, a small group of
foolhardy young men had attempted to break up the Federal Diet at
Frankfurt and set up a provisional government in its place. The rising
was undertaken with totally inadequate means and put down without any
difficulty whatever. But the governments of Germany were thoroughly
alarmed. Though some of them had hitherto had Liberal impulses, they now
started furiously building at 'the saving dam' which the decisions of
the Vienna Conference of spring, 1834--drafted by Metternich--imposed
upon them the duty of erecting against the 'rising flood.' The drive
descended with especial fury upon the students' associations. Bonn's
turn came a little later. When Marx came to Bonn in the autumn of 1835,
informers were daily sending 'suspects' to prison. University
authorities, police and spies denounced, arrested and expelled dozens of
'Burschenschafter.'

Not a single association that was connected in any way with any general
purpose, even the most discreet, survived the stress of these severe
measures. The only one to remain was the 'Korps,' who, as a contemporary
protested, regarded 'brawling and carousing as the highest aim of a
student's life.' The authorities were glad enough to close their eyes to
the activities of the 'Korps.' There were also small 'tavern clubs,'
consisting of groups of students from the same towns, from Cologne,
Aachen, etc. These were not distinguished for their rich intellectual
life either. After most of the boldest, most advanced and liberal-minded
students had been eliminated those who remained were too bewildered or
too indifferent not scrupulously to avoid all discussion of politics.

Lectures had not yet begun when Marx arrived at Bonn. He had plenty of
time to settle down. He took a room quite close to the University, and
immediately fell upon the lecture list. The natural sciences were so
badly represented at Bonn that Marx resolved to postpone his study of
physics and chemistry until going to Berlin, where he would be able to
study under the real authorities on those subjects. Sufficient remained
for him to do nevertheless. He decided to attend courses of lectures in
no fewer than nine subjects. His father, to whom he wrote of his plans,
hesitated between pleasure at so much zeal and fear that Karl might
overwork. 'Nine courses of lectures seem rather a lot to me,' he wrote,
'and I don't want you to undertake more than mind and body can stand.
But if you can manage it, very well. The field of knowledge is immense
and time is short.'

In the end Marx only attended six courses. According to his professors
he was 'industrious' or 'very industrious' at them all. Professor
Welcker, under whom Marx studied Greek and Roman mythology, stated that
he was 'exceptionally industrious and attentive.' In the summer term
Marx attended four courses. This was still a great deal, particularly
when compared with his later studies in Berlin, when he only attended
fourteen courses of lectures in nine terms. The year at Bonn was the
only one in which he took his university studies seriously. Somewhat to
his own surprise, Marx discovered a taste for law, his future
profession. All the same he seems to have preferred listening to the
great Schlegel on Homer or the Elegies of Propertius and D'Alton on the
history of art.

However industriously he applied himself to them, his studies failed to
engross him completely. As he demonstrated at school, he was no bookworm
or spoilsport. He joined the Trier 'tavern club' and was one of its five
presidents in the summer term of 1836. Marx, a true son of the
Rhineland, appreciated a good 'drop' all his life. In June he was
condemned to one day's detention by the proctor for being drunk and
disorderly. The prison in which he served his sentence was a very jolly
one. A contemporary who studied at Bonn a year later than Marx reports
that the prisoners were allowed visitors, who practically never failed
to turn up with wine, beer and cards. Sometimes the merry-making was
such that the entertainment expenses made a serious inroad into the
prisoners' monthly allowance. It was not because of the one day's
confinement alone that Karl got into debt, in spite of the ample
allowance sent him by his generous father.

Marx joined another club as well. It was called the 'Poets' Club.' If
the police records are to be believed, this club of enthusiastic young
men was not so entirely innocuous as it seemed. Its founders were Fenner
von Fenneberg, who took a very active part in the revolution of 1848 and
1849, first in Vienna and later in Baden, and a Trier student named
Biermann, who had come under suspicion while still at school as the
author of 'seditious poetry.' He escaped to Paris to avoid arrest, and
it was proved that he had been in contact with a Major Stieldorf, whom
the police accused of agitating for the annexation by Belgium of the
western Trier territory.

Marx appears to have been very active in the 'Poets' Club.' Moritz
Carrière, a philosopher and aesthetician of some merit, who at the time
was the leader of a similar group at Göttingen, with whom the Bonn club
was on friendly terms, remembered Marx as one of the three most
important members. The other two were Emanuel Geibel, who later made a
reputation as a lyric poet, and Karl Grün, an adherent of the 'true'
Socialism which Marx was soon so pitilessly to combat and deride.

His father approved of Karl's joining the 'Poets' Club.' He knew his
son's stormy nature and was never without anxiety that it might run away
with him. He did not like the 'tavern club,' for he feared Karl might
become involved in a duel. He was relieved when he learned that Karl had
joined the 'Poets' Club' and wrote: 'I like your little group far better
than the tavern. Young people who take pleasure in such gatherings are
necessarily civilised human beings, and set greater store on their value
as future good citizens than those who set most store by rowdiness.'

However, it soon appeared that even this little group was not without
its dangers. The police, suspecting treasonable activities everywhere,
started taking an interest in the 'Poets' Club.' The club rules and the
minutes of their meetings in the winter of 1834-5 fell into the hands of
the police-spy, Nohl, who had now been sent to Bonn, but to their
disappointment the police were forced to admit that both the rules and
the minutes were politically completely innocuous. According to the
rules the members, 'moved by a similar love of _belles lettres_,' had
decided to unite 'for the reciprocal exercise of their would-be poetical
talents.' In spite of this the police remained full of misgivings, and
although their inquiries had resulted in nothing tangible, the matter
was handed over to the University authorities, whose disciplinary court
should institute proceedings.

Marx's name was not mentioned. His father, well informed about events in
Bonn, once more had cause for anxiety about him, and not on account of
the 'Poets' Club' alone. In the spring of 1836 a wild conflict broke out
among the students, and the association of Trier students was in the
midst of the fray. Conflict between the 'Korps' associations and the
tavern clubs had begun during the winter. The 'Korps' demanded that the
tavern clubs should merge with them. This the tavern clubs refused to
do, and the refusal resulted in hostile encounters with members of the
Borussia Korps, who were 'true Prussians and aristocrats,' and, under
the leadership of Counts von der Goltz, von der Schulenberg and von
Heyden, provoked, derided and challenged the 'plebeians' whenever they
met them. Their especial hatred was directed to the Trier students. In
the conflict of the feudal Borussians with the sons of the bourgeois
citizens of Trier there was, in a sense, an element of class-war.

In 1858 Lassalle, after some unpleasant fellow had sent him a challenge,
wrote to Marx and asked him his opinion of duels. Marx replied that it
was obviously absurd to try and decide whether duelling as such was
consistent with _the_ principle; but within the biased limitations of
bourgeois society it might sometimes be necessary to justify one's
individuality in this feudal manner. As an eighteen-year-old student at
Bonn Marx evidently thought the same. An entry in the records of the
university disciplinary court states that Marx was once seen bearing a
weapon such as was usually used for duels. His father in Trier heard of
this incident and wrote to his son: 'Since when is duelling so
interwoven with philosophy? Men fight duels out of respect, nay, rather
out of fear of public opinion. And what public opinion? Not always the
best--far from it! So little consistency is there among mankind! Do not
let this taste--if it is not a taste, this disease--take root. You
might, after all, end by robbing yourself and your parents of their
finest hopes for you. I do not believe that a reasonable man can so
easily disregard these things.'

There was foundation for his father's fears. The duels the students
fought in the suburbs of Ippendorf and Kessenich were anything but
harmless. The young Count von Arnim was killed in a duel in 1834, and
soon afterwards a student named Daniels, from Aachen, was killed too.
Karl did not heed his father's warnings. He fought a duel, in all
probability with a Borussian, in August, 1836. He received a thrust over
the left eye.

How his father took the news is not known. Before the end of the summer
term he had given the Bonn university authorities his consent to his
son's transfer to Berlin. He did not 'merely give his consent' but
heavily underlined the statement that it was 'his wish.' A longer stay
in Bonn would have profited Karl nothing and only threatened duels on
the one hand and police persecution on the other.

## Chapter 03: Jenny von Westphalen

Marx spent the summer and autumn of 1836 in Trier, where he became
secretly engaged to Jenny von Westphalen, his future wife.

Her antecedents were entirely different from his own. She came from a
different world. Her grandfather, Philipp Westphalen (1724-1792) was
adviser and confidential secretary to Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick. A man
of middle-class origin, he owed his rise to his abilities alone. His
contemporaries spoke of him as a competent administrator and a
far-seeing and prudent politician. He never became a soldier but
remained a civil official throughout his career, but the victories of
Krefeld, Bellinghausen, Warburg, Wilhelmsthal and Minden were his
handiwork. Philipp Westphalen was the duke's real chief of staff during
the Seven Years' War. Delbrück, the military historian, describes him as
the Gneisenau of the Seven Years' War, and Bernhardi calls him the
leading spirit of Ferdinand's staff. He was a gifted writer, and his
notes are among the most important historical sources for the period.

The King of England esteemed the German so highly that he appointed him
adjutant-general of his army. Westphalen, with the national pride that
distinguished him and later frequently brought him into conflict with
the fawning courtiers of the Guelf court, declined the honour. In the
end he only accepted ennoblement at the hands of the house of Brunswick
in order to be able to marry the woman of his choice.

He met her when she was on a visit to her uncle, General Beckwith,
commander of the English-Hanoverian army, which helped. Duke Ferdinand
in the struggle against the French. Jeanie Wishart of Pitarrow came of
the family of the Earls of Argyll who played such a big rôle in the
history of Scotland, particularly during the Reformation and the Great
Rebellion. One of her forefathers, George Wishart, was burned at the
stake as a Protestant in 1547 and a little later another, Earl Archibald
Argyll, mounted the scaffold in Edinburgh as a rebel against King James
II.

The younger branch of the family, to which Jeanie Wishart of Pitarrow
belonged--she was the fifth child of George Wishart, an Edinburgh
minister--also produced a number of prominent men. William Wishart,
Jenny's great-grandfather, accompanied the Prince of Orange to England,
and his brother was the celebrated Admiral James Wishart. Jenny's
grandmother, Anne Campbell of Orchard, wife of the minister, belonged to
the old Scottish aristocracy too.

Ludwig von Westphalen, the youngest son of this German-Scottish
marriage, was born on July 11, 1770. He was his mother's favourite
child. She survived her husband by twenty years and lived with her son
until her death. He was an exceptionally learned man. He spoke English,
his second native tongue, as well as German, and could read Latin,
Greek, Italian, French and Spanish. Marx used to remember with pleasure
how old Westphalen would recite whole hymns of Homer by heart. It was
from her father that Jenny and Karl learned to love Shakespeare, a love
they preserved all their lifetime and handed on to their children.

Marx was sincerely attached to Jenny's father, his 'paternal friend.'
The words with which he dedicated the thesis for his doctor's degree
proceeded from a thankful heart. 'May all who are in doubt,' he wrote,
'have the good fortune that I have had and be able to look up with
admiration to an old man who retains his youthful vigour and welcomes
every advance of the times with enthusiasm and passion for truth and an
idealism which, bright as sunshine and proceeding from deep conviction,
recognises only the word of truth before which all the spirits of the
world appear, and never shrinks back from the retrograde ghosts which
obscure the gloomy sky, but, full of godlike energy and with manly,
confident glance, penetrates all the chrysalis changes of the world and
sees the empyrean within. You, my paternal friend, provided me always
with a living _argumentum ad oculos_ that idealism is not a figment of
the imagination but a truth.'

For a man with an outlook of that kind there was not much scope in the
German States of his time. Little bound him to the hereditary Brunswick
Guelf dynasty. He had no hesitation in entering the service of the
Napoleonic kingdom of Westphalia. His son and biographer, Ferdinand von
Westphalen, tried to attribute this step to his concern for the
well-being of his family, but this cannot be accepted as a satisfactory
explanation. His family always had been prosperous and was still
prosperous at the time, and, besides, Ludwig von Westphalen proved
sufficiently a few years later that he was willing to make greater
sacrifices for his convictions than that involved in declining an
official position. The Kingdom of Westphalia was such a notable advance
on the feudal state, and so full of beneficial reforms in every respect,
that a man as sensitive to the demands of the time as Ludwig von
Westphalen could not hesitate a moment in choosing whether to serve a
fossilized petty princeling or the brother of the emperor of the world.

In the realm of King Jerome, just as in the Rhineland, the popularity of
the new régime, at first widespread among middle-classes and peasants
alike, dwindled away, to be replaced by aversion and ultimately bitter
hostility. With every increase in the taxes necessary to finance the
never-ending war, with every new calling-up of recruits, hostility grew.
In 1813 Westphalen, then sub-prefect of the _arrondissement_ of
Salzwedel in the department of the Elbe, was arrested by order of
Marshal Davoust because of his hostility to the French régime and
confined in the fortress of Gifhorn. He was only freed by the troops of
the Allies.

He was confirmed in the office of administrative head of the district by
the Prussians and remained in Salzwedel for another three years. In 1816
he was promoted and transferred to Trier, which became his and his
family's second home.

Westphalen's first wife, Elisabeth von Veltheim, was descended from the
Old Prussian aristocracy and died young, in 1807, leaving four children.
Two daughters were brought up by her relatives. They grew up far from
their father and he only went to see them occasionally. Ferdinand, the
elder of the two sons, stayed in Salzwedel until he left school and then
went to live with his sisters. His father had practically no influence
upon his upbringing. He grew up in a thoroughly reactionary environment
to be a thorough reactionary himself--arrogant, narrow-minded and
bigoted. He actually became Prussian Minister of the Interior, and in
the most reactionary cabinet that Prussia ever had he was the most
reactionary of them all. Frederick William IV, the 'romantic on the
throne,' was later very friendly with him.

Ludwig von Westphalen's second wife was Karoline Heubel, daughter of a
minor Prussian official from the Rhineland. She was a clever and
courageous woman. A picture of her in her old age, with her large,
gleaming eyes, enables one to see how beautiful she was in her youth.
There were three children of this marriage. Jenny, the eldest, was born
at Salzwedel on February 12, 1814. The next child was a daughter, of
whom no more is known, and the third was a son, Edgar, born in 1819.

Jenny, who later had to endure poverty in its shabbiest form--for in
London there was no money to buy a coffin for her dead child--had a
happy and carefree childhood. Her parents were rich.

Ludwig von Westphalen's salary in the early eighteen-twenties was one
thousand six hundred thalers a year, which was a great deal at that time
and place, and in addition there was the yield of a respectable estate.
At that time two good furnished rooms could be rented at Trier for from
six to seven thalers a month, and the price of a four-course dinner
every day for a whole month was from six to seven thalers. The
Westphalens occupied a sumptuous house with a big garden in one of the
best streets of Trier.

Heinrich Marx and his family lived next door. In a small town like Trier
everybody knows practically everybody else. Children living in
neighbouring houses know each other best of all. Jenny's favourite
playmate was Karl's elder sister, Sophie. Edgar, who was scarcely a year
younger than Karl, sat next to him on the same school bench. Westphalen,
himself half-German and half-Scotch, had no national or racial
prejudices. Lessing was one of his favourite authors. That Heinrich Marx
had only recently become a Christian worried him not at all. The
children made friends and the fathers followed suit. The Marx children
played in the Westphalens' garden, and in his old age Edgar von
Westphalen still remembered with pleasure the friendly greeting that old
Marx always had for him and his sisters.

A close friendship sprang up between old Westphalen and Karl Marx. The
old man--he was in his seventies--used to enjoy wandering 'over our
wonderfully picturesque hills and woods' with the young schoolboy. Of
the talks that they had on these occasions Marx was fondest of recalling
those in which Westphalen awakened in him his first interest in the
character and teachings of Saint-Simon. Marx's father was a Kantian. The
pedigree of scientific socialism according to Friedrich Engels is well
known: 'We German Socialists are proud of being descended, not only from
Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen but from Kant, Fichte and Hegel as well.'

Laura Lafargue burned the whole of the correspondence between her
parents. We do not know when the love-affair between the two young
people first began, and we believe it to be a waste of time to try and
find out from the rare and obliterated traces that are left. At the time
of Marx's death an old inhabitant of Trier could still remember 'lovely
Jenny' and Marx, the young student, whom he recollected as 'practically
the ugliest human being whom the sun could ever have shone on.' An older
friend of his, he said, still used to speak ardently of the charming,
bewitching creature, and neither he nor anybody else could understand
how her choice had possibly managed to fall upon Marx. True, he admitted
that Marx's early demonstrated talent and force of character and his
prepossessing ways with women made up for his ugly exterior. One seems
to hear the voice of a spurned suitor in all this.

Karl's father was at first the only person to know of the secret
engagement. He knew his son too well not to know that it was useless to
forbid him something which Karl would certainly not have allowed himself
to be forbidden. He expressed what reassured him in his letters to his
son. He admonished him in this affair, as in all others, to be as candid
with his father as with a friend, to test himself rigorously and, above
all, to be mindful of man's sacred duty to the weaker sex. Karl, if he
persisted in his decision, must become a man at once. Six weeks later he
wrote again: 'I have spoken to Jenny, and I should have liked to have
been able to reassure her completely. I did my uttermost, but I could
not talk everything away. I do not know how her parents will take it.
The judgment of relatives and of the world is after all no trifle. ...
She is making a priceless sacrifice for you. She is manifesting a
self-denial which cold reason alone can fully appreciate. Woe betide you
if ever in your life you forget it! You must look into your heart alone.
The sure, certain knowledge that in spite of your youth you are a man,
deserving the world's respect, nay, fighting and earning it, giving
assurance of your steadfastness and future earnest striving, and
imposing silence on evil tongues for past mistakes, must proceed from
you alone.'

At the time of his engagement Karl Marx was an eighteen-year-old student
with numerous inclinations and a highly uncertain future. As the second
son of a numerous family, with no considerable financial prospects to
look forward to, he would have to fight for his own place in the world,
and he would need a number of years for the purpose. Jenny, four years
older than he, was the daughter of a rich and noble State official, the
'prettiest girl in Trier,' the 'queen of the ball.' When Marx visited
Trier in 1863 he found Jenny still survived in old people's memories as
the 'fairy princess.' The engagement conflicted with all the prejudices
of the bourgeois and noble world.

Karl 'had to become a man at once.' In the middle of October he went to
Berlin and plunged head over heels into his books. In order to marry it
was necessary to complete his studies as quickly as possible, pass his
examinations and find a job. In the meantime all Jenny could do was
wait. She was twenty-two years old. Many of her friends were married,
and the rest were engaged. She rejected all her suitors--officers,
landed proprietors and government officials. People in Trier started to
talk.

As long as Karl had been in Trier what people said did not worry Jenny.
When she grew afraid he had been there to support her, full of courage
and plans for the future. She believed in him, in his future and hers.
But when he went she was alone. Nobody must notice anything, she must
laugh gaily, pay visits, go to dances, as behoved a girl of marriageable
age belonging to the best society. Karl's father and his sister Sophie
were her only confidants. With them she could talk openly of her love
and of her anxieties.

The two persons dearest to Marx, Jenny and his father, were often filled
with anxiety for the future. His father wrote to him at the beginning of
March, 1837, and said that though from time to time his heart delighted
in thoughts of him and of the future, he could not shake off anxious and
gloomy forebodings when the thought struck him: Was Karl's heart in
conformity with his head, his capacity? Was there room for the earthly
but tender feelings so consolatory to the man of feeling in this vale of
tears? Karl's heart was clearly possessed by a daemon it was not granted
everybody to be possessed by, but was the nature of this daemon divine
or Faustian? Would Karl--and this doubt was not the least painful of
those that afflicted his father's heart--ever be susceptible of a true,
human, domestic happiness? Would Karl--and this doubt, since he had
recently begun to love a certain person not less than his own child, was
no less tormenting--ever be in a position to bring happiness into his
most immediate surroundings? He felt sorry for Jenny. Jenny, who with
her pure, childish disposition was so utterly devoted to Karl, was from
time to time a victim, against her will, of a kind of fear, heavy with
foreboding, that he could not explain.

In another letter six months later he wrote: 'You can be certain, and I
myself am certain, that no prince could estrange her from you. She
cleaves to you body and soul, and she is making a sacrifice for you of
which most girls are certainly not capable. That is something you must
never forget.'

Jenny waited impatiently for Karl's letters. They came rarely. Marx was
never a very good correspondent. To make up for it, at Christmas, 1836,
Jenny received a volume of poems, _The Book of Love_, dedicated to his
'dear, ever-beloved Jenny von Westphalen.' Sophie wrote to her brother
that when Jenny came to see Marx's parents on the day after Christmas
'she wept tears of joy and pain when she was given the poems.'

The three volumes of _The Book of Love_ have long since vanished. What
survives of Marx's poetical attempts--two poems published in a
periodical, the _Athenäum_, a volume of poems dedicated to his father,
scenes from _Oulanem_, a tragedy, and some chapters from _Scorpion and
Felix_, a novel in the manner of Sterne--justify the harsh judgment that
Marx himself passed on them. He described them as sentiment wildly and
formlessly expressed, completely lacking in naturalness and entirely
woven out of moonshine, with rhetorical reflections taking the place of
poetical feeling. All the same he granted them a certain warmth and
straining after vital rhythm.

Jenny's position became more and more intolerable. She hesitated when
his father suggested that Karl should reveal the secret and ask her
parents for her hand. She seems to have been worried by the difference
in age between herself and Karl. Eventually she agreed to Karl's
father's suggestion and Karl wrote to Trier. How the demand for her hand
was received we do not know. There seem to have been difficulties and
some opposition, the leader of which is sure to have been Ferdinand, the
subsequent Prussian Minister of the Interior, who had just been
transferred to an official position in Trier, where he was soon noted
for his 'great zeal and moderate intelligence.'

Eventually Jenny's parents gave their consent. At the end of 1837, Karl
Heinrich Marx, a student nineteen years of age, became officially
engaged to Jenny von Westphalen.

## Chapter 04: Student Years in Berlin

There were seven hundred students at Bonn, but several thousand in
Berlin. Bonn, in spite of spies and informers, was a pleasant,
patriarchal provincial town, in which it was not easy to get away from
the usual students' round, with its taverns and duels. The University of
Berlin, compared to the other universities in Germany, was a 'workhouse'
compared to a 'tavern,' to quote Ludwig Feuerbach.

At that period Berlin still retained many relics of the times of the
Brandenburg Electors. The walls still surrounded the Old Town, and the
old towers, only the names of which remain to-day, were still standing.
Gardens, meadows and fields still made deep inroads into the maze of
narrow, crooked alleys. Schöneberg was still the wooded _beautiful
mountain_, and the unpretentious houses of the Nollendorfs still stood
on the Nollendorfplatz, which teems with traffic to-day. It lagged
behind the young industrial towns of the Rhineland in economic and
social development, but with its three hundred thousand inhabitants it
was second only to Vienna, the biggest town on German-speaking
territory, and was the first big town that Marx became acquainted with.

He matriculated in the faculty of law on October 22, 1837, took a modest
room in the Mittelstrasse, not far from the university, and reluctantly
proceeded to pay calls upon a few influential friends of his father's to
whom he had been given introductions, and then cut himself off from all
social intercourse. He saw no one and spoke to no one.

Bonn had taught him that an attractive title to a course of lectures is
not always a reliable guide to its contents. In his first term he
attended only three courses of lectures--by Steffens, the philosopher,
on anthropology, Savigny on jurisprudence and Gans on criminal law.

Grams and Savigny, the two stars of the university, were bitter
opponents. Friedrich Karl Savigny was the founder and principal theorist
of the school of historical jurisprudence which rejected the conception
of natural right as an empty abstraction and regarded law as something
concrete arising out of the spirit and historical development of a
nation. This boiled down in practice to a simple sanctification of
everything handed down from the past. The ideologist of the
Christian-German state had discerned the revolutionary implications of
the philosophy of Hegel at a time when the ruling powers still regarded
it as absolutism's strongest possible support.

His most important adversary was Eduard Gans. Hegel had summoned the
young scholar, who possessed a gift of eloquence not granted to other
lecturers, to the faculty of jurisprudence. Gans was not a thinker of
special originality. All his life he remained faithful to his great
teacher's system, but he went his own way in the conclusions he drew
from Hegel's fundamental principles. In opposition to the school of
historical law that looked towards the past, he set up Saint-Simonistic
ideas looking towards the future. He had a glowing enthusiasm for the
complete freeing of the human personality, an enthusiasm for all plans
which had as their goal the complete reconstruction of society. His
controversy with Savigny was more than merely a legal one. It assumed a
philosophical, actually a political character.

After the death of Hegel in 1831 Gans lectured on history as well as
law, the history of the French Revolution and its salutary effects on
the rest of Europe in particular. The big lecture hall was filled to
overflowing by his audience. His lectures were attended not only by
students but by officials, officers, men of letters, 'the whole of
Berlin,' in fact everyone who was still concerned for political and
social questions in those fusty times. They came to listen to the free
speech of a free man.

The fact that the university was freedom's only sanctuary was one of the
principal factors in its importance. Gans once took a French scholar
round Berlin. In Unter den Linden he showed him the building next to the
university. 'Look!' he said. 'The university next to the arsenal. That
is the symbol of Prussia.' Prussia was an enormous barracks. A narrow
and spiteful censorship waged a pitiless war on intellectual freedom. It
was a time when a censor (he was the one with whom Marx was destined to
tussle when editor of the _Rheinische Zeitung_) suppressed an
advertisement of a translation of Dante's _Divine Comedy_ by
'Philalethes,' the later King John of Saxony, with the comment that 'no
comedy should be made of divine things.' A police régime of the pettiest
kind hampered the citizen's activities in every direction and made his
life increasingly intolerable. Only at the university was there a
modicum of freedom of speech. Gans was one of the few who made real use
of his academic freedom. He expressed opinions and praised the French
Revolution in his lectures in a way he could not possibly have done in
books.

Savigny and Steffens testified to the zeal with which Marx listened to
them, and Gans's report on him was that he was 'exceptionally
industrious.'

Marx, obliged to study law, felt, to use his own expression, 'above all
an urge to wrestle with philosophy.' He made up his mind to combine
philosophy and law. He worked through the sources and the commentaries
and translated the first two books of the Pandects--'absolutely
uncritically and just like a schoolboy,' as he wrote to his father in
retrospect. He worked at a three-hundred-page philosophy of law,
covering the whole territory of law, only to see at the end that
'without philosophy nothing could be accomplished.' In addition he made
excerpts from works on the history of art, translated Latin classics,
started studying English and Italian in order at the end of term 'once
more to search for the dance of the Muses and the music of the satyrs.'
These poems, he wrote to his father, were the only ones in which he
'caught a glimpse, as if by the touch of a magic wand, of the realm of
true poetry as a distant fairy palace,' and 'all his creations fell away
to nothing.'

'What with all these activities, in my first term I stayed up many
nights, fought many battles, experienced much internal and external
excitement. In the end I emerged not very much enriched, having
neglected nature and art, and rejected friendships.' His health had been
seriously affected in the process, but he did not spare himself but cast
himself once more into the arms of philosophy. Once more he wanted 'to
plunge into the ocean, but with the firm intention of finding mental
nature to be necessarily just as concretely and firmly grounded as
physical nature ... my aim was to search for the idea in real things
themselves.' Marx had read fragments of the Hegelian philosophy, whose
'grotesque, craggy melody' he had not found to his taste. He wrote a
dialogue entitled _Cleanthes, or the point of departure and necessary
progress of philosophy_, a philosophical-dialectical treatment of
divinity as manifested as an idea-in-itself, as religion and as history,
only to find at the end that his dearest child had been 'nursed in
moonshine, and that it was as if a false siren had carried it in her
arms and handed it over to the enemy.' His last sentence was the
beginning of the Hegelian system. Mortification at finding himself
forced to bend the knee to a philosophical system that he hated made him
ill. During his indisposition he read Hegel from beginning to end, and
most of Hegel's pupils as well, and 'chained himself firmly and more
firmly still to the present philosophy of the world from which he had
thought to escape.' By the late summer of 1837 he had become an
Hegelian.

He was living at the time at Stralau, a country place near Berlin, where
the doctor had sent him. Fresh air, plenty of walks and a healthier life
enabled him to 'ripen from a pale-faced weakling to robust bodily
vigour.' Moreover, it was at Stralau that he met the men who introduced
him to the 'Doktorklub' and played a great part in the next stage of his
development.

The 'Doktorklub' had been founded a few years previously. There were no
tavern clubs or local students' associations in Berlin. Students who
were in sympathy with one another met on fixed days at inns and
coffee-houses, which in Berlin were also reading-rooms. In one of these
inns in the Französischestrasse there met regularly a number of students
and young graduates united by a similar interest in literary and
philosophical questions. In the course of time these meetings took on
the character of an informal club and they were transferred to private
premises where there would be no undesired guests and more open speech
was possible. 'In this circle of ambitious young men,' a member of the
'Doktorklub' wrote in his reminiscences, 'there reigned that spirit of
idealism, that enthusiastic urge for knowledge, that liberal spirit that
still so thoroughly animated the youth of that time. Poems and other
work done by us used to be read aloud and criticised at our meetings,
but our special interest was the philosophy of Hegel, which was still in
its prime and held sway more or less over the whole educated world,
though individual voices had already been raised against the system and
a split between the Rights and the Lefts had already become perceptible
in the ranks of the Hegelians themselves.'

Marx became a frequent visitor to the club, and through it he made
numerous acquaintances in Berlin literary and scientific circles
including Bettina von Arnim, the last Romantic, in whose _salon_ in
Unter den Linden the most varied society met--young writers and old
generals, Liberals and Conservatives, ministers and Jewish journalists,
believers and atheists. Marx does not seem to have been a frequent guest
of Bettina's, and in his poems he wrote a pointed epigram about the
'new-fangled Romantic.' Bettina remembered the young student well. When
she came to Trier in 1838 (or 1839) he had to accompany her on all her
excursions. Marx only had a week to spend in his native town, and was
left with practically no time to talk to Jenny at all.

The university became unimportant for Marx. True, he had to attend the
prescribed lectures, the lectures essential for a law student if he were
to pass his examinations, but more than that he did not do. In the eight
terms he spent in Berlin after the summer of 1837 he only attended seven
courses of lectures, and for three whole terms he attended no lectures
at all. His interests were now confined to philosophy. Some of his
notebooks of this period have been preserved. They are full of excerpts
from Aristotle, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Bacon, and other philosophical
classics.

The political under-currents of the time masqueraded, were forced to
masquerade, as philosophical schools of thought. Division appeared in
the Hegelian camp. The 'Old' Hegelians remained loyal to the system and
conservative ideals of the older Hegel, while the 'Young' Hegelians laid
even greater stress on the revolutionary elements in the Hegelian
method, on the Hegelian dialectic, which regards nothing as permanent
but everything as flowing or becoming, recognises the contradiction in
everything and is thus the 'algebra of the revolution.' The breach
between the two schools of thought became wider and wider and the
'Doktorklub' was in the very midst of the rising battle. The challenging
'Young' Hegelian group began to crystallise out of it. Its most
important representatives were Adolph Rutenberg, Karl Friedrich Köppen
and Bruno Bauer.

Marx met Rutenberg first, and it was probably Rutenberg who introduced
him to the 'Doktorklub.' In November, 1837, he was calling him his most
intimate friend. Rutenberg was a former 'Burschenschafter,' and had
served long sentences in Prussian prisons. He became a lecturer in
geography and history at the Cadet School but was soon dismissed because
of the unfavourable influence he was said to exercise on his pupils and
because of the Liberal newspaper correspondence he wrote. He became a
professional writer. He was somewhat superficial, not overweighted with
learning, and an easy and quick writer, and soon came to occupy a
foremost position among the publicists of Berlin. Political journalism,
properly so-called, did not exist in Germany of the thirties. The
draconic censorship alone was sufficient to nip it in the bud. An
inadequate substitute was provided by the general correspondence with
which the journalists of Berlin kept the provincial Press supplied.
There was very little in this correspondence. It contained few facts and
still fewer ideas, but that left all the more scope for Liberal
expressions and veiled hints about the remarkable things the writer
would be able to disclose were the sword of Damocles, i.e. the
censorship, not dangling over his head. During the period in question
these letters from the capital fulfilled a definite need. They expressed
the elementary interests of society and strengthened the elementary
protest against the ruling powers. Rutenberg was one of the most
prominent representatives of this type of journalism, and as such he had
a certain importance in Marx's life. At the beginning of 1842 he was
appointed editor of the _Rheinische Zeitung_. In this position, when he
had to prove himself as a genuine publicist for the first time, he was a
complete failure. He was not fit for more than writing Berlin letters
full of veiled hints. Rutenberg sank lower and lower and ended up in
doubtful hole-and-corner journalism.

Karl Friedrich Köppen was a man of entirely different stamp. He, like
Rutenberg, was a history master by profession, but was a man of real
learning and scholarship, with a solid and extensive knowledge in many
fields. At the same time he was of a modest and retiring disposition,
with no aptitude whatever for placing himself in the limelight, unlike
Rutenberg, who was very skilled at it indeed. Köppen's chief work, an
account of Lamaism, has in many respects not been superseded to this
day. He was the first German historian to put forward an unprejudiced
view of the Terror in the French Revolution. Even some of his letters on
transitory themes have preserved their value. Those he wrote about
Berlin University are still prized by scholars and specialists. It is
only as a politician and a pioneer of the Socialist movement that Köppen
is still not appreciated according to his deserts. He took an active
part in the formation of the first workers' organisations in Berlin in
1848 and 1849. When the Reaction set in he was one of the few
intellectuals who continued working in the workers' clubs in spite of
the severe penalties he had to suffer. Köppen remained true to his
ideals, and his friendship with Marx survived all the vicissitudes of
life. When Marx visited him in Berlin in 1861 he found him 'the old
Köppen still.' He wrote to Engels that the two occasions he
'pub-crawled' with him really did him good.

The most important member of the group was Bruno Bauer, a lecturer in
theology. A contemporary describes him thus: 'Somewhat small in build
and of medium height, his demeanour is calm and he confronts you with a
confident, serene smile; his frame is compact, and you observe with
great interest the fine but definite features of his face, the boldly
protruding, angular and finely pointed nose, the high-arched brow, the
fine-cut mouth, the almost napoleonic figure.' Generally distracted and
absent-minded, with his gaze directed into space--Rutenberg's children
always used to say that Uncle Bauer was looking into Africa--he used to
liven up in argument. His wide erudition, his gift of precise
definition, his irony and the boldness of his thought made Bauer the
chosen leader of the Young Hegelian movement. It was not till later,
when the time came to proceed from analysis to synthesis and establish
positive, practical aims that he failed. He remained the critic; and
criticism for criticism's sake, 'absolute criticism' became for him an
end in itself. But at the end of the thirties and the beginning of the
forties, when the times demanded criticism of the old and the shattering
of ancient idols, Bruno Bauer was in the very forefront of the battle.

In 1837, when Marx joined the group, Young Hegelianism was just coming
into existence. David Friedrich Strauss had published his _Life of
Jesus_ two years before. It was the first Hegelian onslaught on the
foundations of official religion. It is somewhat difficult to-day to
realise its full significance. Society of that day was divided into
strata. It was a rigid framework, resting solely on the sanction of
religion, and reason had to adapt itself to it in all modesty and
humility as to something willed by God. As long as the foundation on
which it rested, namely the principle of divine revelation, stood
intact, all criticism of any detail of the social structure was
impotent. But any thrust at that principle that went home shook the
whole structure to its depths.

Before Strauss Hegelian philosophy had peacefully and harmoniously
cohabited with religion. Certainly it was only a marriage of prudence,
but from the point of view of the old world it was a highly useful and
convenient one. Strauss was the first to disturb this harmonious bliss.
Everybody immediately realised that it forestalled a general attack on
the whole position. Marx wrote a few years later:

'Criticism of religion is the hypothesis of all criticism. The
foundation of irreligious criticism is that man makes religion and
religion does not make man. But man is no abstract being lurking
somewhere outside and apart from the world. Man means the world of men,
the state, society. Religion, which is a distorted outlook on the world
because the world is itself distorted, is the product of the state and
of society. Religion is a fantastic materialisation of the human entity,
because the human entity has no true reality. Hence the fight against
religion is a direct fight against a world the spiritual aroma of which
it is.'

Strauss found anything but support among the Hegelians of Berlin. The
essays published by Bruno Bauer in 1835 and 1836 were among the most
trenchant of the attacks that were made on him. Bauer flatly denied the
right of philosophy to criticise Christian dogma, and he did so with
such dogmatism and violence that Strauss confidentially predicted
that he would end up in the camp of the extreme bigots. Bauer took a
different path, however, and it was the bigots who forced him down it.
Apart from the fact that their attack was directed at the philosophy of
Hegel, which a Hegelian like Bauer was necessarily obliged to defend,
the God whom they so martially proclaimed was not the mild Jesus of the
Sermon on the Mount but the gloomy, vindictive Jehovah of the Old
Testament. Their Holy Book was the Old Testament far more than the New,
and it was this that set Bauer on his critical tack.

He made his _début_ in this direction in 1837 and 1838; at a time, that
is to say, when Marx had become a member of the 'Doktorklub.' Marx took
part in the development of Young Hegelianism which originated in the
club; moreover, he was, as far as we can tell--unfortunately there is no
period of Marx's life about which we are so badly informed--one of the
most active and progressive spirits in its development. He took his
place at the most extreme wing from the start. Ruthless consistency was
a characteristic of the very beginning of his independent intellectual
life. At the end of 1836 he expressed his views about law in a letter to
his father, who replied: 'Your views about law are not without truth,
but systematised they would be very calculated to cause storms.' The
ageing Trier lawyer had lived through the storms of the French
Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars, and yearned for peace and quiet. His
son liked storms and looked out for them, though for the time being in
the realm of intellectual conflict only.

Most of the members of the 'Doktorklub' were older than Marx, and many
of them were much older. That did not prevent them from accepting him as
an equal practically from the first. As early as 1837, when he was a
student of nineteen and was nursing the idea of founding a literary
paper, his friends Rutenberg and Bauer were able to assure him that 'all
the aesthetic celebrities of the Hegelian school' were willing to
collaborate. The club used to meet often, either in private houses or in
small inns in the neighbourhood of the university For a short time it
met every day. The books and essays to which it gave birth demonstrate
its breadth of interests and the rapid development through which it
passed.

At first the chief subject of discussion was religion. To begin with the
battle raged round the question of the distortion of true Christianity
by mythology and the assimilation of Christianity to the conclusions of
contemporary philosophy, but it quickly developed into an attack on
religion itself. Though the members of the club did not definitely
emerge as atheists until 1842, most of them had long been aware of what
lay at the end of the road they had embarked upon, and occasionally
ceremoniously greeted one another with the jesting appellation of 'Your
irreverence.'

In the second half of the thirties the Government started a drive
against Hegelianism, and that drove the 'Doktorklub' into political
opposition, though an outward fillip was still required. The
'Doktorklub' gave the initiative at the 'serenade' of students on Gans's
birthday in 1838. The celebrations were intended to honour in Gans the
sturdy champion, not only of the Hegelian tradition, but also of the
seven Göttingen professors who, to the applause of the whole of Germany,
had preferred sacrificing their office to taking an oath of loyalty to
the King of Hanover who had abolished the Constitution. But, so far as
the club was concerned, being in political opposition was still far from
involving them in taking an active part in contemporary life. Rutenberg
was the only one who demanded that they should take the plunge into
contemporary life. His insistence that the time had come to abandon
fruitless 'brooding' and pass from the world of theory to the world of
action was answered by Bauer, who maintained that there could be no
question yet of their direct participation in the life of the time.
Before they could have any practical influence upon the world, and that
in the near future, they must, in his view, effect an intellectual
revolution in men's minds. There was no other way. Marx shared Bauer's
opinion. The old must be intellectually annihilated before it could be
annihilated on the material plane. The alteration of the world would
necessarily follow from the new interpretation put upon it by
philosophers. In other words a virtue was made of impotence. This earned
the club the following lampoon in classical metre:

>So far our deeds are all words and are like to remain so;  
>Abstractions we have in our minds are bound to come true of
themselves [^01].

Bruno Bauer was still faithful to this view when he moved from Berlin to
Bonn in 1838. In 1840 and 1841 the Berlin group moved faster and faster
towards the Left. In the summer of 1840 an observer characterised it as
'thoroughly devoted to the idea of constitutional monarchy.' Köppen
wrote his book on _Frederick the Great and his Opponents_ and dedicated
it to 'his friend Karl Heinrich Marx of Trier.' Köppen honoured
Frederick, 'in whose spirit we swore to live and die,' as the enemy of
Christian-German reaction. His basic idea was that the state was
embodied in its purest form in a monarchy ruled over by a monarch like
Frederick, a philosopher, a free servant of the world spirit. Renewal
could only come from the top.

The phase of Liberal constitutional monarchism soon ran its course. By
the winter of 1840-1 the club were calling themselves 'friends of the
people,' and their theoretical position was therefore at the extreme
left wing of revolutionary republicanism. Rutenberg in his Berlin
letters compared the so-called reading rooms of Berlin with the Paris
coffee-houses on the eve of the Revolution and Köppen wrote his essays
on the Terror. The club had begun 'direct' participation in contemporary
life.

During this period Marx published nothing, and no manuscripts dating
from these years have been preserved. His share in the intellectual life
of the club, and it was an important one, was only expressed indirectly
in the writings of others. It appears from a letter Köppen wrote to Marx
on June 3, 1841, that many of the ideas expressed by Bruno Bauer in his
essay on 'The Christian State and Our Times,' one of the first in which
political deductions were drawn from religious criticism, were Marx's.
Köppen remarked that as long as Marx was in Berlin he had no 'personal,
so to speak, self-thought thoughts of his own'; which was obviously a
very, friendly and highly exaggerated piece of self-depreciation, but at
the same time gives a clue to how much Marx was able to give his
friends. They treasured him as 'a warehouse of thoughts, a workshop of
ideas.' Marx lived in their memories as the 'young lion,' combative,
turbulent, quick-witted, as bold in posing problems as in solving them.
In the _Christliches Heldengedicht_, written in 1842, after Marx had
left Berlin, Marx appeared as the club remembered him:

>Who's this approaching who thus rants and raves?  
>'Tis the wild fury, black-maned Marx of Treves;  
>See him advance, nay spring upon the foe  
>As though to seize and never let him go.  
>See him extend his threatening arms on high  
>To seize the heavenly canopy from the sky;  
>See his clenched fists, and see his desperate air,  
>As though ten thousand devils had him by the hair [^02].

It must not be supposed that the 'Doktorklub' confined itself to
bringing together a collection of academic intellectuals for the purpose
of philosophical discussion only. Most of its members were young,
exuberant and always ready for mischief. Protest against the crass
philistinism that surrounded them and the absurd, petty regimentation of
personal life by the police occasionally broke out in unruly forms.
Bruno Bauer appears in the police records as a 'heavy drinker' and
Rutenberg was reported to have taken part in street fights. Edgar Bauer,
a younger brother of Bruno, was punished for ostentatiously smoking in
the street, which was forbidden by the police. Liebknecht describes in
his memoirs how Marx celebrated a reunion with Edgar Bauer in London in
the fifties. They engaged in a 'pub-crawl' and not a single tavern on
their route was allowed to remain unvisited. When they could drink no
longer they started throwing stones at the street lamps under cover of
darkness and went on until the police came and they had to run. Marx
developed a turn of speed no one had thought him capable of. He was
nearly forty at the time, father of a numerous family, author of works
of far-reaching importance. One can imagine what he must have been
capable of in his twenties in Berlin.

Marx, once accepted into the ranks of the Young Hegelians, paid
practically no more attention to the university. It had been 'purged.'
Eduard Gans, Hegel's most important pupil and the only Hegelian in the
faculty of law, died young, in 1839. Bauer had to leave the university
soon afterwards. He was unspeakably obnoxious to the pietists, and all
Altenstein, Minister of Public Worship and Education, who was favourably
inclined towards the Hegelians, was able to do for him was to have him
transferred to Bonn. Reactionaries were installed in the Hegelians'
places. Gans's chair was filled by Julius Stahl, theorist of Prussian
absolutism, who in the fifties became a practitioner of it as well. The
extreme bigots, the people whom Hegel had described a few years
previously as the 'rabble' with whom he had to 'tussle,' set the tone in
the university.

With the accession of King Frederick William IV the Christian-Romantic
reaction set in in full force. He who did not bow and hold his peace was
visited with exemplary punishment. Of academic freedom no trace was
left. The university became an annexe of the barracks.

In his first student years Marx had had hopes of becoming a university
lecturer at Berlin. This was impossible now. He could not even expect to
take his doctor's degree at the university. His thesis would have to be
submitted to Stahl, against whom the students--with Marx certainly among
them--had noisily demonstrated when he was appointed to Gans's place. As
Varnhagen noted in his diary, this was the first outward opposition to
the new government.

Marx's father died in May, 1838. During the last year the family's
material position had been worsening. In Trier Jenny was waiting. And on
the other side Bruno Bauer was urging his friend to hurry. It was time
to put a stop to his 'shilly-shallying' and end his 'wearisome
vacillation about the sheer, nonsensical farce of his examinations.'
Marx, he said, should come to Bonn, where he would find things easy. At
Bonn he would be able to get a lectureship. The professors at Bonn knew
they were no philosophers and that the students wanted to hear
philosophy. 'Come here and the new battle will begin.' Marx doubted
whether everything would turn out to be so easy at Bonn as Bauer hoped.
He was far more engrossed with a project for founding a philosophical
journal, about which he had been conducting an earnest correspondence
with Bauer, than with the prospect of a lectureship at Bonn. But he was
not yet willing to give up hope of overcoming the obstacles and being
able to teach at Bonn by his friend's side.

On March 30, 1841, he received his leaving-certificate from Berlin
University. On April 6 he sent to Jena a dissertation on 'The difference
between the natural philosophies of Democritus and the Epicureans.'
Certain negotiations appear to have preceded this step. The University
of Jena was celebrated at the time for the readiness with which it
granted doctor's degrees. It lived up to its reputation. A week later
the dean of Jena University presented the candidate Karl Heinrich Marx
to the faculty of philosophy. The diploma was dated April 15. Marx's
official student years were at an end.

## Chapter 05: Philosophy under Censorship

The whole of the politics of an absolute state are embodied in the
person of the reigning monarch. The more flagrantly his policy
contradicts the interests of the classes excluded from government, the
more conscious they are of their impotence to break their ruler's power,
the more longingly they direct their gaze towards the heir to the
throne. Upon him they rely for the fulfilment of all their hopes. With
him, or so they whisper to themselves, the great new era will begin. The
greater their expectations, the more bitter their disappointment when
the new régime turns out to be nothing but a bare sequel of the old.

As Crown Prince Frederick Wilhelm IV had been the hope of many. They had
taken seriously the high-sounding phrases concerning liberty and
national unity that had flowed so easily from his lips, however vague
and indefinite the phrases had been. They had expected that when once he
was king the era of long-demanded reforms would open. When he ascended
the throne new political life awakened on every side, and everyone sent
him petitions and demands, expecting them to be fulfilled overnight. 'An
Augustan age was to begin for Prussia. Everywhere new, fresh forces
seemed to be arising; there was germinating and sprouting, and
everywhere long-closed buds seemed to be opening in the warm light of
the newly arisen sun. A breath of spring went out from Berlin and seemed
to spread throughout the Fatherland.'

The romantic, pious, waywardly intellectual king fulfilled none of the
many expectations that were centred upon him. He had proclaimed that
there must be freedom of speech, but the new instructions issued to the
censor's office provided for no alleviation of his severity. Things
remained as they had been before. It was a time when freeing the
individual from his traditional ties was the vogue. People's minds were
much occupied with the problem of divorce, but the Government settled
the matter in its own inimitable way and decided for the _status quo_.

The Left Hegelians had had but little faith in the Crown Prince, but
even they had not been entirely without hope, as Köppen's writings show.
When he became king they were quickly disillusioned. The first blow
struck by the new régime fell upon their shoulders. Frederick William IV
was a personal friend of Savigny, and Savigny strengthened him in his
resolve once and for all to exterminate the godless forces of
Hegelianism. He summoned the philosopher Schelling from Munich to Berlin
to enable him at last to bring out into the light of day his
long-prepared philosophical system, which was but a metaphysical
justification of the police state. When the Hegelians tried to combat
him the censor suppressed their literary opposition just as ruthlessly
as he had done in the past; and thus the men who still to an extent
believed that the battle could be fought out on the peaceful plain of
theory were driven a stage farther into 'practice,' and 'direct
participation in life.'

To the Hegelians the dismissal of Bruno Bauer was a still severer blow.
To Marx the blow was a personal one. All the plans he had made in his
last years at Berlin had been closely bound up with Bruno Bauer. They
had wanted to teach together at Bonn, they had wanted to be joint
editors of The _Archives of Atheism_, they had intended to do battle
together against the enemies of Hegelianism. It was for this reason that
Bauer had urged his friend to join him at Bonn at the earliest possible
moment. The end of Marx's studies made the proposition a practical one
for the first time, but circumstances intervened to make it impossible.

The University of Bonn had two theological schools, Protestant and
Catholic, and they had always been bitterly opposed. Each was always
ready to go to the assistance of the enemy of the other. The Catholics
always supported the not completely orthodox Protestants and the
Protestants always rallied behind the Liberal Catholics. Bruno Bauer
counted on this. Between the pair of hostile brothers he hoped to find
space for his critical annihilation of Christianity. He was
disappointed. Catholics and Protestants forgot their ancient feud and
united against their common foe. Pious students, incited by their
teachers, declined as future ministers of religion to go on listening to
the heresies of the 'atheist' lecturer. A Catholic-Protestant United
Front, created specially for the purpose, started making hostile
demonstrations against him, free fights broke out at lectures, and the
university authorities strove to get rid of the disturber of their
peace, whom the Ministry of Public Worship and Education had foisted
upon them because it wanted him out of Berlin.

In the meantime Bauer's standing with the Ministry had also been
seriously impaired. The department had been purged of its last
pro-Hegelians. In April, 1841, when Bauer's _Criticism of the Synoptic
Gospels_ appeared, Eichhorn, the Minister, had inquired in Bonn whether
it would not be possible to withdraw his right to lecture. But as long
as Bauer refrained from political allusions in the lecture-room it was
difficult to take any active steps against him without tearing the last
shreds from the pretence of academic freedom.

The Government found their long-awaited opportunity in the autumn of
1841. Bauer tied the rope round his own neck by taking part in the
demonstrations that took place in Berlin in honour of Welcker, who was a
professor at Karlsruhe and leader of the opposition in the Parliament of
Baden. Welcker's journey through Prussia was the signal for an
extraordinary outburst of enthusiasm. The Government well knew that the
banquets and 'serenades' of which he was the occasion were not in honour
of him personally, but in honour of the cause he represented; i.e.
constitutional government and the struggle against autocracy. The Berlin
celebrations were organised by Bauer's friends, and Bauer was in Berlin
at the time. In his speech at a banquet held on September 28 he drew a
contrast between the Hegelian conception of the reasonable state,
consciously understanding its tasks, and the vague spirit of
South-German Liberalism.

The sensation caused by the demonstrations in Welcker's honour, and more
particularly by Bauer's speech, was extraordinary. It was talked about
for days. The police busied themselves with the 'scandalous' affair and
the king ordered a detailed report to be made to him. On October 14,
after reading the report, he wrote a letter to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, insisting that the organisers of the affair be sought out and
removed from Berlin, or at least placed under rigorous police
supervision. On no account must Bauer be allowed to continue lecturing
at Bonn.

The king's letter did its work. Throughout the winter one report was
written after another, the affair was exhaustively discussed in the
Press, all the universities in Prussia were consulted, and eventually,
on March 22, the verdict the king wanted was delivered. Bruno Bauer left
the University of Bonn in May, 1842.

Marx followed Bauer's struggle in Bonn with extreme attention, for his
own destiny was at stake beside his friend's. If Bauer had to leave the
university, an academic career was closed to him as long as Prussia
remained the bigoted, reactionary State that it was.

After leaving Berlin University Marx lived partly at Trier, partly at
Cologne, partly at Bonn. Only one of his literary plans was realised.
The ever-increasing severity of the censorship made it impossible even
to think of founding an atheistic periodical. But Bauer's _Posaune des
Jüngsten Gerichts über Hegel den Atheisten und Antichristen_ did appear
and Marx collaborated in it. It appeared anonymously. The writer gave
himself out to be a right-thinking Christian and proceeded to
demonstrate that the most dangerous enemy of the Christian State was
Hegel, because he demolished it from within; and by Hegel he meant
Hegel, and not Hegel as interpreted by his misguided pupils; Hegel who
had so long passed as a column of the existing order. The deception was
so well carried out that at first even men like Arnold Ruge took it for
the real thing. The cat was only let out of the bag by that section of
the Press which was friendly to the Hegelians. Every _peasant_ [^03],
one paper wrote plainly enough, would understand that the book had not
been written by a religious man at all but by an artful rebel. Marx
prepared a sequel intended to demonstrate the revolutionary element in
Hegel's art teaching. But the censor made it impossible to continue the
series of pamphlets which was planned.

The philosophers, whether they wanted it or not, found themselves
assailed on every side by the demands of practical, everyday life. Marx
went on working at his essay. He wanted to publish it but it never
appeared. He stopped, was forced to stop work on it because everything
else had become overshadowed by the importance of the plain, practical,
political task of coming to grips with the enemy. Marx's essay, 'Remarks
on the New Prussian Censorship,' written in January and February, 1842,
the deadliest attack ever made, the sharpest blow ever struck at the
brazen profanity of arbitrary despotism, was intended for Ruge's
_Deutsche Jahrbücher_ but only appeared a year later in the _Anekdota
zur Neuesten Deutschen Philosophie und Publizistik_, which was published
in Switzerland.

In April, 1842, Marx went to Bonn, where Bauer's fate had already been
decided. 'Irritating the devout,' shocking the philistine, bursting into
peals of laughter in the deadly religious silence, gave them a pleasure
which there was now less reason than ever to restrain. Bauer wrote
mockingly about it to his brother. He described how he and Marx one day
infuriated the excellent citizens of Bonn by appearing in a donkey-cart
while everybody was going for a walk. 'The citizens of Bonn looked at us
in amazement. We were delighted, and the donkeys brayed.'

In Bonn Marx wrote his first article for the _Rheinische Zeitung_, which
had been appearing in Cologne since January 1, 1842.

The Rhine Province was economically and politically the most advanced
part of Prussia, and its centre was Cologne. In no other part of Germany
had industry developed so rapidly or was modern commerce so
disseminated. Consciousness of the anachronism of the feudal state
developed sooner and more powerfully here than elsewhere among the
confident young bourgeoisie. Their economic demands struck everywhere on
political impediments, and they recognised comparatively early that
these impediments must be removed. If there were no other way, an end
must be put to them by force. They required the unity of Germany, which
was carved up into six-and-thirty 'Fatherlands'--big, medium, small and
pigmy states, each with its own coinage, its own weights and measures,
its own Customs. Political freedom, the overthrow of the many petty
potentates, the unification of Germany into a single big economic unit
was their necessary aim.

The centre of the Rhine Province was Cologne, where most of the modern
industrial undertakings had their headquarters. The most energetic and
progressive representatives of the new world which repudiated Old
Prussia and was hated by it in turn lived there. Cologne was the
headquarters of the young intelligentsia arising with and in the midst
of the new economic order.

In the course of 1841 a number of young writers, philosophers, merchants
and industrialists had gathered into a small, loosely knit group in
Cologne. Camphausen, Mevissen and other future captains of industry
belonged to it, besides representatives of the new intelligentsia such
as Georg Jung, a member of a rich Dutch family, whose wife was the
daughter of a Cologne banker, and Dagobert Oppenheim, brother of the
proprietor of the big banking house of Oppenheim and Co.; and writers
such as Moses Hess, who was a gifted and versatile man, if too volatile
and unstable to make real contributions to the many branches of
knowledge he wished to make his own.

Marx made a tremendous impression on the members of this group when he
met them for the first time. This was apparently in July, 1841, when he
was on his way from Trier to Bonn. Jung spoke of Marx as being 'a quite
desperate revolutionary' and having 'one of the acutest minds' he knew.
In September, 1841, Moses Hess wrote a letter to Berthold Auerbach which
was a positive panegyric of Marx. 'You will be delighted to meet a man
who is one of our friends here now, though he lives in Bonn, where he
will soon be a lecturer,' he wrote. 'He is a phenomenon who has made a
tremendous impression on me, though my interests lie in an entirely
different field. In short, you can definitely look forward to meeting
the greatest, perhaps the _only real_ philosopher now living. Soon, when
he makes his _début_ (as a writer as well as in an academic chair) he
will draw the eyes of all Germany upon himself. Dr. Marx, as my idol is
called--he is still a young man (he is at most twenty-four years
old)--will give mediaeval religion and philosophy their last push. He
combines the most profound philosophical earnestness with the most
biting wit. Think of Rousseau, Voltaire, Holbach, Lessing, Heine and
Hegel fused into one--I say _fused_, not just lumped together--and you
have Dr. Marx.'

About this time the Cologne group conceived the project of having a
daily paper of their own. Conditions were favourable. Antagonism between
Protestant Prussia and the Catholic Rhineland had scarcely diminished
during the bare three decades of their amalgamation. In the course of
the thirties Church and State had come into a whole series of conflicts,
which were liable to flare up again at any moment. Since the
revolutionary upheaval by which the Catholics of Belgium had secured
their independence from Protestant Holland, an example that militant
sections of the clerical circles in the Rhineland occasionally felt
tempted to imitate, the danger inherent in these conflicts was all the
greater. The old and widely circulated _Kölnische Zeitung_ propagated
the Catholic cause with great skill. The Government tried to counter it
with a paper of its own, the _Rheinische Allgemeine Zeitung_, which was
started in 1841. It met with little success. It was too feeble in every
way to compete with the ably conducted _Kölnische Zeitung_.

The Cologne group decided to take the paper over. The response to the
appeal to take up shares in the new undertaking far surpassed
expectations. Thirty thousand thalers were subscribed in a short time.
In those days that was a very respectable sum of money. Every section of
the public having Left sympathies of any kind was represented among the
subscribers. As a token of the interest the Government took in an
anti-ultramontane organ, even Gerlach, the president of the local
administration, was among the shareholders.

The paper did not immediately find its political line. The first editor
was intended to have been Friedrich List, whose _National System of
Political Economy_ had just appeared. In the field of economic theory,
List was the first spokesman on behalf of the young bourgeoisie's
aspirations for the protection and advancement of industry in an
economically independent Germany. But List was ill and recommended Dr.
Gustav Höfken, one of his disciples, to fill his place. The first number
appeared on January 1, 1842. Höfken's policy was for the expansion of
the German Zollverein, the development of German trade and trade policy,
and the liberation of the German consciousness from everything that
hampered unity. This did not satisfy the paper's new proprietors. They
all belonged to the prosperous and educated bourgeoisie. On the board of
directors Rudolf Schramm, the manufacturer's son, sat side by side with
wealthy lawyers and doctors. The chief shareholders were leading Cologne
industrialists, the most important being Ludolf Camphausen, later Prime
Minister of Prussia, one of the pioneers of the railway in Germany. It
had long been clear to them that their economic programme could not be
realised without a fundamental reorganisation of the state. Jung and
Oppenheim, the two managers, were Young Hegelians and helped Hess, who
was closely associated with the editorial control from the beginning, in
finding Young Hegelians to work for the paper. Variances arose with
Höfken and on January 18 he resigned.

Marx already had considerable influence upon the management, especially
upon Jung, and it was on his recommendation that his old friend
Rutenberg was appointed editor, a position for which he soon proved
utterly unsuitable. He could write Young Hegelian articles, but he was
simply not equipped for the task of controlling a great political
newspaper, which was what the _Rheinische Zeitung_ was increasingly
becoming every day. From the middle of February onwards the real editor
was Moses Hess.

Changes of editorship did not impede the paper's expansion. Its
circulation doubled in the first month and went on increasing steadily.

Close as Marx's connection with the paper was from its first day of
publication, for the first three months he did not work for it. He wrote
nothing for it until after Bauer's dismissal, when all prospect of an
academic career had vanished. The first articles he wrote were a series
about the debates in the sixth Rhenish Diet on the freedom of the Press,
and the first of the series appeared on May 5, 1842. This was the first
work of Marx's to be printed, if one excepts the two poems his friends
published, possibly against his will, in the _Athenäum_. Georg Jung
thought the article 'exceptionally good.' Arnold Ruge called it 'in
short, the best that has ever been written about the freedom of the
Press.' Ludolf Camphausen inquired of his brother who the writer of the
'admirable' article might be. (Marx did not sign it, but called it 'by a
Rhinelander.') Extracts were quoted everywhere, and earned the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ such credit that Marx was promptly asked to send in
as many more articles as he could as quickly as he could write them.
Marx wrote three more articles in the course of the summer, one of which
was suppressed by the censor and the other heavily blue-pencilled. In
the middle of October Marx was sent for to Cologne. On October 15 he
took over the editorship of the _Rheinische Zeitung_.

In spite of all the determination with which Marx fought against feudal
absolutism and rejected half-solutions and illusory ones--in a letter to
Ruge he described constitutional monarchy as 'a mongrel riddled with
contradiction and paradox'--he was soon forced to part from his Berlin
friends. They went on with their 'absolute criticism,' completely
untroubled as to whether it were possible or justified in the concrete
circumstances in which they found themselves. A dispute that arose
between him and Edgar Bauer is illuminating. In some essays he sent to
Marx Edgar Bauer criticised the principle of compromise in political
matters. Not satisfied with that, he made a most violent attack on all
who were unwilling in practice to make his uncompromising critical
attitude their own. Marx, in a letter to Oppenheim, emphatically
repudiated this species of pseudo-radicalism. He described Bauer's
articles as 'quite general theoretical discussions concerning the
constitution of the state, suitable rather for a scientific journal than
for a newspaper,' and drew a picture of 'liberal-minded, practical men,
who have undertaken the troublesome rôle of struggling step-by-step for
freedom within constitutional limits.'

Marx's constant regard for the concrete facts led him to taking an
interest in social problems. At the time the German Press was paying
particular attention to the Chartist movement in England and the
Communist aspirations in France and Switzerland. The _Rheinische
Zeitung_ took up these questions and printed articles by Hess about the
Communists and by Von Mevissen, who had just returned to Cologne from
England, about the Chartists. In August, 1842, the management of the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ and those associated with them formed a
study-circle for the discussion of social problems.

Marx took part in it himself. At the beginning of October he defended
his paper against a charge of Communism. The article he wrote
demonstrates how slight Marx's knowledge of social problems still was in
1842. He was still under the influence of ideas recently elaborated by
Hess. Hess was the first of the Young Hegelian camp to turn his
attention to Communism, and Engels says that he was the first of the
three of them to come over to Communism. What Marx intended to write was
a 'fundamental critique of Communism' based on 'a long-continued and
thorough study.' He read the works of the French Socialists and
Communists who were the chief authorities on the subject at the
time--Proudhon's _Qu'est ce que la Propriété?_, Dezamy's _Calomnie et
Politique de M. Cabet_, Leroux, Considérant, and others.

However important social questions may have been, there were immediate
political problems to solve. In all these Marx shared the views of the
other Left Hegelians, and his method was theirs. His position was at the
extreme Left wing of bourgeois democracy. He was, to repeat the phrase,
a 'desperate revolutionary.' A clean sweep must be made of things as
they were--but for the time being in the domain of theory only. Victory
in the intellectual sphere must precede victory in the world of
reality--how, was uncertain, the path to it was not yet visible. Marx,
in spite of some vacillation and changes of mind, clung as long as
possible to the hope of being able to convince the rulers of the
necessity of fundamental changes. Should their efforts prove in vain
there was but one alternative and that was revolution, the threat of
which appears in his writings at this period from time to time. When the
ruling powers called on divine inspiration for their defence, Marx
replied that English history had sufficiently demonstrated that the
conception of divine inspiration from above called forth the
counter-conception of divine inspiration from below. 'Charles I mounted
the scaffold because of divine inspiration from below.' The threat was
there plainly enough; but it was held in abeyance, only to apply if all
efforts to gain the victory in the intellectual sphere should fail. It
was their task to persevere tirelessly with these efforts.

The new newspaper was at first not unwelcome to the Government.
Upholding the idea of national unity in opposition to the narrow
frontiers of provincialism, it stood by implication for Prussian
hegemony in Germany, set its face against ultramontanism and state
interference in Church matters, all by virtue of its programme of
freeing the national consciousness of everything that hampered the sense
of unity.

But even before Marx took over control of the paper it had come into
ever-growing conflict with the Government. As early as July Marx wrote
to Ruge that the 'greatest obduracy' was required to see a paper like
the _Rheinische Zeitung_ through. It was censored with 'the most stern
and unjust rigour.' The more it criticised the autocracy, the
bureaucracy, the censorship, the whole system of the Christian-German
Reaction, the harder did the Government bear down upon it. If at first
it had been a welcome ally against the _Kölnische Zeitung_, its tone
very soon became 'even more doubtful' than that of the _Kölnische
Zeitung_. In the last resort it was possible, if not easy, to come to
terms with the Catholic Reaction. With the spirit of Liberalism, whose
banner was flown more flagrantly in the _Rheinische Zeitung_ every day,
it was out of the question.

Marx directed its policy far more clearly, more purposefully, more
single-mindedly, launched it against the innermost chamber of the Old
Prussian State. Under his direction the paper made extraordinarily rapid
strides. When he took it over it had about one thousand subscribers. On
January 1, 1843, the number had increased to three thousand. Very few
German papers could boast as many. It was more widely quoted than all
the others, and to write for it was considered a high honour. Letters,
articles, poems were sent to it from all parts of Germany. Marx edited
it as he had wanted it to be edited when he contributed to it from Bonn.
It was essential, he had written to Oppenheim from Bonn, that the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ should not be directed by its contributors but that
the contributors should be directed by it. He was, as friend and foe
soon saw, 'the source from which the doctrine flowed.' He concerned
himself with every detail. The paper was, as it were, fused all of a
piece. Marx himself selected the articles and edited them. Traces of his
powerful hand are perceptible in the paper's tone, its style, even in
its punctuation.

But this meant that Marx was brought up against the hard facts of
reality more sharply than ever. The Prussian State as it actually was
could still be measured against the idea of what the true state ought to
be. But there was no answer in Hegel to economic questions such as that
raised by the debates in the Diet about the wood-theft law or the
distress among the wine-growing peasants of the Moselle. Engels wrote
later that 'Marx always said that it was his going into the question of
the wood-theft law and the position of the Moselle peasants that turned
his attention from pure politics to economic conditions and thus to
Socialism.'

The more deeply Marx plunged into reality, the more his Berlin friends
lost themselves in abstraction. Their criticism became ever more
'absolute,' and was destined to end up in empty negation. It became
'nihilistic.'

The word 'nihilism,' which dates from those times, was coined for them.
The Russian writer, Turgeniev, who is generally supposed to have
invented it, learned it during this period in Berlin, when he met
members of Bruno Bauer's circle. He transferred it to the Russian
revolutionaries twenty years later.

Berlin 'nihilism' took delight in an occasionally absurd ridiculing of
philistinism, and the so-called 'Freien,' or 'Free,' demonstrated their
emancipation by an anti-philistinism which in practice tied them to that
very world which they so radically repudiated, and rendered them
incapable of genuinely combating it. Their emancipation ended up in
sheer buffoonery.

Marx's unwillingness to place the _Rheinische Zeitung_ at the disposal
of their antics brought their violent wrath down upon his head. The
final breach came on account of Herwegh.

Georgh Herwegh's poems, _Gedichte eines Lebendigen_, had made him the
most popular poet in Germany. They expressed incomparably all the vague,
sentimental, often naïve longing for liberty that was rife in German
society at the time. Herwegh had been forced to seek refuge abroad. He
was able to return to Germany in 1842, and his return developed into a
triumphal progress. Herwegh, who was a quite unpolitical poet at heart,
was so fêted and honoured that he ended by completely losing all sense
of proportion. At Berlin he was invited to see the king. Frederick
William IV liked assuming a popular rôle and courting popularity, and on
his side Herwegh felt flattered by the rôle of Marquis Posa which he
hoped to play before the king. The interview, however, gave satisfaction
to neither party. Each felt the falseness of his position, and when the
Press started discussing this curious audience each party behaved as if
the other had come off worse. The extreme Left took Herwegh's audience
especially amiss, and his meeting with Bruno Bauer's group ended in an
abrupt breach. Herwegh wrote a letter to the editor of the _Rheinische
Zeitung_ about the 'Freien.' He skated quickly over the occasion of his
own quarrel with them and attacked them on quite general grounds. 'They
compromise our cause and our Party with their revolutionary romanticism,
their longing to be geniuses and their big talk,' he said.

Marx was anything but pleased at receiving Herwegh's letter, but his
opinion of the 'Freien' coincided with Herwegh's. He was forced to
defend Herwegh against the attacks made upon him from Berlin. They
demanded that the _Rheinische Zeitung_ print their anti-Herwegh
articles, but Marx refused. They sent him an ultimatum, which Marx
declined. The Berliners broke off relations with Marx and the
_Rheinische Zeitung_. This was Marx's first rupture with the
ultra-Lefts.

The paper lost little because of the 'Freien.' Its reputation was
growing steadily, its circulation was increasing, and it was on the way
to becoming the leading paper in Germany, when the censorship suddenly
gave it its death-blow.

As early as the days of Rutenberg's editorship the Government had
regretted the good-will they had shown the _Rheinische Zeitung_. In
February, 1842, inquiries were made in official circles in the Rhineland
as to whether it might not be advisable to withdraw its licence. This
danger was at first averted because, though the local officials took
exception to a great deal in the paper, they were unwilling to lose an
ally against their hereditary clerical foes. But the censorship became
more rigorous. It was in the hands of the 'shameless' Dolleschall, the
dull-witted official who had forbidden 'making a comedy of divine
things.' What he understood he blue-pencilled without rhyme or reason,
and he was even more rigorous with what he did not understand, because
that he regarded as particularly suspicious. But it was impossible to
blue-pencil everything. So much that was subversive remained that the
Berlin authorities recognised the insufficiency of their previous
instructions. New and even more rigorous instructions were sent the
censor. Marx was for a long time fond of quoting one saying of
Dolleschall's: 'Now my living's at stake. I'll cross everything out!' It
made no difference. Dolleschall was recalled and a new and more severe
censor came and ruled in his stead. It was not long before the newcomer
was reprimanded for excessive leniency. This hurt his feelings greatly,
and he defended himself. He had suppressed no fewer than a hundred and
forty articles, but he received no mercy because of that. The censor was
given a super-censor to sit by his side, so that one should blue-pencil
what the other left. Even this did not suffice. In December the Berlin
authorities sent a special envoy to the Rhineland to inquire how the
population would take it if the paper were suppressed or whether
suppression would cause too much dissatisfaction. The paper's reputation
had grown to such an extent that the Government shrank from taking the
final step. But it was only a question of time.

Though the order came from Berlin, it was the Tsar, Nicholas I, who
really suppressed the _Rheinische Zeitung_. On January 4 the _Rheinische
Zeitung_ published a violent anti-Russian article. Russia was the prop
of Prussian foreign policy. It was an alliance in which Russia gave the
orders and Prussia listened and obeyed. The Tsar saw to it that Prussia
did not deviate from the straight and narrow path. When Frederick
William IV ascended the throne and there were murmurs here and there in
the Prussian Press to the effect that perhaps this Russian hegemony over
a German State was not entirely in order, Nicholas I was filled with
righteous indignation. He read the submissive young king a lecture and
did not shrink from giving his very plain opinion as to how Prussia
ought to be ruled.

The Prussian ambassador at the court of St. Petersburg had repeatedly to
listen to hard words. On January 10 he reported to Berlin another and if
possible a more violent outburst of imperial rage. Nicholas I had
engaged Herr von Liebermann in conversation at the ball at the Winter
Palace on January 8 and said that he found the Liberal German Press
infamous beyond all measure, and he could not sufficiently express his
astonishment at the reception the king had given the notorious Herwegh.
His Imperial Majesty spoke so violently and with such a flood of words
that the ambassador was unable to say anything at all. Moreover, the
Tsar had already written Frederick William IV a personal letter. His
rebukes became so trenchant and so threatening that Berlin became
alarmed.

The anti-Russian article had been read with indignation in Berlin two
weeks before the ambassador's report arrived from St. Petersburg. This
time there was no more hesitation. On January 21, 1843, the three
Prussian ministers concerned with the censorship decided to suspend the
_Rheinische Zeitung_. The Government were in such a hurry that they sent
a special mounted messenger to Cologne. According to the edict which he
carried the newspaper had been guilty of malicious slander of the State
authorities, especially the censorship department; it had held up the
administration of the Press police in Prussia to contempt and offended
friendly foreign Powers. In order not excessively to damage the
shareholders and subscribers, the paper was to be allowed to continue
until March 31, but would be subject to special censorship to prevent it
from erring during the course of the reprieve.

A clever, cultured cynic, named Wilhelm Saint-Paul, came to Cologne as
the last censor. In his reports on Marx he called him the living source
and fountain-head of the paper's views. He had made Marx's acquaintance,
and he was a man 'who would die for his ideas.' Another time he wrote
that certain as it was that the views of Dr. Marx rested upon a profound
speculative error, as he had tried to prove to him, Dr. Marx was equally
certain of the rightness of his views. 'The contributors to the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ could be accused of anything rather than lack of
principle in that sense. This can only be one more reason,' Saint-Paul
concluded with shameless logic, 'for removing him, in the event of the
paper being allowed to continue, from a position of direct and
controlling influence.'

The fear that the ban would rouse ill-feeling turned out to be well
founded. In every town of the province, in Cologne, Aachen, Elberfeld,
Düsseldorf, Coblenz and Trier, hundreds of respectable citizens signed
petitions to the Government, appealing for the lifting of the ban. The
whole of the German Press took up the question of the suspension of the
_Rheinische Zeitung_. The authorities in Berlin actually hesitated as to
whether it might not be advisable to allow the paper to reappear under
definite restrictions.

But in the last resort the Berlin Government regarded the good-will of
the Tsar as more important than the temper of the Rhinelanders. On
February 7 the ambassador in St. Petersburg wrote another report:

'Since submitting my last humble report I have had the opportunity of
meeting Count de Nesselrode at his wife's _salon_ and of conversing with
him. Instead of giving me information which might have been useful or
interesting to me in connection with the general political situation,
the Vice-Chancellor used the occasion to ask me whether I had read the
really infamous attack which the _Rheinische Zeitung_, published at
Cologne, had recently made on the Russian Cabinet, basing its furious
denunciations on the false pretext of a note said to have been addressed
to me by him relative to the tendencies of the German Press. I replied
that I was not acquainted with the text of the particular article but I
recollected well that the _State Gazette_ had recently published a
refutation of some similar articles, declaring, briefly but quite
categorically, that the assumptions on which those articles were based
were entirely without foundation or reasonable cause. This refutation
was certainly not unknown to the Vice-Chancellor; but he confessed to me
that he was unable to understand how a Censor employed by Your Majesty's
Government could have passed an article of such a nature. In his opinion
it far surpassed in perfidy and violence all previous attacks made on
the Imperial Government in the Prussian Press. He added that in order
that I might judge for myself and be fully acquainted with the facts he
would send me a copy of the _Rheinische Zeitung_ containing the article
in question, which he did the same evening. Consequently I am very
gratified to-night, on returning from the Patriotic Ball, to find in the
_State Gazette_ for January 31, which has just arrived by post, that
Your Majesty's three ministers in charge of the censorship have recently
issued an order by virtue of which the _Rheinische Zeitung_ will cease
to appear as from April 1. I shall make it my most immediate duty to
draw Count de Nesselrode's attention to this energetic measure to-day on
the occasion of a dinner to which he has invited me. I believe it to be
my duty very humbly to add that during my conversation with the
Vice-Chancellor the day before yesterday he assured me definitely that
in all probability the Emperor has not yet seen the article in question,
because he on his part had hesitated to lay it before His Imperial
Majesty's eyes' [^04].

The Prussian Government trembled at the thought that the infamous
article might yet come to the eyes of the Tsar. It was decided
definitely that the ban should remain. A deputation of shareholders was
not even received. Marx, in ignorance of the true ground for the
suspension of the paper (which as a matter of fact, has remained unknown
to historians to this day) made a last desperate move. An article,
inspired by him, appeared in the _Mannheimer Abendzeitung_ attributing
the whole of the blame to him. It was he who had given the paper its
distinguishing tone, he was its evil spirit, its controversialist _par
excellence_, and it was his audacious insolence and youthful
indiscretion that were to blame. But that made no difference either. The
issue of March 18 contained the following: 'The undersigned announces
that he has retired from the editorship of the _Rheinische Zeitung_
because of the present censorship conditions. Dr. Marx.' But still there
was no act of clemency.

The last number of the _Rheinische Zeitung_ appeared on March 31. It was
so sought after that as much as from eight to ten silver groschen were
paid for a copy. The _Rheinische Zeitung_ took its departure with a
poem:

>We boldly flew the flag of freedom, and every member of the crew did
his duty. In spite of the watch having been kept in vain, the voyage
was good and we do not regret it. Though the gods were angry, though
our mast fell, we were not intimidated. Columbus himself was despised
at first, but he looked upon the New World at last. Friends who
applauded us, foes who fought us, we shall meet again on the new shore.
If all collapses, courage remains unbroken [^05].

## Chapter 06: The Germans Learn French

Though the final impulse that led to the suppression of the _Rheinische
Zeitung_ came from the Tsar, even if it had refrained from commenting on
foreign politics it would inevitably have been suppressed a few weeks
later just the same. The Prussian Government was determined to make an
end of the radical Press once and for all. At the end of 1842 it forbade
the circulation in Prussia of the _Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitung_, which
had been a mouthpiece of the Left Hegelians for the past two years under
the editorship of Gustav Julius. At the beginning of January, 1843,
Frederick Wilhelm IV obtained from the Government of Saxony the
suspension in Dresden of Ruge's _Deutsche Jahrbücher_. Soon afterwards
Buhl's _Patriot_ was banned in Berlin. The police and the censor forced
the _Königsberger Zeitung_ to sever its connection with the radicals. At
the end of January a decree withdrew all the concessions that had been
granted two years before.

The Left Hegelians had now lost all the literary positions they had
occupied at the beginning of the forties. They had been worsted in the
struggle for the transformation of the State, for the remodelling into
rational form of a world the irrationality of which they had
demonstrated. They had fought with intellectual weapons only and had
been defeated. Old Prussia had not been able to answer their arguments.
Incapable of victory in the theoretical field, it had nevertheless
conquered in fact. Its weapons were the police, the censorship and
force. Against force, theory--theory, pure, unaided and alone--had
failed.

Journalism had been the only method of political activity available, and
now it had been taken away. No prospect of the situation changing was in
sight. Certainly there were protests here and there, and in the
Rhineland they were stronger than elsewhere, but the overwhelming
majority of the population, the masses, looked upon the executioner of
liberty with indifference. Nothing was to be hoped for from the inert
multitude. Bruno Bauer and his followers turned into themselves and away
from a reality that was so unreasonable. They isolated themselves, spun
a new theory out of their very impotence, made a fetish of individual
consciousness, which they regarded as the only battlefield on which
victories could be fought and won, and ended up in an individual
anarchism which reached its zenith in Max Stirner's ultra-radical and
ultra-harmless _Einzigen_.

Marx, Ruge, Hess, all who had not grown weary of the fray, drew a
different conclusion from defeat. The physical force of the State had
emerged victorious only because philosophy had remained alone, had not
been able to answer force with force. One duty above all others was now
incumbent upon the philosophers--to find their way to the masses. In the
spring of 1843 Marx wrote that politics were the only ally with the aid
of which contemporary philosophy could become a reality. At the end of
that year he expressed the idea with which he, far more than any of his
colleagues, was impressed with in the celebrated words: 'The weapon of
criticism can certainly never be a substitute for the criticism of the
weapon; physical force must be overthrown with physical force; and
theory will be a physical force as soon as the masses understand it.'

To speak to the people and make them understand one must talk to them
freely. Immediately after the suppression of the _Rheinische Zeitung_
Marx decided to go abroad and continue the struggle from there. 'It is
unpleasant,' he wrote to Ruge when the suppression was made public, 'to
perform menial service even in the cause of freedom and to fight with
needles instead of with clubs. I have grown weary of hypocrisy,
stupidity, the exercise of brute force and bowing and cringing and
back-bending and verbal hair-splitting. The Government has released me.
... In Germany there is now nothing I can do. In Germany one can only be
false to oneself.'

Marx's first intention was to settle in Switzerland and work with
Herwegh on the _Deutsche Boten_, which Herwegh edited there. But Ruge
invited his collaboration in bringing out the suppressed _Deutsche
Jahrbücher_ in another form abroad. He held out to Marx the prospect of
a fixed income of from five hundred and fifty to six hundred thalers and
about two hundred and fifty thalers extra which could be earned by other
writing. Thus, if all went well, he would have an income of eight
hundred and fifty thalers. This was more than Marx could have hoped for,
and he gladly accepted Ruge's proposal. 'Even if it had been possible to
continue the _Jahrbücher_' he wrote to Ruge in answer--Ruge had for a
time been hesitating as to whether it might not perhaps be better to
stay on in Dresden after all if the minister made concessions--it would
at best be a feeble imitation of the "dear departed," and that would no
longer be good enough. In comparison the _Deutsche-Französische
Jahrbücher_ \[sic\] would be an enterprise of high principle, a thing of
consequence, an undertaking to which one could devote oneself with
enthusiasm.' Ruge had considered whether it might not be a good idea to
make the proposed review one of more than three hundred and twenty
pages. Books of more than three hundred and twenty pages were not
subject to censorship in Germany at the time. Marx rejected the idea.
Such books were not for the people. The most one dared offer them was a
monthly.

A monthly would be suitable for the problem which now had to be solved;
i.e. that of making contact with the masses. The name that Marx chose,
_The German-French Year-Books_, was an indication of the intended
contents. Ludwig Feuerbach had urged that the philosopher who should
identify himself with life and mankind should be of Franco-German blood;
his heart French and his head German. The head reformed, the heart
revolutionised. For the German radicals the head meant German
philosophy. 'We Germans are contemporary with the times in philosophy
without being contemporary with the times in history.' The French were
contemporary with the times in history. Paris was the 'new capital of
the new world.' The review was intended to bring Germans and French, the
most advanced in theory and the most advanced in practice, together into
an 'intellectual alliance.'

Negotiations with Julius Fröbel, the prospective publisher, progressed
favourably. Marx went to Dresden to make final arrangements. It was
impossible for the paper to appear in Switzerland, which was becoming
increasingly subservient to orders from Berlin and had started expelling
radicals and banning newspapers and books. Brussels, or better still,
Paris, held out brighter prospects for the new venture. By the end of
May all arrangements were complete, and Marx was able to realise his
'private plans' and marry.

'As soon as we have signed the contract I shall go to Kreuznach and get
married,' he wrote to Ruge in March. 'I can assure you, without being at
all romantic, that I am head-over-heels in love. I have been engaged now
for more than seven years, and my fiancée has had to fight the hardest
battles for my sake, almost shattering her health in the process, partly
with her bigoted, aristocratic relations, whose twin objects of worship
are the "Lord in Heaven" and the "Lord in Berlin," and partly with my
own family, into the bosom of which some priests and other enemies of
mine have insinuated themselves. For years my fiancée and I have had to
engage in more unnecessary and exhausting conflicts than many who are
three times as old as we and prate continually of their "experience of
life" (which is one of the favourite expressions in our home circle).'

Since the death of Karl's father there had been an element of strain in
Jenny's relations with his family. The few letters that survive from the
years 1839 to 1843 do not cast a very clear light on the reason. Karl's
mother complained in the middle of 1840 that her son had become quite a
stranger to his family and wrote in her Dutch-German that he had
'renounced everything which had formerly been valuable and dear to him.'
The Westphalen family took no notice of her, humiliated her, annoyed
her, behaved haughtily and distantly, were eccentric, and 'had no family
feeling at all.' There was much talk of a Herr Schlink, who somehow
seems to have encouraged these dissensions. What they were more
particularly about cannot now be discovered.

Marx had 'fallen out with his family' since 1842. He told Ruge that he
had no claim to his father's estate until after his mother's death.
After his 'failure' in his career as the editor of a paper--according to
all the well-disposed people whose opinion his mother prized so highly
the _Rheinische Zeitung_ was a 'fiasco'--his family put obstacles in his
way and, although they were comfortably off, he was left in most
pressing financial straits. His mother never became reconciled to him.
She refused to help him even during his years of acute distress in
London. When she died in 1863 Jenny wrote to Frau Liebknecht that it
would be hypocrisy for her to say she had been sentimental at the news
of her mother-in-law's death.

As long as old Westphalen lived he held a protecting hand over his
daughter's engagement to Karl. Hostilities only broke out again after
his death. True, no one raised objections to Marx's origin. Many years
later, when Charles Longuet, in an obituary on Frau Marx, mentioned
racial prejudice as having had to be overcome, Marx described it as
'pure moonshine.' To Jenny's relatives Marx seemed strange and hostile
not because of his racial antecedents but because he was a pupil of
Hegel, a follower of Feuerbach, a friend of the notorious Bruno Bauer,
the atheist. Jenny's half-brother, Ferdinand, was the leader of the
religious opposition. Jenny despised him. In her letters she never
referred to him as her brother but as the 'Minister of State,' the
'Minister of the Interior' and so on. When her daughter Laura became
engaged to Lafargue Jenny Marx observed that their 'agreement about
fundamentals, particularly in the religious respect,' was 'a singular
piece of good fortune.' She added, thinking of her own youth, 'And so
Laura will be protected from all the struggles and the suffering
inevitable for a girl with her opinions in the environment in which she
is to live.' Jenny Marx preserved a bitter hatred of the 'bigots' for
the whole of her life.

Though Jenny needed all her determination to overcome the opposition, an
open rupture with her family did not take place. On June 13, 1843, there
took place the marriage of 'Herr Carl Marx, doctor of philosophy,
resident in Cologne, and of Fräulein Bertha Julia Jenny von Westphalen,
no occupation, resident in Kreuznach.'

The young couple spent the next few months at Frau von Westphalen's
house at Kreuznach, where they had two visitors. The first was Esser, a
_Revisionsrat_ and a friend of Karl's father, who had the naïve
effrontery to offer him work for the Government which had just
suppressed the _Rheinische Zeitung_. The attempt to buy him met with a
point-blank rebuff.

At the end of July Ruge passed through Kreuznach, on his way to Brussels
to find out what prospects it offered for the publication of his
periodical. They did not turn out to be very hopeful. The German colony
in Brussels was small, and was only moderately interested in philosophy
and politics. Though the Press enjoyed greater freedom in Belgium than
in France, intellectual life in Belgium, in so far as it could be called
such, was only a feeble echo of the French. Ruge went on to Paris.

In the words of the young Engels, Paris was the place where 'European
civilisation had reached its fullest bloom.' It was the 'nerve-centre of
European history, sending out electric shocks at regular intervals which
galvanised the whole world.' The Bourgeois Kingdom was tottering. Ruge,
accustomed from Germany to detecting the slightest signs of opposition,
found the tension in the city very great. Guizot's majority in the
Chamber had sunk to three. 'The Bourgeois King's loss of prestige among
the people is demonstrated by the many attempts to assassinate that
dynastic and autocratic prince. He will not allow himself to be
'hampered' in any way with the promised 'republican institutions.' One
day when he dashed by me in the Champs Elysées, well hidden in his
coach, with hussars in front and behind and on both sides, I observed to
my astonishment that the outriders had their guns cocked ready to fire
in earnest and not just in the usual burlesque style. Thus did he ride
by with his bad conscience!' France was the home of revolution, and in
France the inevitable new revolution must start again. Everywhere that
revolutionaries lived, waiting impatiently for their hour to strike,
they lived in expectation of the 'crowing of the Gallic cock.'

At the end of October, 1843, Marx and his wife went to Paris. Ruge and
the publisher, Fröbel, had already approached the leading radicals and
members of the Opposition with a view to enlisting their support. The
journal was intended to be bilingual, the Germans writing in German and
the Frenchmen in French. Ruge's opinion was that everybody could read
French, a view which accorded ill with the paper's proposed popular
appeal. However, they were unsuccessful in securing the collaboration of
a single Frenchman. Lamennais turned them down. Lamartine considered
that his contributing to the journal would constitute an unwarrantable
interference in German affairs. Louis Blanc had misgivings on account of
the Young Hegelians' defiantly acknowledged atheism. He was
anti-clerical, of course, but as an admirer of Robespierre and an heir
of the Jacobins he was a deist. Leroux was for the time being entirely
occupied with the invention of a printing machine. Cabet and Considérant
also refused to associate themselves with the new journal, and Proudhon
was only occasionally in Paris. The new enterprise became The
_German-French Year-Books_ all the same. It taught the Germans 'to talk
French,' i.e. to be revolutionaries.

All the German contributors were _émigrés_. Not a single contributor
wrote from Germany. Feuerbach's reason for declining Marx's invitation
to contribute was not very plausible. Even Bakunin in Zurich, with whom
Ruge and Marx had already corresponded--the letters were published in
the _Jahrbücher_--withdrew. The poets Herwegh and Heine were the only
contributors, apart from Marx, whose names were known.

The money for the journal was supplied by Fröbel, who put up three
thousand francs, and Ruge, who put up six thousand thalers. Ruge and
Marx shared the editorship, but Ruge did little. At first he was away
from Paris and soon after he came back he was taken ill. All the work
devolved upon Marx. The first and only double number appeared at the end
of February.

Two essays by Marx appeared in it. One was 'On the Jewish Question,' and
was in reply to two essays of Bruno Bauer. Marx had written it at
Kreuznach. The other, 'Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy of Law' he
had started at Kreuznach and finished at the end of the year in Paris.
After the suspension of the _Rheinische Zeitung_ Marx 'withdrew from the
public stage into the study to solve the doubts that assailed him.' He
had to come to terms in his own mind with the Hegelian philosophy of law
under the guidance of which he had fought his journalistic battle. In
that battle it had been smashed to pieces. According to Hegel the state
was the creator and guardian of a rational social and political order.
The social organization proceeded from the state. But in dealing with
the distress among the wine-growing peasants of the Moselle Marx had
been forced to acknowledge that 'there are circumstances which are
decided as much by the actions of private individuals as by individual
officials, and are as independent of them as the method of drawing one's
breath.' The more Marx examined the 'circumstances' which the actions of
'individual officials' determined the wider the scope they seemed to
include. The 'circumstances' turned out to be the special interests of
quite definite social groups, and the 'individual officials' ended by
becoming identified with the state itself. Marx found it necessary to
inquire whether the relations of state and society were not just the
reverse of what Hegel had conceived them to be.

Ludwig Feuerbach's _Introductory Theses to the Reform of Philosophy_
appeared in March, 1843. In this work the doubts which assailed Marx in
his own special domain of Hegelian philosophy were exposed in their most
general form and solved by a complete reversal of the Hegelian system.
'The true relation of thought to being is only this,' wrote Feuerbach.
'Being is subject, thought predicate. Thought arises from being, not
being from thought. All speculations about law, about will, freedom,
personality, without man, beside him or above him, are speculations
without unity, necessity, substance, basis or reality. Man is the
existence of personality, the existence of liberty, the existence of
law.' Ideas have their origin in reality, they never realise themselves
in reality. Applied to the philosophy of law, it follows from this
reversal that it is not the idea of the state, the idea realising itself
in the state, which creates and directs society, but society which
conditions the state. In 1859, Marx summarised the result of his
inquiries at this time in the classical sentences: 'Legal conditions,
like state forms, are neither to be explained as things in themselves
nor from the so-called general development of the human spirit. They
have their roots rather in the material conditions of life, the whole of
which Hegel, following the example of eighteenth-century Englishmen and
Frenchmen, included under the name of "civil society."'

Feuerbach recognised man to be the creator of ideas which Hegel
externalised into independent entities. But even in Hegel man is still
an abstraction, a generic being, still 'languishing quite outside the
world, having no history.' Marx went farther than Feuerbach; he went
into the world of concrete reality. 'Man is the world of men, the state,
society.'

Criticism of the state became at the same time criticism of the social
order. It reached farther and penetrated to the foundations of society.
Those foundations were private property. Logically Marx took the final
step. Only one social class could fulfil the task of shaking off
barbarism. That class was the proletariat. 'The revolution requires a
material foundation. Theory is only realised in a people in so far as it
realisation is a practical necessity. It is not enough that thought
presses for realisation, reality itself must press for thought.' The
answer to the question as to where the possibility of emancipation in
practice lay was as follows: 'It lay in the formation of a class with
radical chains, a class in bourgeois society, which is yet not of
bourgeois society, a social rank which is the abolition of all social
ranks ... a sphere of society which cannot' emancipate itself without
emancipating itself from all other spheres of society and thus
emancipating all other spheres of society at the same time, which in a
word, is the complete loss of man, and which can only attain itself
again by the complete winning of man. This social catalyst is the
proletariat.'

Philosophy had emerged into economics. At the end of the road taken by
political radicalism in its criticism of the irrational Prussian State
lay Communism, the abolition of private property, the proletarian
revolution.

The _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ was the last product of the Young
Hegelians. It was the last not only in the sense that after it the Young
Hegelians were spoken of no more, but also in another sense. There was
nothing left for them to say. Young Hegelianism had become Communism. Or
rather Young Hegelianism as such shrank back from its consequences,
revised its premises and disintegrated; whether into narrow petty
bourgeois philistinism or 'absolute' criticism or individual philosophy
or any other petty-bourgeois manifestation is in the last resort
immaterial.

Ruge was not entirely satisfied with the contents of Marx's first
number. He considered some of Marx's 'epigrams' too artificial, others
too crude. 'Some unpolished things were also served up which otherwise
(that is to say, if I had not been ill) I should have corrected, but as
it is they got by in the rush.' Nevertheless he considered that the
issue also contained a number of remarkable things which would attract a
great deal of attention in Germany.

They did indeed attract a great deal of attention. The few copies that
entered Germany were secretly passed from hand to hand. They caused
astonishment, admiration, execration and disgust among Marx's former
comrades. Those who were frightened stopped their ears, shut their eyes,
dazzled by the new light. All were greatly affected.

The other side of this political and literary success was material
failure. The police grasped the fact that the _Jahrbücher_ were
incomparably more dangerous than anything they had had to concern
themselves with before. In April the Prussian Government informed the
provincial authorities that the _Jahrbücher_ came within the definition
of attempted high treason and _lèse-majesté_. The police were directed
to place Ruge, Marx, Heine, Bernays and their collaborators under arrest
immediately they should set foot on Prussian soil. The head of the
Austrian police and censorship department described the _Jahrbücher_ as
a publication 'whose loathsome and disgusting contents surpass
everything previously published by the revolutionary Press.' Metternich
was afraid it might be 'smuggled into the Austrian realm.' The whole
official apparatus was set in motion, right down to the administrators
of the town wards. Booksellers were warned against buying this monster
of a book and 'notified of the severe penalties involved.' An exhaustive
search was ordered to be made for it at all second-hand book-shops.

A hundred copies fell into the hands of the police on a Rhine steamer
and two hundred and thirty were confiscated by the Bavarians at the
frontier of France and the Palatinate. Ruge described later how Bernays,
who accompanied the parcel on its ill-fated journey, came back very
gaily with the information that he had disposed of the whole lot at
once. The Customs officials had almost doubled up with laughter over
Heine's verses about King Ludwig; a pleasure, Ruge added, that Heine and
they could have had much more cheaply.

Fröbel refused to continue with the undertaking. Ruge, who was
prosperous--he had only recently increased his fortune by successful
speculations--though it was his encouragement that had brought Marx to
Paris and though he had guaranteed him a definite income for his work as
editor, withdrew likewise. Publication ceased after the first number,
and Marx was left in a very difficult situation. He urged Ruge to keep
his promise, but Ruge declined. The most he consented to was paying Marx
in kind. He left him the unsold copies of the _Jahrbücher_ to dispose of
as best he could.

A violent quarrel between Marx and Ruge resulted. It would not, however,
have ended in a definite rupture had not other personal differences,
especially on fundamental matters of principle, been developing between
them for some time.

Emma Herwegh relates that Ruge proposed to Marx and Herwegh that they
should go and live with him and found a kind of Fourierist
_phalanstère_, a communal household which the women should take it in
turn to manage, doing the cooking and sewing and all the other domestic
work required. 'Frau Herwegh rejected the idea at once. How could a nice
little Saxon woman like Frau Ruge possibly get on with the highly
intelligent and even more ambitious Madame Marx, who knew so much more
than she? And how could the so recently married Frau Herwegh, who was
the youngest of them all, possibly feel attracted to this communal life?
Surely enough, Herwegh and his wife declined Ruge's invitation. Ruge and
Marx and their wives went to live together in the Rue Vanneau. A
fortnight later they parted.'

Marx and Ruge differed far too much in character, temperament and
outlook on life for their collaboration to have endured, even if these
external conflicts had not arisen. Ruge was a radical petty-bourgeois, a
narrow-minded moralist, a tedious censor of morals, a careful,
calculating business man, even if he was not altogether averse to
sacrificing some fraction of his money for a cause--provided certain
definite limits were not overstepped. Marx was a revolutionary. Ruge, as
Marx was forced to recognise in Paris, rejoiced in 'a fundamental and
universal ignorance.' He could not understand that Marx 'reads so much,
works with such extraordinary intensity, sometimes actually does not go
to bed for four nights running, and keeps on plunging anew into an ocean
of books.'

The final and open rupture came because of Ruge's opinion of Georg
Herwegh. There is no record of Marx's side of the case, but what Ruge
stated in his own justification is sufficient. Herwegh was married to a
rich Berlin banker's daughter and was very fond of luxury. It is not
necessarily true that he was absurdly extravagant in clothes, flowers,
food, furniture, carriages and horses, although he certainly overdid
some things. Herwegh was very friendly with the Countess d'Agoult, a
friendship which gossip turned into a highly immoral and dissolute
love-affair. 'One evening,' Ruge wrote to his mother, 'the conversation
turned to this topic. ... I was incensed by Herwegh's way of living and
his laziness. Several times I referred to him warmly as a scoundrel, and
declared that when a man gets married he ought to know what he is doing.
Marx said nothing and took his departure in a perfectly friendly manner.
Next morning he wrote to me that Herwegh was a genius with a great
future. My calling him a scoundrel filled him with indignation, and my
ideas on marriage were philistine and inhuman. Since then we have not
seen each other again.'

Marx defended Herwegh on another occasion; this time against Heine. The
_Jahrbücher_ group had hailed Heine with joy. He was a new man, with new
ideas. His arrival was like a blast of fresh air, a burst of stormy
movement. He made friends with the _Jahrbücher_ group, having quarreled
with practically all the other German _émigrés_ and being lonely and in
bad health. He soon took a dislike to Ruge, of whom he said that though
he had freedom in his mind, he would not let it sink into his limbs;
however enthusiastic he might be for Hellenic nudity, he was quite
incapable of bringing himself to cast off his barbaric modern trousers,
or even the Christian-German pants of convention. Eleanor Marx
remembered hearing from her parents that there was a time when Heine
came to Marx's house day in and day out, to read his verses to the young
couple and obtain their opinion of them. Heine and Marx would go through
a little poem of eight lines a countless number of times, continually
discussing one word or another and working away at it until everything
was perfectly smooth and no trace of the workshop and the file was left.
An infinite amount of patience was required for all this, because Heine
was morbidly sensitive to criticism. Sometimes he would come to Marx,
literally weeping because of an attack by some obscure reviewer. Marx's
only way of dealing with the situation was to send him to his wife,
whose wit and charm soon brought the desperate poet round to reason.
Heine did not always come seeking for help. Sometimes he brought it. One
example of this the Marx family had particular cause to remember.

When little Jenny Marx--she was born on May 1, 1844--was a baby of only
a few months, she was seized with violent cramps which seemed to be
threatening her life. Marx and his wife stood by the child in despair,
not knowing what to do. Heine arrived, looked at the child and said:
'The baby must be given a bath.' He prepared the bath himself, put the
child in it, and as Marx said, saved Jenny's life.

It was certainly more than a coincidence that Heine wrote _Germany: A
Winter's Tale_ during the year in which he and Marx were friends. He
sent parts of it to Marx from Hamburg for serialisation in the Paris
_Vorwärts_ before publication of the whole. He ended the accompanying
letter with the words: 'Farewell, dear friend, and excuse my terrible
scrawl. I cannot read over what I have written--but we need but few
tokens to understand each other.'

Heine's _Weaver's Song_ also appeared for the first time in _Vorwärts_,
and Marx wrote about the rising of the Silesian weavers in the same
paper. If in 1843, when he recognised as latent in the proletariat the
power which should carry his philosophy into practice, he regarded the
proletarian revolution as necessary and inevitable though for the time
lying in the indefinite future, he now believed he saw Communism
actually coming into being before his eyes. However he over-estimated
the desperate revolt of the Silesian weavers. They were not, as he then
believed, ahead of the English and French workers' movements in
class-consciousness and clarity of purpose. On the contrary, they were a
long way behind them. This was no rising of organised industrial workers
against the capitalists but wild rioting by desperate, impoverished
homeworkers, who smashed machines as they had done in England half a
century before. The philosophic foundation of Communism was manifestly
insufficient to grapple with the facts. So Marx threw all his energy
into the study of political economy. He read and made excerpts from the
French economists, B. Say, Frédéric Skarbek, Destutt de Tracy, P. le
Pesant de Boisguilbert, besides the great English economists, Adam
Smith, David Ricardo, J. R. M'Culloch and James Mill, whom he read in
French translations. He studied history, especially that of the French
Revolution. For a time he planned to write a history of the Convention.
And he sought and found contact with the German artisans, the real
proletariat, whom so far he had scarcely seen face to face, and with the
French secret societies, who were the real revolutionaries. For the time
being he was free from material worries. Former shareholders of the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ sent him a thousand thalers in March and in July
Georg Jung sent him eight hundred francs as compensation for the hundred
confiscated copies of the _Jahrbücher_.

## Chapter 07: The Communist Artisans of Paris

Several tens of thousands of Germans were living in Paris in the middle
of the forties. This large colony was divided into two sections having
practically no contact with one another. One consisted of writers and
artists and the other of artisans. Some trades were almost exclusively
in the hands of Germans. This applied particularly to the cobbler's
trade. In fact in Paris 'German' and 'cobbler' had almost become
synonymous.

Many German artisans went to Paris to improve themselves in the city
which dictated the fashions and the taste of Europe, and after a year
returned to Germany. Most of them learned but little French, and in
Paris they lived a life of their own. This also applied to the great
majority of those who had been driven from their native land by sheer
hunger and want. The latter class remained in France. Both classes alike
depressed the wages of French workers, and for a number of years French
and German workers were bitterly hostile. Fierce encounters often took
place in the Faubourg St. Antoine, which was then a working-class
district. French workers would attack the Germans and there would be
regular street battles.

The tension did not diminish until various revolutionary organisations
started their activities among the workers. Quite a number of political
_émigrés_ had gathered in Paris after the failure of the revolt of the
German 'Burschenschafter' in 1833. It appears from the dossiers of the
Paris Prefecture of Police that the first secret societies among German
_émigrés_ were formed in the middle of the thirties. At first they
consisted exclusively of intellectuals, but they soon attracted workers
too. Dr. Ewerbeck, a physician, one of the first to go among the workers
with revolutionary propaganda, describes how he once took Ludwig Börne
to a meeting. Börne listened to the speeches, looked at the faces about
him, and burst into tears of pleasure as he left. The revolutionary
intelligentsia had found its way to the people.

The German conspirators soon made contact with the French secret
societies. The most active, alert-minded German workers lived the life
of their French class-comrades. Soon there was no French secret society
without a German member. The Blanquist groups actually had special
German sections. This joint work did more and more to heal the breach
between the French and German workers, and thus enhanced the reputation
of the revolutionaries among their German fellow-countrymen.

After the Congress of Vienna Europe was full of secret societies. At
first they were most widespread in the Latin countries. The Carbonari
kept the ideals of the Jacobins alive during the years of reaction, and
the Blanquist leagues were their French form. As working-class influence
in these organisations increased--for workers tended more and more to
form the predominating majority of their members--Socialist ideas
gradually crept in. Socialist influence was predominant from the middle
of the thirties.

For a long time secret societies in Germany continued to be almost
exclusively composed of students and professional men. Out of the
'League of Exiles' there had arisen the 'League of the Just.' The League
of Exiles consisted originally of _émigré_ intellectuals and it had
increased its numbers by admitting workers to its ranks. In this society
intellectuals and workers did not hold together as they managed, though
not without occasional friction, to do in others. The workers in the
League of Exiles cut themselves adrift from the intellectuals and formed
a new society of their own--the League of the Just. Hardly any educated
men belonged to it. The League of the Just entirely dissociated
themselves from the radical literary groups, with whom they wished to
have nothing whatever to do. They regarded the 'humanists' with the
greatest possible suspicion. Weitling remarked that their humanism did
not come from _homo_, a man, but from Humaine, which was the name of one
of the leading Paris tailors. All humanists had to have a suit from
Humaine, Weitling maintained. The League of the Just, the members of
which belonged almost exclusively to the working classes, very soon
started adopting Socialist ideas. After the failure of the rising
attempted by the Paris Blanquists in 1839, in which members of the
League of the Just took part, this process was completed. In London,
whither they fled, Socialist intellectuals lived like proletarians.
Schapper, their leader, a former student of forestry, had worked as a
compositor in Paris.

The spiritual leader of the League of the Just was Wilhelm Weitling.
Weitling was born in Magdeburg in 1808. He was the illegitimate son of a
French officer and a German laundress. Being 'tainted' for that reason,
driven from pillar to post, often subjected to humiliation, this young,
brooding, talented and gifted tailor's assistant had become a rebel
early. He wrote _Humanity as It Is and as It Ought to be_ in 1835, and
in 1842 there appeared his _Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom_, an
important landmark in the history of criticism of contemporary society.
It pointed to a future society to be founded on the law of nature and
love. In 1841 he fled from France to Switzerland and issued a periodical
called _Der Hülferuf der Deutschen Jugend_ from Geneva. Seven hundred of
the thousand copies that were printed went to France, according to the
Paris police estimate.

To Marx Weitling was the ideologist of the first, still crude
proletarian movement which culminated in the Silesian weavers' rising.
In the article in _Vorwärts_ already mentioned Marx wrote: 'Where could
the bourgeoisie--including the scribes and the philosophers--boast of a
work like Weitling's _Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom_ regarding the
emancipation of the bourgeoisie--political emancipation, that is to say?
If one compares the jejune, timid mediocrity of German political
literature with the unbounded brilliance of the literary _début_ of the
German worker; if one compares the gigantic footprints of the
proletariat, still in its infancy, with the diminutive political traces
left by the German bourgeoisie, one can prophecy a truly athletic,
powerful form for the German Cinderella.'

Propaganda by the Communist workers was now intensified. The aim was no
longer merely that of holding a small group of revolutionaries together.
The object now was to win over all similarly minded men. In the process
their propaganda came up against revolutionary under-currents with
tendencies similar to their own. In many places in Germany, particularly
in the Harz Mountains and in Silesia, a number of Christian sects had
managed, in spite of all persecution, to keep together and continue
teaching a crude kind of Primitive Christian Communism. Emigrants to
America were constantly founding anabaptist groups, which linked up with
those who stayed at home. Thoughtful, brooding Silesian and Saxon
working men, having no connection with one another, relying entirely
upon themselves, independently worked out Communistic Utopias, founded
upon the Bible, the only book they knew. Such knowledge of them as
occasionally came the way of the educated world caused either
irritation, amusement or contempt. The idea of the communalisation of
women arose among the anabaptists. 'The whole bourgeois world denounces
us for wishing to introduce the communalisation of women,' is a phrase
in the Communist Manifesto. Georg Weerth, a friend of Marx's and a
colleague of his on the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_, wrote this comic
poem:

>They are also minded to communalise women; they want to abolish
marriage, so everybody in the future may go to bed with one another _ad
libitum_; Tartars and Mongols with Greek women; Cheruscans with yellow
Chinese; polar bears with Swedish nightingales, Turkish girls and
Iroquois; oil-scented Samoyed women shall bed with Britons and Romans,
and swarthy flat-nosed Kaffirs with alabaster-white _grisettes_. Yes, we
shall alter the whole world under this modern management, but the most
beautiful women will be reserved for the editorial staff of the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ [^06].

The influence on the secret societies of the Primitive Christian
Communism of the various sects also came out in phraseology. In the
League of Exiles a unit, following the practice of the Carbonari was
called a 'hut' and the members were 'comrades.' In the forties the
League of the Just used the terms 'communes' and 'brothers.' In
Switzerland members met for common love feasts, like the apostles and
disciples of Christ. All these undercurrents and more were mingled in
the Communism of the German artisans. The ideals of primitive
Christianity jostled with the ideas of Saint-Simon, Owen and Fourier.
The Communism of these men, as can be well imagined from the situation
in which they found themselves, was essentially a longing for a return
to a transfigured pre-capitalist world rather than the forward-looking
will of a new class for a new world of which they were to be the
expression. The idea that industry itself creates the conditions for and
the possibility of a social revolution, and that the proletariat has a
historical task to fulfil was remote from the minds of the German
artisan Communists. They could not conceive of the evils under which
they suffered as being other than the consequences of the machinations
of bad and egoistical men.

This 'utterly crude and unintelligent Communism' was repudiated by Marx.
He saw 'its central motive as want.' He rebelled against the 'bestial'
idea of the communalisation of women. This kind of Communism 'denied
personality' and 'physical possessions were the only aim of its life and
being.' The elements in it that Marx valued were its criticism of the
existing state of things and its will to overthrow it by force. The
French secret societies with whom the German Communist associations were
in touch were animated by the same revolutionary ardour. Since the time
of the French Revolution, from Gracchus Babeuf through Buonarotti to
Blanqui, they had remained faithful, though in the most multifarious
forms, to the single idea of a violent popular revolution. They believed
that the people could not be freed from their tormentors and exploiters
and that ultimately justice could not be obtained for the poor unless
they rose and shattered their enemies to pieces.

The identity of the leaders of the secret societies of French workers
with whom Marx came into personal contact has not yet been established.
He was introduced to the German Communist group by Dr. Ewerbeck.
According to reports of Prussian secret agents, with whom Paris swarmed
in the summer of 1844, Marx was a frequent guest at workers' meetings at
the Barrière du Trône, Rue de Vincennes. He did not join either the
League of the Just or any of the French secret societies. The gulf
between him and them was too great. As men and fighters Marx valued them
highly. In 1844 he wrote that 'at the Communist workers' meetings
brotherhood is no phrase but a reality, and a true spirit of nobility is
reflected in the faces of these men hardened by labour.' He admired in
them 'their studiousness, their thirst for knowledge, their moral
energy, their restless urge for development.'

Marx had no easy task in gaining the ear of the Communist workers. Most
of those who had ever made contact with bourgeois revolutionary writers
regretted the experience. When Weitling's friends were collecting money
to pay for printing his works, Ewerbeck asked Ruge for a contribution,
and Ruge angrily refused. He was filled with righteous indignation at
the German Communists, 'who wanted to make all men free by making them
workers and proposed replacing private property by communal property and
the just division of wealth, themselves laying all stress on property
and money in particular.' Marx did not meet Weitling personally until
the summer of 1845.

Besides the French and German Communists with whom he was in touch, Marx
kept in contact with the French Socialists. He did not share their faith
in the possibility of transforming bourgeois society by gradual reforms,
belief in which separated them from the Communists. He was unable to
share their hope of persuading the possessing classes by the force of
argument to search into their hearts and turn over a new leaf. But from
Socialist criticism of existing society he learned a great deal. The
Communists _a priori_ rejected this world as an evil world of evil men.
The hatred that filled them sharpened their sight for social
contradictions and gave their criticism a moral force which made that of
the Socialists seem feeble in comparison. But the Socialists did not
just see the division of the world into rich and poor. They observed the
rich growing richer and the poor growing poorer, they watched a
historical process developing before their eyes, the downfall of the
middle strata, the growing accumulation of capital. They stood in the
midst of their times and sought to understand them. The Communists who
followed Weitling were citizens of the kingdom of Utopia on leave.

In July, 1844, Marx met Proudhon, with whom he kept in contact as long
as he remained in Paris. He had long discussions with him, which often
lasted all night long, and 'infected' him with Hegelianism. Marx did not
meet Louis Blanc till towards the end of his stay in Paris. Marx said in
1853 that they formed 'a kind of friendship, if not a specially close
one.'

After the collapse of the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ Marx no
longer had a mouthpiece through which he could work, although in Paris
it was more important to have one than ever. 'The German Communists,' a
report of the Ministry of the Interior stated, 'have made Paris their
headquarters and the centre from which all their intrigues radiate. It
is through France that they hope to act. Outside the kingdom of France
there is no country, except, perhaps, England, where they dare affront
the severity of the laws and the magistrates with such audacity [^07].'

The possibility of creating a popular paper which should be intelligible
to the German Communist workers presented itself in _Vorwärts_. The
founder of this weekly was Heinrich Börnstein, who was a translator and
an acute business man. The money for founding the paper had been put up
by Meyerbeer, the composer. Like the few other German papers that had
been established in Paris before it, it met with only meagre success as
long as it was more concerned with tittle-tattle and theatrical gossip
than with the questions that agitated the minds of all the Germans in
Paris who read a newspaper at all. But Börnstein could also write for
the Left. On July 1, 1844, he appointed Bernays editor of _Vorwärts_.
Bernays was an exceptionally witty and nimble-minded man and had
contributed to the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_.

All _émigrés_ of all political leanings started by making use of the
opportunity of writing for _Vorwärts_. They did so less out of
enthusiasm for the paper than because they had no choice. Börnstein
writes in his reminiscences:

'There soon gathered round _Vorwärts_ a group of writers such as no
other paper anywhere could boast, particularly in Germany, where the
state of the Press at that time, before the lively assault of 1848, was
appalling. Besides Bernays and myself, who were the editors, there wrote
for the paper Arnold Ruge, Karl Marx, Heinrich Heine, Georg Herwegh,
Bakunin, Georg Weerth, G. Weber, Fr. Engels, Dr. Ewerbeck and H.
Bürgers. It can well be imagined that these men wrote not only very
brilliantly but very radically. _Vorwärts_, as the only uncensored
radical paper appearing in the German language anywhere in Europe, soon
had a new appeal and increased in circulation. (Börnstein omits to
mention that he was the only one to whom it mattered.)

'I still remember with pleasure,' he continued, 'the editorial
conferences, which often took place weekly, at which all these men
gathered in my office. I had rented the first floor of the corner house
of the Rue des Moulins and the Rue Neuve des Petits Champs. ... From
twelve to fourteen men used to gather for these editorial conferences.
Some would sit on the bed or on the trunks, others would stand or walk
about. They would all smoke terrifically, and argue with great passion
and excitement. It was impossible to open the windows, because a crowd
would immediately have gathered in the street to find out the cause of
the violent uproar, and very soon the room was concealed in such a thick
cloud of tobacco-smoke that it was impossible for a newcomer to
recognise anybody present. In the end we ourselves could not even
recognise each other.'

Marx's first article in _Vorwärts_ appeared on August 7, and from the
middle of August onwards his influence on the paper steadily increased.
_Vorwärts_'s attacks on Frederick William IV, as the most exalted and
most assailable representative of reaction, became more and more
violent. Heine wrote his verses about the 'new Alexander.' The Prussian
Government, angry but powerless in the matter, did not decide to
intervene in Paris until _Vorwärts_ extolled Burgomaster Tscech's
attempted assassination of the king. Ernst Dronke describes 'how the
dicta of the Press went home in Prussian official circles in spite of
their pretended bureaucratic indifference. At a meeting to commemorate
the introduction of municipal government in Berlin the Minister, Arnim,
could actually not refrain from mentioning with abhorrence the praises
of regicide which are understood here to have appeared in _Vorwärts_,
the forbidden Paris paper.' The language of _Vorwärts_ had indeed been
very strong. An attempt on the life of a German king, it stated, was
Germany's only argument against German absolutism. All others had
failed. Absolutism lost its divine infallibility as soon as it was shown
to be assailable. Its assailability must be shown on the person of a
German king, because neither the fate of Charles I nor of Louis XVI nor
the many attempts on the life of Louis Philippe had taught Germany its
lesson.

The draconic penalties for introducing the 'dregs' of German journalism
no longer sufficed. So the king of Prussia appealed to the professional
solidarity of kings. The ambassador, von Arnim, made representations to
the Prime Minister, Guizot. Guizot was not particularly inclined to do
what Arnim asked. True, he had Bernays brought up before a summary court
and sentenced to two months' imprisonment and a fine of three hundred
francs because _Vorwärts_ had not paid the fee for the prescribed
licence. A charge based on the anti-Prussian article would, however,
have to be tried by a jury. This prospect did not suit the ambassador,
and he declined it. Such a trial would in effect become a political
demonstration, and the accused, as in so many trials at that time, would
have too good an opportunity of giving the widest publicity to their
propaganda. The Prussian Government would attach no value whatever to a
trial of that kind. So Frederick William IV sent Alexander von Humboldt
to Louis Philippe as a special envoy. On January 7, 1845, Humboldt
presented His Majesty with 'a beautiful porcelain vase' together with a
long letter from his master, Frederick William IV. Louis Philippe was
delighted at the cordial greetings of the Prussian king. He assured
Humboldt of his firm determination to rid Paris of the German atheists.

The Prussian Government had got what it wanted. Its secret agents had
been on Marx's tracks for a whole year. His name appears constantly in
their reports. They trailed him even into modest working-class taverns.
They denounced him as the leading spirit behind _Vorwärts_ and his name
headed the list of evil-doers whose expulsion Prussia demanded.

On January 11 the Minister of the Interior ordered the expulsion of
Marx, Ruge, Börnstein and Bernays. Their presence in the country, the
so-called reasons adduced for the decision stated, was calculated to
disturb public order and security. They must leave Paris within
twenty-four hours of receiving the order and must leave France within as
short a time as possible. Their return was forbidden under threat of
penalties.

The expulsion order was not unconditional. Its recipients were
discreetly given to understand that they could remain if they gave an
undertaking to refrain from agitating against friendly governments in
the Press. To be sure, this hint was given them after the Liberal Press
had violently protested against this act of French servility to Prussia
and after the Government step had been condemned in the Chamber even by
many of its own supporters.

Bernays was in prison. Börnstein protested his political innocuousness
and was allowed to stay. He gave his promise to suspend _Vorwärts_ all
the more readily because he found a new occupation. He entered the
service of the French political police. Ruge moved heaven and earth,
proved that he had nothing whatever to do with the _Vorwärts_ people,
and that, moreover, he was a subject of Saxony. He remained in Paris
too. Marx was the only one to leave.

Heinrich Bürgers, in his _Reminiscences of Ferdinand Freiligrath_,
writes:

'In Lent of the year 1845 two young men might have been seen travelling
towards the Belgian frontier in the _Messagerie_, on their way to
Brussels. They were alone in the small coach and beguiled the tedious
journey through Picardy with lively conversation, and an occasional song
which the younger of the two struck up in order to dispel the
reflections which the other tried in vain to master. Their journey was
not entirely voluntary, although it was made of their own choice. Karl
Marx--for he was the elder of the two young German travellers --had been
served with an expulsion order by the Paris Prefecture of Police. ... It
conflicted with his pride to place himself voluntarily under police
supervision, and he decided rather to transplant himself to Brussels,
leaving his wife and child behind. He took me with him as his
travelling-companion, as the punishment inflicted on the man who was my
friend and faithful guide in my studies had disgusted me with the
prospect of staying any longer in the French capital.'

Marx arrived in Brussels on February 5, 1845. His wife followed him soon
afterwards with his daughter, who was barely one year old.

## Chapter 08: The Life-long Friend

In the fifteen months of Marx's stay in Paris he had met Proudhon and
Louis Blanc, Heine and Herwegh, German Communists and members of French
secret societies. Some of them crossed his path again, few encouraged
him, he remained friendly with none. His meeting with Friedrich Engels
was decisive. From October, 1844, until he closed his eyes for the last
time, in victory and defeat, in the storm of revolution and the misery
of exile, always struggling and always fighting, he trod by Engels's
side and Engels trod by his, along the same path towards the same goal.

Friedrich Engels was born in Barmen on November 28, 1820, the eldest son
of Friedrich Engels, senior. His father was a merchant. Engels's great
grandfather, Johann Caspar Engels, had, on very slender capital, started
a lace factory, connected with a bleaching works and a ribbon
manufactory, which had developed by the time of his death into one of
the biggest undertakings in the Wuppertal and went on expanding under
the energetic management of his sons and grandsons. When the brothers
parted in 1837, Friedrich Engels senior established the cotton-spinning
firm of Engels and Ermen in Manchester. Later it extended to Barmen. The
firm survives to this day.

The environment in which Engels grew up was as different as it could
possibly have been from that in which Marx passed his boyhood years. In
the Wuppertal bigotry reigned in its most repulsive form--a narrow,
gloomy, moping 'fundamentalism' which wanted all the world, like it, to
go about in sackcloth and ashes, thinking everlastingly of its sins. No
songs other than hymns must be sung, no books other than devotional
books must be read. Science and art were considered vanities of the Evil
One. When a boy at Engels's school asked one of the masters who Goethe
was, the peevish and reproachful answer was that he was 'an atheist.' At
the age of eighteen Engels described his native town as the 'Zion of
obscurantism.'

Engels's mother had preserved a cheerful disposition from her happy
childhood in Berlin, but his father not only adhered to the most
rigorous observances of the devout but brought up his children in strict
accord with the oppressive spirit of the prevalent bigotry. Engels was
fond of his mother but became alienated from his father at an early age
and actually hated him.

Trier was a beautiful old town, living on the cultivation of vine, Bonn
was a friendly conglomeration of students, landladies and artisans, and
even in Berlin Marx saw practically nothing of modern industry. Engels
grew up among factories and slums. From his earliest years he was
surrounded by poverty and distress, sick children who 'breathed more
smoke and dust than oxygen' into their lungs in the squalid rooms in
which they lived, men, women and children who worked at the loom for
fourteen or sixteen hours a day, half-starved, consumptive, their only
friend the brandy-bottle which occasionally allowed them to forget the
dreariness of their existence; all the horror of early capitalism, which
celebrated its maddest orgies in this part of the Rhineland.

The lively boy rebelled against the grim existence that surrounded him.
When his father found the 'otherwise excellent youth' reading chivalrous
romances instead of pious books in spite of severe punishments, he
reproached him for flippancy and lack of principle. There was a small
group of young poets at his school, and young Engels wrote poems
entirely in the manner of Ferdinand Freiligrath, who was then a clerk in
the counting-house of a Barmen business house, writing his verses
'between the journal and the ledger.' His poems sung of the free life of
the sons of the desert, of lion hunts and Moorish kings. Revulsion from
Europe and the present was the first feeble, passive sign of revolt
against the Europe of the time.

As long as Engels lived in Barmen only faint echoes of the noises of the
battle without came to his ears. The bigots of his native town barely
knew the names of Börne, Heine, and the poets of Young Germany, and they
would have been revolted at the idea of one of their pious community
soiling himself by reading such heathenish and sinful stuff. They
ignored the movements abroad among the people, and took no interest in
politics, literature or philosophy. Engels may have heard older
schoolfellows of his talking when they came back to Barmen for their
holidays, and this could not have failed to give wings to his longing to
escape from his hateful, cramped surroundings. But he did not escape
yet.

Engels left school a year early. He was an excellent pupil. He learned
easily and quickly, and was particularly good at languages. His father's
reason for abandoning the idea of making his son a lawyer and making a
merchant of him instead is unknown. He took him first into his own
business, and a year later sent him to Bremen for wider experience. He
took care that the youth should be preserved from temptation when away
from home. The export house young Engels entered was on excellent terms
with Engels and Ermen, and the young man lived in the family of a pastor
besides. Bremen was another stronghold of bigotry like his native town.

It was also a trade centre, with relations to the outside world that
were far different from those of the Wuppertal. In spite of the
patriarchal nature of the state that set its imprint upon it, it allowed
its subjects incomparably more freedom than was allowed by the timid
bureaucracy of Prussia. The censorship was milder, and allowed many
things to pass that in Prussia would have been strictly forbidden. A new
world was suddenly unfolded before young Engels's eyes. It attracted and
repelled him, he sought it and then fled from it, it shook him to the
foundations of his being.

The writings of Börne made him a political radical. The step he thus
took over the boundaries imposed upon him seems to have been an easy
one. His breach with the past was no great wrench. The latently defiant
poetry of his school-days had prepared the way. Literature meant a great
deal to him, and his schoolboy poems led him straight to the poets of
the time, who gave expression to the vague longings for freedom that
possessed him. Through them he was guided a step farther. With Börne he
reached the stage of development necessary for open-minded young men of
the time.

His struggle with religion was infinitely harder. There is no shred of
evidence to show that the young Marx had any struggle with religion
whatever. But Engels only rid himself of the faith of his youth and
childhood after the most harassing and agonising torments. The doctrine
of predestination was the corner-stone of the paternal faith. Whom God
had chosen would be saved, whom He had damned was damned for all
eternity. Man had no power in himself to do good, his fate was
predetermined by God, Whose grace was everything. The inhuman rigour of
this doctrine repelled Engels early, but its complement, the forbidding
of fatalistic resignation, the necessity of faith in one's own
salvation, and of everlastingly struggling anew for assurance of it,
steeped his acts and thoughts in piety. Though he rejected as fanatical
exaggeration a good deal of what he had been taught to believe was
essential, he was still deeply religious when he went to Bremen. The
first and decisive blow that undermined his faith was Strauss's _Life of
Jesus_. If the Bible contained but one single contradiction--and Strauss
laid bare an abundance of contradictions--his faith in it was shattered.
The very rigour with which the bigots insisted on the literal verbal
inspiration of the Bible threatened the whole structure if but this one
column fell. Young Engels fought with all his might against the doubts
that assailed him on every side. 'I pray daily,' he wrote to a friend.
'I pray for the truth practically all day long. I began to do so as soon
as I began to doubt, and yet I do not return to the faith that you have.
... Tears come into my eyes as I write. I am moved to the depths of my
being, yet I feel that I shall not be lost, that I shall come to God,
for Whom I yearn with my whole heart. That, surely, bears witness to the
Holy Spirit, by which I live and die, even if the opposite is ten
thousand times stated in the Bible.'

He did not return to the fold. Schleiermacher kept his religious
feelings alive for some time yet. But, once entered upon the path, he
trod it with characteristic firmness and unflinching honesty with
himself. From religion he went to philosophy. He became an Hegelian at
the age of twenty and did not stop at that. In October, 1841, when he
went to Berlin to serve a year as volunteer in the Artillery Guards, he
was an Hegelian of the extreme Left Wing. A certain tendency to occupy
himself with religious historical problems survived from his religious
youth, besides, apparently, a spirit of intolerance that he preserved to
his old age. Marx has often been reproached for obstinacy, but Engels
was worse by far. He once told Eduard Bernstein that though everybody
talked of Marx's intolerance when Marx presided at the General Council
of the International even the most controversial questions seldom led to
open conflict; when he was in the chair things were quite different.

Engels soon entered the group of the 'Freien' in Berlin, with whom he
took part in the controversy with Schelling, against whom he wrote two
able pamphlets. He wrote for the _Rheinische Zeitung_ and other radical
journals. His articles were not worse and most of them were better,
wittier and more lucid than those of the other Berlin Young Hegelians.
When he returned to Barmen in the autumn of 1842 he could lay claim to
occupying quite a respectable position in the world of letters at an
age--twenty-two--at which the young Marx had not yet published a line.

Out of regard for his family he had so far written either anonymously or
under the pseudonym of Friedrich Oswald. But the mentality of his
'disappointing' son was not unknown to his father, nor did the former
make any attempt to conceal it. In a report on Engels's formative years
which dates from 1852 an excellently informed Danish police agent states
that 'the family council decided to withdraw him from the enlightening
atmosphere of Germany and send him to the factory in Manchester. His
father told him that either he must go to England and become a decent
business man or he would entirely withdraw all paternal support. After
the completion of his military service as a Prussian subject Engels
found it more prudent to give in and go to Manchester. This was in the
late autumn of 1842.'

Engels chose to travel via Cologne, in order to seize the opportunity of
meeting the staff of the _Rheinische Zeitung_. His first meeting with
Marx passed off coolly. Marx was just about to break with the Berlin
'Freien' and saw in Engels one of their allies. Engels on his side had
been prejudiced against Marx by Bruno Bauer. However, they agreed to the
extent that it was arranged that Engels should continue to contribute to
the _Rheinische Zeitung_ from England. Engels sent his first dispatch,
on the internal crisis in England, on November 30, almost as soon as he
arrived in London.

Engels had a special gift for rapidly finding his way about on foreign
soil, and in his young years, unlike Marx, he was always quick to form a
judgment. But however premature the views that he put forward might
seem--a young man in a country for the first time attempting to unravel
its innermost structure after two days on its soil--they were less
premature than they appeared. Engels had studied English affairs 'on the
quiet' in Germany, the outward reason being that he was going to
Manchester. But there were other weighty reasons as well.

Engels became a Communist in the autumn of 1842. In this he did not
differ from other Left Hegelians, who, proceeding from religious
criticism, had come over to Feuerbach and recognised in Communism the
only possibility of realising the generic notion of man. Engels had met
Moses Hess and been strongly influenced by his conception of world
history, according to which the Germans were to carry out the
philosophical revolution, the French the political revolution and the
English the economic revolution. In a letter Hess wrote Berthold
Auerbach in October, 1842, he told him he had been discussing questions
of the day with Engels and that Engels had left him a most enthusiastic
Communist.

Like Marx, Engels came to Communism by way of contemporary German
philosophy. But Engels's Communism was fed from other than philosophical
sources. The conclusions of the philosophers could only be put into
practice by means of the abolition of private property, and Communism
alone could free mankind from barbarism. Marx reached this conclusion as
the result of a process of intellectual development. Engels crossed the
't's' and dotted the 'i's' of his theory from the evidence of his
senses. Engels knew the state of the proletariat at first hand--'the
status which represents the complete loss of humanity.' All he needed
for the whole extent of the dehumanisation it involved to become plain
to him was to re-tread the way to it, this time by the high road of
philosophy. For him the proletariat was not just a philosophical
instrument, but meant the proletariat of the Wuppertal, the workers in
his father's factory. He only had to look about him to see
dehumanisation in its grossest form. He had known for a long time that
the spinners in his father's factory in Manchester lived the same
brutalised existence as their class-comrades in suffering in Germany.
Their brutalisation was the consequence of an economic system in which
he lived and which he knew from the inside. Philosophy led him, like
Marx, into the field of economics. He had this advantage over Marx, that
he could study economic realities while living in their midst.

Engels passed nearly two years in Manchester, and they bore rich fruit.
How well he applied himself to the mastery of economics is demonstrated
in the _Umrisse zur Kritik der Nationalökonomie_, his 'brilliant
sketches' in the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_. Engels set out to
demonstrate all economic categories as aspects of private property and
all contradictions of bourgeois economy as necessary consequences of
private property. Expressed in philosophical language and often only by
implication, the work contains the foundations of scientific Socialism.
The much-extolled system of free competition, it argues, leads to an
ever more precipitous breach between capitalists and workers. While
political economists were working out their theories about the balancing
of supply and demand and the impossibility of over-production, reality
answered them with trade crises which returned as regularly as comets
and brought more suffering and mischief in their wake than the great
plagues of old. While the reign of private enterprise lasted, crises
would recur; each one more universal, therefore more severe than the
last, impoverishing a greater number of small capitalists and increasing
in ever greater proportion the multitude of the class living on bare
work alone. Thus private property produced the revolution by itself.

The more deeply Engels penetrated the English social and economic
scheme, the clearer it became to him that the English were not to be won
over by the categories he had relied on up to now. However persistently
he tried to drum into the heads of the 'obdurate Britons' what was taken
for granted in Germany, namely that 'so-called material interests never
appear in history as self-sufficient motives, but that they
nevertheless, whether consciously or unconsciously, invariably provide
the guiding strings of historical progress,' he did not succeed. He was
forced reluctantly to resign himself to the conclusion that in England
only the conflict of material interests was recognised. In England
interests and not principles would begin and carry out the revolution.
But this applied to England only. To Germany it did not apply. 'The
Germans,' he tried to explain to his English friends--in English--at the
end of 1843, 'are a very disinterested nation; if in Germany principle
comes into collision with interest, principle will almost always silence
the claims of interest. The same love of abstract principle, the same
disregard of reality and self-interest which have brought the Germans to
a state of political nonentity, these very same qualities guarantee the
success of philosophical Communism in that country.'

But now he was in England, a country which ignored general principles,
it became his task to base his Communism on a foundation of material
interests. Engels found a great workers' movement, that of the
Chartists, in progress. Its aims were purely political, but Engels did
not doubt for a moment that it was bound to become Socialist, and that
within a short time the Chartists would see that private property was
the root of all the evils from which the working classes were suffering.
After the abortive attempt at a general strike to enforce universal
suffrage, they must confine themselves for the time being to propaganda.
Engels was a close observer of the first great independent workers'
movement to take place in a European country. It was something for which
not even the preliminaries were to hand in Germany. He got into touch
with the Chartists through James Leach, a Manchester workman, and in
Leeds he established a friendship with George Julian Harney, editor of
the Chartist paper, _The Northern Star_.

He admired the practice of the Chartists, but, as a Communist and an
atheist, he was closer in theoretical outlook to Robert Owen. He
heartily approved of Owen's struggle against the marriage tie, religion
and private property, which Owen regarded as the three irrational,
arch-egoistical institutions from which humanity must be freed in order
that a new world founded on reason and solidarity might be built. He
made contact with the Owenites, and in their paper, _The New Moral
World_, he described to the English, who had scarcely heard of it, the
growth and development of Continental Communism.

Engels lived at the heart of the English cotton industry, the most
modern industry in the most modern industrial country of Europe. In
spite of the 'tremendous advances' made in recent years, his native
Wuppertal could not compare with it. He found that just where
industrialism was flourishing most exuberantly the proletariat was
plunged into the greatest distress. For month after month Engels roamed
through the working-class districts of Manchester, which he soon got to
know better than most of its inhabitants. Though he was familiar with
the plight of the German spinners and weavers, he was profoundly moved
by what he saw. His book on the state of the working-classes in England,
based on his observations and extended researches and written in the
winter of 1844-5, is the most flaming indictment of early capitalism
ever written.

At the end of August, 1844, Engels travelled back to Germany by way of
Paris, and met Marx for the second time. In the bare ten days they spent
together 'they established their agreement in all theoretical fields,
and their joint work dates from that time.'

Engels brought Marx more than he received from him. Both had come
independently to Communism, both had recognised in the proletariat the
class which, product and negation of private property at the same time,
was to abolish private property. But Engels had an incomparably deeper
insight into the economics of bourgeois society. Living in economically
advanced England, he had anticipated Marx in understanding its
dialectic, its inherent tendency to produce contradictions and thus its
own downfall. He had come face-to-face with a real workers' movement,
met the proletariat in its real form. In Manchester 'he had had his nose
rubbed into the fact that economic realities, which in history written
hitherto had played either no rôle at all, or at best an insignificant
one, were, at any rate in the modern world, a decisive historical force;
that economic realities provide the foundation from which present-day
class-conflicts arose; that in those countries where, thanks to big
industry, those conflicts had fully developed, for example in England,
they were the foundation on which political parties were built and party
struggles fought and thus of the whole of political history. Marx had
not only come to the same conclusion but in the _Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher_ had arrived at the generalisation that it was not the state
that conditioned and regulated civil society but civil society that
conditioned and regulated the state; and that therefore politics and
their history were to be explained by economic conditions and their
development 'and not the reverse.'

When Engels wrote these phrases in 1885 he represented his and Marx's
insight into historical reality as more mature than it really was at the
end of 1844. It was not till after their meeting and the beginning of
their co-operation that these ideas were definitely formulated. Engels
helped Marx to make concrete his quite abstract ideas concerning the
relations of state and society; and Marx helped Engels to understand
that the dependence of politics on material interests, class interests,
a dependence the validity of which Engels had hitherto only been willing
to admit as applying to England, was in reality valid for all countries
alike. But he still maintained, when he once more trod the soil of his
native land, that Germany could only be won for Communism by the insight
of educated people.

Before the two friends parted they decided to cross swords with Bruno
Bauer for the last time. Engels wrote his contribution to the planned
pamphlet while still in Paris. It filled about twenty pages. Marx
harried and pursued 'critical criticism' into its last lurking-place,
put such enthusiasm into his attack on the jugglers with ideas that he
almost appeared to be doing it for the sheer exhilaration of the thing,
and to the surprise of Engels, who failed to see that their opponents'
nullity merited such profusion, filled more than three hundred pages.
The book appeared in February, 1845, under the title of _The Holy
Family_ (by which was meant the three brothers, Bruno, Edgar and Egbert
Bauer) _or the Critique of Critical Criticism_. It did not attract much
attention. Bruno Bauer and his followers had reduced themselves to
absurdity and nobody took any more notice of them.

Engels found the Germany he returned to very different from the Germany
he had left. Increasing impoverishment of wide masses of artisans and
home-workers; the rapid spread of pauperisation, of which hitherto
people had only read in sentimental French novels and pamphlets which
were not taken very seriously; the rising of the weavers, the first
movements among the industrial workers, all entirely new features in the
picture that educated society, leading its own life, had formed of
Germany, troubled and disturbed the bourgeoisie and forced them to face
the problems that had arisen. A wave of strikes passed over Germany in
1844. Workers in the calico factories in Berlin rose in insurrection,
railway workers in Westphalia did the same. There were strikes in
Saxony, Hamburg and elsewhere. People discovered that there was
something rumbling down below, something with a menace. That something
was millions of people, of whom at most the police had taken notice of
before. What had been discovered was the existence of the proletariat.

Pamphlets appeared giving recipes for overcoming 'the plague of the
nineteenth century.' Bettina von Arnim wrote _This Book Belongs to the
King_, in which she ruthlessly exposed the distress in the so-called
Vogtland, near Berlin. Philanthropical societies were formed, with the
support of Frederick William IV, 'societies for the good of the working
classes.' In East Prussia they remained what their founders intended
them to be, but in the western provinces Socialist-minded intellectuals
soon gained an entry to them. At Elberfeld, Barmen, Cologne, Bielefeld,
and elsewhere these societies became Socialist propaganda centres,
education centres of and for the workers. It became necessary to
dissolve the local Berlin society as early as the autumn of 1844.

The first German Socialist papers appeared at the same time--the
_Westfälische Dampfboot_ at Bielefeld, the _Gesellschaftsspiegel_ at
Elberfeld, the _Sprecher_ at Hamm and others. The word 'Socialist'
should not be understood in the sense in which it is understood to-day.
Socialism meant sympathy with the suffering masses, indignation at
injustice, appeal to man's nobler instincts, and belief in a better
world. The descriptions of the lives of the workers which those
newspapers contained are still valuable to-day. They shook the
conscience of all whose sensibilities had not grown blunted. A Communist
at that time was not much more than a resolute opponent of poverty,
hunger and mass-distress.

Former contributors to the _Rheinische Zeitung_, like Moses Hess and
D'Ester, were prominent among these Socialists-by-compassion. Engels
flung himself enthusiastically into propaganda work. The way to the
workers was closed to him. The authorities would not have allowed him to
agitate for Communism among the workers. At the best he could only have
spoken to very small groups. But for the time being Engels did not
believe that kind of work to be so very necessary. He still pinned all
his hopes to principles to which the intellectuals must be won over
first.

In the winter of 1844-5 the victory of Communism seemed to him to be
only a question of a few years, possibly even months. He wrote to Marx
that the propaganda being carried out in Cologne was tremendous; there
were marvellous fellows at Düsseldorf, there were Communists at
Elberfeld and at Barmen even the commissary of police was a Communist.
If they could only get to work directly on the people, they would soon
be on top. Everyone, from rich to poor, came to the Communist meetings.
Nor were their activities without success. Whichever way you turned you
stumbled upon a Communist. 'Communism is the sole subject of
conversation, and new adherents come to us every day. In the Wuppertal
Communism is a reality, almost actually a power in the land.' The whole
unreality of the movement is revealed by the phrase: 'The proletariat is
busy, we do not know what with, and we can hardly know.'

Engel's position at Barmen gradually became untenable. The police
started taking a very definite interest in his activities, and he had to
reckon with the prospect of being arrested, possibly by the Communist
commissary of police himself. Life with his family was 'a real dog's
life.' All his father's religious fanaticism was re-awakened and Engel's
emergence as a Communist stirred him to 'a glowing bourgeois fanaticism'
besides. 'You have no idea of the maliciousness of the Christian heresy
hunt after my soul,' he wrote to Marx in Brussels. 'My father only needs
to discover the existence of the _Critical Criticism_ book to turn me
out of the house altogether. ... It is no longer to be borne.'

Marx's insistence on his friend's joining him in Brussels so that they
might continue their common labours became more urgent than ever. At the
beginning of April, 1845, Engels went to Brussels.

## Chapter 09: Clarification

'After we had passed a night in Brussels, almost the first thing Marx
said to me \[H. Bürgers\] in the morning was: "We must go and see
Freiligrath to-day. He is here, and I must make good the wrong the
_Rheinische Zeitung_ did him before he stood 'on the party battlements.'
His confession of faith has wiped out everything."'

Ferdinand Freiligrath stood out by a head from the teeming multitude of
German poets. His exotic poems, of equal rank to their prototype, Victor
Hugo's _Les Orientales_, glowed with passion, luxuriated in wild
visions, and were technically flawless. The young people of Germany
received them with enthusiasm. The effect they had on the young Engels
has already been noted. About the year 1840 Freiligrath was the most
popular poet in Germany. Devoted to the ideal of 'pure art,' he held it
to be unworthy of the poet to descend into the contemporary arena. His
verses:

>The poet stands on a high watch-tower  
>As on the party battlements--[^08]

were later quoted to satiety. He had no objection to accepting the
pension of three hundred thalers which Frederick William IV granted him
in 1842 at the suggestion of Alexander von Humboldt. He wrote an open
letter attacking Herwegh for wishing to bring poetry down to the level
of the handmaiden of politics. His ambition seemed to be to become the
court poet of Berlin.

This brought the _Rheinische Zeitung_ down on him with a vengeance. It
mercilessly derided the 'pensioned poet.' In Marx's opinion Freiligrath
was 'an enemy of Herwegh's and of freedom.'

A year later Freiligrath was in the revolutionary camp. The cry for
freedom that swept across Germany like a wave awakened the dreamer. In
1844 the censor forbade the publication of his _Patriotic Fantasies_.
Freiligrath, without troubling about the censor, published them under
another title, _Confession of Faith_, and renounced his much-talked of
'pension' in the preface. The book was banned. Freiligrath escaped
arrest by fleeing to Belgium.

He remained in Belgium for a few months only. They sufficed for him to
form a friendship with Marx, 'that nice, interesting, unassuming,
resolute fellow,' as he called him. Freiligrath's poetic powers reached
their zenith in the revolutionary years of 1848 and 1849 and he was one
of Marx's closest collaborators on the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_. Their
friendship defied all the vicissitudes of life and survived a number of
temporary estrangements during the hard years of exile in London.
Freiligrath was one of the few men whom Marx 'loved as friends in the
highest sense of the word.'

Marx met only a few German exiles in Brussels. In this 'disagreeable
mongrel country' as Freiligrath called Belgium, the Germans did not feel
at home, and in Brussels they were not liked. Three years later, when
Marx was expelled by the anti-revolutionary government, his expulsion,
to quote Engels, 'helped to mitigate Belgian hatred of the Germans.'

There were not many exiles from other countries either. But small as the
colony of exiles was, it was an important one. During those years a
political refugee could lead a more secure life in Belgium than in any
other European country, not even excluding Switzerland. When Buonarotti,
the fellow-conspirator of Babeuf, had to flee from Geneva at the
beginning of the Restoration, Belgium was the only country to offer him
a refuge. He lived there until the revolution of 1830 and wrote his
famous work on the _Conspiracy of the Equals_, the bold attempt of
Babeuf and his comrades to plant the banner of Socialism in Paris when
the great Revolution ended. The book had an influence far wider than the
borders of Belgium and France. It had a strong influence on the
'physical force' Chartists. Exile set its seal upon men of Buonarotti's
type. In Belgium were refugees to whom the rest of Europe was
shut--French Blanquists, Polish Democrats, German Republicans, _émigrés_
of the second and third generation.

Belgium received them all and suffered them to remain upon her soil, as
long as they refrained from direct political activity. The small country
had fought for and gained its independence only a few years before; it
was not yet firmly in the saddle and it very intelligibly fought shy of
diplomatic conflicts with its powerful neighbours. These would have been
inevitable if the exiles had been allowed to carry out propaganda from
Belgium, and the attempt would have cost the refugees their sanctuary.
Thus, although the Press was freer than in France, there was no
'emigrant' paper or organisation. This state of affairs survived until
the outbreak of the February revolution, when the atmosphere changed
throughout the whole of Europe, and the Liberals came into power in
Belgium--and then not for long.

Marx became acquainted with the peculiarities of Belgium during the
first days after his arrival. The Prussian Government soon reconciled
itself to the withdrawal of the expulsion of Ruge, Börnstein and the
others who were to have left France with Marx, but it continued to
persecute Marx. Scarcely had he arrived in Brussels when the Prussian
ambassador demanded his expulsion. Marx applied for a permit soon after
his arrival. He did not obtain it. Only after many inquiries did he find
out that such an application did not suffice. He had to give a written
undertaking to the _sûreté publique_ to print nothing in Belgium about
contemporary politics. After that he obtained his permit. Infuriated by
the renewed persecution, tired of the struggle with 'his' officials, who
wasted time he could have employed profitably, full of contempt for his
reactionary Fatherland, 'the backward colony of Russia,' in December,
1845, he renounced his Prussian nationality.

He did not find the renunciation of journalistic activity hard to bear.
He had other activities in mind. In the foreword to _The Holy Family_,
written in September, 1844, he and Engels had announced that after
completing their demolition of Bruno Bauer they would state their own
constructive position to the new philosophical and social doctrines in
independent works.

Marx planned to write a two-volume _Critique of Politics and Political
Economy_, for which he had arranged a contract with Leske, the Darmstadt
publisher, before he left Paris. As soon as he had settled down in
Brussels he flung all his energy into the task. In January Engels was
urging him to complete the book quickly, even if he should be
dissatisfied with it himself. Engels declared that it was essential that
the work be finished before April. Men's minds were ripe for it, and
they must strike while the iron was hot. This formula was to be
frequently repeated during the next twenty years. Again and again Engels
was to urge his friend to write 'finis' to the work in hand, stop his
everlasting ploughing through books and collecting of material, and
actually get down to the work of writing. Engels later confessed that
while they were in Brussels together Marx taught him for the first time
what hard work really meant. Marx's thoroughness, the vigour with which
he grappled with a subject, not letting it go till he had mastered it in
all its details, the conscientiousness with which he would read through
everything that had ever been written about it, were alien to Engels's
temperament. _The Critique of Politics and Political Economy_ was meant
to appear in the summer of 1845. The first volume, _The Critique of
Political Economy_, appeared in the summer of 1859, and the first volume
of _Capital_ in the autumn of 1867.

Once more Marx plunged into a sea of books. He read and made excerpts
from the economists Buret, Sismondi, Senior, A. Blanqui, Ure, Rossi and
Pecchio, to name the most important only. In the summer of 1845 he went
to Manchester with Engels to study the English economists, Petty, Tooke,
Thompson, Cobbett and others, who were not available in Brussels. In
addition to all this he planned to collaborate with Engels in publishing
a whole series of important Socialist books in German translations--the
principal works of Fourier, Owen and others. Marx was to write
introductions for the French authors and Engels for the English ones.

But in the summer of 1845 a new task intervened. Marx informed his
publisher that he had to break off work on the _Critique of Politics and
Political Economy_. It appeared to him to be of vital immediate
importance to attack German philosophy and state his positive attitude
to the present and past position of German Socialism. This was necessary
in order to prepare the public for a system of economics which was
diametrically opposed to German preconceptions of the time.

During the lifetime of Marx and Engels this work never appeared.
Excerpts from the manuscript were only published in various places years
after their death. When, thanks to the tireless researches of D. B.
Riazanov, it finally appeared in its complete form in 1932, it was found
that _German Ideology_ was Marx's and Engels's first exposition of their
interpretation of history--historical materialism--carried out in a
detail for which they never found time or opportunity again. When Marx
published his _Critique of Political Economy_ in 1859, he contented
himself with preparing the public for the new viewpoint with a few
sentences in the foreword. A decade and a half had passed since he had
arrived at it, jointly with Engels, and he had used it as a guiding
thread through all his works and could well believe that it was
intelligible to all who could read and only required a final and
definite formulation. But if one looks back now at the endless
controversies that have centred round the correct interpretation of
historical materialism, one cannot help deploring that _German Ideology_
found no publisher in 1846.

In his reminiscences of the origins of the Communist League Engels
states that Marx had developed the main outlines of his materialist
interpretation of history by the time he joined him in Brussels in
spring, 1845. The two friends decided to elaborate jointly the
antithesis between their views and the ideological background of German
philosophy. This purpose was to be carried out in the form of a critique
of post-Hegelian philosophy. It was impossible to carry it out otherwise
at the time, not only because it was the only way in which Marx and
Engels could come to terms with their previous philosophic conscience,
but because in the intellectual and historical conditions of the forties
the quintessence of their case, namely the proposition that it is not
man's mind that conditions his being but, on the contrary, his social
being that conditions his mind, could be stated most effectively and
with the most far-reaching consequences in the field of political action
in the form of a controversy with idealism and in that form only.

More than half of the two solid octavo volumes that Marx and Engels
wrote between September, 1845, and August, 1846, is taken up with a
refutation of Max Stirner, the theorist of individual anarchism. Marx
took up the cudgels with Stirner with real delight. He took 'the
schoolmaster' sentence by sentence and harried him until nothing was
left of the atheistic 'egoist' but a beer-swilling Berlin philistine. He
was no less pitiless in his exposure of the 'true' Socialism which had
recently become fashionable in Germany and deemed itself superior to
'crude' Communism. He revealed it as an insipid brew of German
philosophical phrases blended with half-understood propositions borrowed
from French Socialist and Communist systems by philanthropic
_littérateurs_ who failed to understand the movement of which these
systems were the expression. The fight against this kind of idealistic
rubbish in all its forms was all the more necessary because in Germany
social contradictions were not yet as developed as they were in France
and England, and in that phrase-intoxicated land phrases were
correspondingly dangerous. The only philosopher who deserved respect was
Ludwig Feuerbach.

Marx's pithiest condensation of his theory of history made at that time
was in a letter to a Russian friend, Paul Annenkov. His criticism of
Proudhon was in reality a criticism of historical idealism. Marx wrote:

'What is society, whatever its form may be? The product of the
inter-actions of men. Are men free to choose this or that social form?
Not in the least. Take any particular stage in the development of the
productive forces of man and you will find a corresponding form of trade
and consumption. Take definite stages in the development of production,
trade, consumption, and you have a corresponding form of social
constitution, a definite organisation of family, rank or classes, in a
word a corresponding form of civil society. Take such a civil society
and you have a definite political situation, which is only the official
expression of civil society.

'It remains to add that men are not free masters of their forces of
production--the foundation of their whole history--because these forces
are acquired, are the product of previous activity. Thus the forces of
production are the result of man's practical energy, but this energy is
itself conditioned by the circumstances in which men are placed by the
forces of production already acquired by them, by the social forms
existing before them, which they themselves have not created but are the
product of the previous generation. From the simple fact that each
generation finds itself confronted with forces of production acquired by
the preceding one, which serves it as the raw material for new forces of
production, it follows that there is a continuity in the history of
mankind, and a history of mankind which is all the more his history
because his forces of production and consequently his social
relationships have grown in the meantime. The necessary consequence is
that the social history of men is always only the history of their
individual development, alike whether they are conscious of it or not.
Their material relationships form the foundation of all their
relationships. These material relationships are only the necessary forms
in which their material and individual activity is fulfilled. ... The
economic forms under which men produce, consume, exchange, are
_transient and historical_. With newly acquired forces of production men
alter their methods of production, and with their methods of production
they alter their economic conditions, which were purely and simply the
necessary conditions of these definite methods of production. ...
Proudhon has understood very well that men make cloth, linen, silk. What
Proudhon has not understood is that men produce the _social
relationships_ in which they produce the cloth and the linen in
conformity with their capacity. Still less has Proudhon understood that
men, who produce social relationships in conformity with their material
productivity, also produce _ideas and categories_, that is to say, the
ideal, abstract expressions of these same social relationships.
Accordingly categories are just as little eternal as the conditions the
expression of which they are. For Proudhon, on the contrary, it is
categories and abstractions that are the primary facts. In his opinion
it is these and not men who make history. ... As for him the driving
forces are categories, there is no need to alter practical life to alter
the categories. On the contrary, if one alters the categories,
alterations in real life will follow.'

The last of the _Theses on Feuerbach_, which Marx wrote in his notebook,
says:

'The philosophers have only _interpreted_ the world differently. The
task is now to change it.'

At the beginning of May, 1846, Marx and Engels sent the greater part of
the manuscript to Germany. They had found some prosperous adherents of
'true' Socialism in Westphalia who had thought of publishing the work.
But 'business difficulties, whether real or alleged can no longer be
determined, intervened. Marx tried in vain to find another publisher. In
spite of all his efforts and those of Joseph Weydemeyer, a former
Prussian artillery lieutenant who had become a Communist and visited
Marx in Brussels in 1846, the book remained unpublished. In retrospect
it seemed to Marx that the impossibility of publishing a work to which
he had devoted a year of his life had not extraordinarily disturbed him.
At the time, however, he bore the blow heavily. But it all lay a long
time behind him when he wrote: 'We left the manuscript to the nibbling
criticism of mice all the more willingly as we had attained our chief
aim--clarification.'

## Chapter 10: Face to Face with Primitive Communism

Neither the old Communist Utopias nor nebulous speculations of the type
of Hess's 'theory' of the various rôles of the different countries in
the revolution--which, incidentally, Engels himself adopted for a
time--could survive in the face of the new interpretation of history.
Communism in Germany and France and Chartism in England no longer
appeared accidental events which might just as well not have happened at
all, or as ideas which could be measured against other ideas, or as
systems which could be considered and accepted or rejected from an
absolute, timeless, moral or logical standpoint. They now appeared, to
use Engels's words, as movements of the oppressed proletarian class, as
forms, more developed or less, of their historically necessary struggle
against the ruling class, the bourgeoisie. Communism no longer meant
imaginatively concocting an if-possible complete social ideal, but an
understanding of the nature, conditions and consequent aims of the
struggle of the proletariat.

Communism was no longer a doctrine but a movement. It no longer
proceeded from principles, from the humanism of the Young Hegelians or
of Feuerbach, but from facts. In so far as it was theoretical, it was
the theoretical expression of the position of the proletariat in the
class-struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie and the theoretical
comprehension of the conditions for attaining the freedom of the
proletariat.

Marx and Engels had established their views scientifically on the basis
of German philosophical theory. It was now equally essential for them to
win over the European, and first of all the German, working class to
their point of view. 'We set about the task as soon as we had reached
clarification,' Engels relates. The overthrowing of primitive Communism
was the first and most urgent aim.

Wilhelm Weitling came to London in September, 1844. The sufferings and
persecution he had undergone for his Communist ideals had increased his
already considerable renown. He had been arrested by the Swiss
authorities in the summer of 1843 and indicted for blasphemy, making
attacks on the rights of property and forming a secret society for the
spreading of Communism. He was imprisoned for four months on remand,
condemned to a further six months in gaol by the Zurich court and, at
the conclusion of his sentence, was delivered over the Prussian frontier
in chains. His trial and still more the official report on 'The
Communists in Switzerland according to the papers found in Weitling's
possession' attracted attention far beyond the borders of Switzerland.
The wide publicity given to his case caused many people to hear of the
Communist movement and of Communism for the first time. Where the
distribution of Communist literature was impossible the official report,
which everybody could buy, with its copious extracts from Weitling's
writings, was not a bad substitute.

This gifted young writer--at once a poet and a philosophising tailor's
assistant--received universal sympathy. He wrote his _Gaol Poems_ in
prison. Even the Prussian Government was aware of the prevailing mood,
and although the Swiss authorities delivered him up to them as a
fugitive from military service, when he was found unfit they let him go
free. But after a few months he had once more made himself so unpopular
with the police that he was arrested again and sent off to Hamburg,
where Heine saw him. 'My legs have no aptitude to carry iron rings like
those Weitling bore,' he wrote. 'He showed me the marks.'

From Hamburg Weitling went on to London, where his German comrades
enthusiastically received him. A big celebration was held in his honour
on September 22, in co-operation with the Chartists and the refugees
from France. But the jubilation and the tumult died away, and before six
months had passed the contradictions that had long been forming within
the movement led to an open rupture.

During the years in which Weitling wrote his _Mankind as it is and as it
ought to be_ and was developing the ideas he expressed in his most
mature work, _Guarantees of Harmony and Freedom_, all the leaders of the
League of the Just had been living in Paris. After the rising of May 12,
1839, they scattered. Weitling went to Switzerland, Schapper, Heinrich
Bauer and Moll found refuge in England. The small Communist groups in
Switzerland lost themselves more and more in sentimental Primitive
Christian Communism and romantic plotting. Weitling, separated from his
old friends, surrounded by backward artisans in a backward country, soon
abandoned himself entirely to primitive Utopianism and highly irrational
flights of fancy. It was different with those members of the League who
went westwards. They came under the influence of Chartism, at the time
the most advanced workers' movement in the world. They established
friendly relations with the Chartist leaders, read the Chartist Press,
and contributed to it themselves. The longer they lived in England the
more they shook themselves free from their primitive equalitarian
Communism. In 1843, when Weitling started talking of the communalisation
of women and concocted a hare-brained scheme for forming an army of
forty thousand thieves and robbers who were to bring the exploiters to
their knees by means of a pitiless guerilla warfare, they firmly
protested against such folly.

Imprisonment had disordered Weitling's mind more than ever. After the
Zurich trial he completely lost all sense of proportion. His outward
fame seemed to confirm his own conviction that he had been chosen as the
teacher, leader and saviour of mankind, to free it from all its misery
and suffering. The 'Londoners' and Weitling had to part.

The dispute flared up over the London German Workers' Union. The Union
had been founded in February, 1840, by Schapper and six other members of
the League of the Just as a legal organisation to serve as a screen for
the League. The League made use of this kind of organisation everywhere.
The statutes of the London German Workers' Union, printed as a special
pamphlet, became the pattern for all organisations of the same kind
founded by members of the League everywhere where German workers lived
and legal organisations of this or a similar kind were possible. The
chief purpose of these Unions was propaganda, and in addition they
provided benefits for sick comrades. It did not take long for the Union
to become the centre of the German workers' colony in London. In
addition to Germans it had among its members Scandinavians, Dutch,
Hungarians, Czechs, southern Slavs and Russians, nationalities which
were of admirable service to the Germans in their contacts with other
countries. In 1847 an English Grenadier Guardsman in uniform was a
regular visitor. At the time the Union reached its zenith, on the eve of
the revolution of 1848, it had between four and five hundred members, a
more than respectable total for the time. The life of the Union was
described in a letter by Hugo Hildebrand, the political economist, who
visited it in April, 1846.

'About half-past eight we went to the Union premises in a spirit of
considerable expectancy,' he wrote. 'On the ground-floor there was an
ordinary shop, in which porter and other beers were sold. I did not
notice any special place reserved for visitors. We went through the shop
and upstairs into a hall-like room, capable of seating about two hundred
men at the tables and benches distributed about the floor. About twenty
men were sitting about in groups, eating a simple supper or smoking one
of the pipes of honour (which lay on all the tables) with a beer-mug in
front of them. Others were standing about. Every moment the door opened
to admit newcomers, so that it was clear that the meeting was only due
to begin later. One saw from their faces that most of the men belonged
to the working class, although all were thoroughly decently clothed and
an easy and unaffected but thoroughly decorous tone prevailed. The
language was predominantly German, but French and English were also to
be heard. At one end of the hall there was a grand-piano, with music,
which in unmusical London was the best proof that we had found the right
room. As we knew no one present we sat down at a table near the door.
Very little notice was taken of us. We ordered a glass of porter and the
usual penny packet of tobacco and awaited our host and acquaintance,
Schapper. It was not long before a big, strong, healthy-looking man of
about thirty-six, with a black moustache and a commanding manner, came
up to Diefenbach (Hildebrand's companion). He was promptly introduced to
me as Schapper, the former Frankfurt demagogue, who later took part in
campaigns, or rather revolutions, in Switzerland and Spain. He was very
serious on the occasion of my meeting him, but friendly, and I could
feel that he looked down at my professional status with a certain inner
pride.'

What Engels, looking back at the early years of the movement forty years
later, said about Schapper, Heinrich Bauer and Moll, the three men who
took such an important part in the birth of the Communist League, may be
stated with advantage here. Engels remembered Schapper as a giant in
stature, resolute and energetic, always ready to risk his life and
bourgeois well-being, an ideal professional revolutionary of the type
characteristic of the thirties. In spite of a certain ponderousness of
thought, he was by no means inaccessible to better theoretical
understanding than his own, to compensate for which he only held on the
more grimly to what he had once grasped. Hence his intelligence was
sometimes carried away by his revolutionary zeal. But he always saw his
mistakes afterwards and candidly admitted them. Heinrich Bauer came from
Franconia and was a bootmaker. He was a lively, spritely, witty little
man, concealing a great deal of shrewdness and determination in his
small frame. Finally Joseph Moll, a Cologne watchmaker, a middle-sized
Hercules, was at least the equal of his comrades in energy and
determination and was superior to them in intelligence. He was a born
diplomat, besides being more accessible to theoretical understanding.

Hildebrand continues:

'Schapper invited us to sit down with him at one end of the hall and
showed me a notice-board on which the Union regulations were displayed.
They were under the heading of "German Workers' Educational Union."
Anyone who earned his living honestly and had nothing dishonourable
against him was eligible for membership, but every application for
membership had to be proposed and seconded by a member. The Union
officials were a president, a secretary, a librarian and a treasurer.
Members were divided into two classes: (1) those who constituted a
Communist club of their own, conditions for membership of which were as
described and (2) other members who took part in the educational
activities of the Union only. Only the first category could take part in
meetings at which voting took place, elect officers and vote on the
admission of new members. The others only took a passive part in the
Union activities, took part in none of the Communist meetings proper and
only paid contributions, and fines if they missed any of the educational
meetings. The basic idea of the Union was that man could only attain
liberty and self-knowledge by the cultivation of his mind. For this
reason every evening was devoted to instruction of one kind or another.
The first evening was devoted to study of the English language, the
second to geography, the third to history, the fourth to drawing and
physics, the fifth to singing, the sixth to dancing and the seventh to
Communist policy. The subjects of instruction were changed every
half-year. ...

'We took our seats at the indicated place. In the meantime the hall had
become crowded, and the president, of whom all I know is that he was
described to me as a doctor, opened the meeting. After a solemn silence
had been obtained and everyone had taken his pipe out of his mouth, the
secretary, a tailor's assistant, whose descriptive powers were really
enviable, read out a notice to the effect that _Citizen_ Hildebrand and
_Citizen_ Diefenbach had been introduced as guests by _Citizen_ Schapper
and asked whether any citizen had any objection. After that attention
was turned to current events and Citizen Schapper made a report on the
events of the week. His report was very eloquent, thorough and
informative. It was evident that he and the club conducted a very
widespread correspondence; for he reported the contents of a letter from
Madrid which contained news of the fall of the military despotism, due
to Christina's hierarchist tendencies, at greater length and in far
greater detail than had yet appeared in any newspaper. A strong
Communist colouring was naturally evident throughout, and the theme of
the proletariat ran like a red thread through the entire discourse. I
candidly admit that I can stand a good dose of Liberalism, but in some
places my hair stood on end. ...

'The whole speech made a great impression on the audience and was
followed by general and continuous applause. Next the minutes of the
last Communist meeting, at which the objectionableness of the Christian
religion was dealt with, were read by the secretary.

'After this a fresh subject came up for discussion, namely the question
of what arrangements were to be made for the education of children in
the Communist State. During the course of the discussion I discovered to
my amazement that at least half of those present were married men.
Unfortunately the debate did not get much beyond the initial stages;
consequently all I found out to satisfy my curiosity was that they
repudiated alike the communalisation of wives and the emancipation of
women, and considered woman as the mental complement of man and marriage
as a moral institution, in which both parties enjoyed equal rights,
although the capacities, disposition and sphere of activity of man and
woman were completely different. Education must be mental and physical,
private and political and must actually begin before birth.

'As it was past midnight by this time, further consideration of these
matters was postponed to the following week. Next I had a very serious
private discussion with Schapper about his hostility to Liberalism,
spoke to a few other members, including a Silesian joiner, inspected the
Union library and bought some Communist pamphlets. ... The meeting
dispersed in a very friendly and good-tempered spirit, so that the
prevalent use of the second person singular did seem not just to spring
from the club rules but to be rooted in the members' hearts.'

These German workers attentively followed political events not only in
England where they lived and in Germany which was their home; their view
took in the whole of Europe. Weitling's realm was not of this world. The
only distinction that he recognised was that between the present, which
he utterly rejected, and a glittering future. All else was evil.
Schapper and his friends were patiently seeking a way for themselves
along the thorny path of conflicting parties and systems. Their guide
was reason. Weitling followed his feelings only. He took his stand on
the Bible, on Love, the Noble and the Good. In his opinion the people
were long since ripe for the new social order, and the only remaining
task was to free them from their oppressors, for which all that was
required was the determined initiative of a revolutionary organisation,
a small band of resolute brothers. The obsolete old world must be
crushed at a blow by the dictatorship of a revolutionary minority who
would act in the interests of the latently revolutionary masses and
shrink at nothing to attain their ends. One almost seems to hear the
voice of Bakunin, with whom Marx was forced to repeat the same struggle
twenty years later, in the following phrases of Weitling, which date
from 1845: 'In my opinion,' Weitling said, 'everybody is ripe for
Communism, even the criminals. Criminals are a product of the present
order of society and under Communism they would cease to be criminals.
Humanity is of necessity always ripe for revolution, or it never will
be. The latter is nothing but the phraseology of our opponents. If we
follow them we shall have no choice but to lay our hands on our knees
and wait till roasted pigeons fly into our mouths.'

These words of Weitling's were spoken at a meeting at the German
Workers' Union at the end of June, 1845. Since the beginning of the year
regular weekly meetings had been held at which the fundamental questions
of Communism were discussed. The extent of the breach between their old
comrade-in-arms and themselves had gradually become clear to the members
of the Union. They found it far from easy to break with their own past.
Personally attached to their leader as they were, they went on trying to
reconcile the incompatible, to find a middle way. They almost apologised
for their secession, but the parting could no longer be postponed.
Schapper, their spokesman, said in his reply to Weitling that he himself
had spoken in just the same way eight, even six years ago. But now,
tempered as he was by so much bitter experience, he was compelled to
express agreement with the reactionary phrase; the people were not yet
ripe; for if they were ripe, such a phrase would no longer be possible.
He ended his speech by saying that truth could not be knocked into
people's heads with rifle-butts.

The London German workers all honoured Weitling and his candid opinions,
but they decided for Schapper by an overwhelming majority. Weitling
could not get over his defeat. He was unable to follow Schapper's
reasoning even a little way. He left London, angered and embittered,
suspecting intrigue and treachery.

Engels had met the leading members of the Union in 1843. In the summer
of 1845, when he and Marx were in London, he renewed the acquaintance
and introduced Schapper, Bauer and Moll, who had made a 'tremendous
impression' on him two years before as the first revolutionary
proletarians he had ever met, to Marx. It is impossible from the scanty
material that has survived to say whether Marx attended a meeting of the
Union or not, but he certainly paid great attention to the progress of
the controversy with Weitling. He set the greater store by it in that it
cleared the way from below for his own special task of breaking
scientific Socialism adrift from sentimental Communism, philosophising,
and 'principles.' His most urgent practical aim was that of setting the
movement on the right track and accelerating its development.

The Union had one institution which would be useful for his purpose.
This was the active correspondence it kept up with members in other
countries. These sent in fairly regular reports concerning political
events in the countries to which they had emigrated, in so far as these
events concerned the workers. It must be possible, Marx decided, to make
a permanent institution of the Union's correspondence with its members,
extend it to all groups and representatives of the Communist and
Socialist movement and thereby bring it to a higher level. However
desirable the sending in of reports might be, the clarifying of views
was more important still. This purpose should be served by written
contact maintained between individual countries and within the countries
themselves.

Marx, with Brussels as his headquarters, set about founding his
correspondence committees in the spring of 1846. As a complement to
these he planned to start a newspaper in which questions concerning the
movement were to be ventilated from every point of view. The tasks that
Marx meant the correspondence committees to fulfil--for a long time
their object and nature defied the efforts of research--were indicated
in a letter of Marx to Proudhon, dated May 5, 1846, which was found a
few years ago. Marx wrote: 'Together with two of my friends, Friedrich
Engels and Philippe Gigot (both of whom are in Brussels) I have
organised a regular correspondence with the German Communists and
Socialists on scientific questions and the supervision of such popular
writing and Socialist propaganda as one may be able to carry out in
Germany by this means. The main object of our correspondence will,
however, be to keep German Socialists in contact with French and English
Socialists, and keep foreigners informed about the Socialist movement in
Germany and inform the Germans in Germany of the progress of Socialism
in France and England in turn. In this way differences of opinion will
come to light; ideas will be exchanged and impartial criticism arrived
at. This will be a step taken by the Socialist movement on its literary
side towards ridding itself of the limitations of nationality. For at
the moment of action it is certainly of great interest to everyone to be
informed of the state of affairs abroad as well as at home.

'Besides the Communists in Germany our correspondence will include
German Socialists in Paris and London. Our relations with England are
already established; as for France we all believe that it would be
impossible to find a better correspondent than you [^09].'

Beside the Communists in Germany our correspondence will include German
Socialists in Paris and London. Our relations with England are already
established; as for France we all believe that it would be impossible to
find a better correspondent than you.

Proudhon, however, declined the invitation. He would very much like to
give his aid when things got going, he said, but in the meantime he held
it to be superfluous. Of the French Socialists Louis Blanc alone seems
to have got into touch with the Brussels committee. In England G. Harney
declared himself willing to co-operate, though he does not seem to have
been very active. Quite an animated correspondence was carried on with
Schapper and his friends, and several members of the Paris section of
the League of the Just, particularly Ewerbeck, co-operated. Little is
known of the contacts made with Communists in Germany, but there was
correspondence with Silesia, with the Wuppertal, where Köttgen, a
painter, was active, with Kiel, where Georg Weber, a doctor, conducted
propaganda, and from Cologne. The Communists of Cologne, under the
leadership of Roland Daniels, a doctor and a personal friend of Marx's,
at first declined the invitation to found a correspondence committee as
premature but later sent reports to Brussels all the same. On the whole
this very loose organisation of correspondence committees did not
achieve very much. It failed to gain a foothold outside German Communist
circles, the reports came in irregularly and contributed practically
nothing to the theoretical advancement of Communism. But it did bring
Marx into closer contact with the London German Workers' Union, which
was the most important German Communist organisation, and in that
respect achieved its purpose.

The views of Schapper and his friends came ever closer to those of Marx.

Weitling refused to have anything to do with this 'new system of
propaganda.' With growing embitterment he watched the dwindling of his
prestige from day to day. The free, loose form of this new organisation,
which aimed at attaining the co-operation of all Communists upon a basis
of scientific Communism, ran counter to all his fundamental
preconceptions, which refused to countenance anything but sentimental
millenarianism and the tactics of the conspiratorial secret society. His
stay in England brought him not only disappointment in the political
field, but one personal failure after another. He tried a number of
schemes, not one of which succeeded. His grandiose ideas, such as that
for revolutionising science by means of 'a general logical study of
thought and speech,' and for founding an artificial universal language,
roused no interest. Obviously intriguing intellectuals were to blame.
They barred his way to the publishers and to their secret 'sources of
money.' Weitling had risen to fame in the rôle of an accuser. His first
writings had been the mighty cry of resentment of the oppressed class
from which he sprang, but half-educated as he was and full of mistrust
for the science of 'this world,' as a discoverer of systems he descended
into the absurd. He was forced to look on while the London Communists
increasingly turned from him to follow Marx. He had had a short meeting
with Marx in London in the summer of 1845, and on his way back to the
Continent at the beginning of 1846 he stopped in Brussels. The Brussels
correspondence committee had just been founded, and in view of the
prestige Weitling still enjoyed an invitation to collaborate with the
committee could not be avoided. Marx invited him.

Two accounts are extant concerning the confrontation of Marx and
Weitling on March 30, 1846. One is a letter Weitling wrote to Moses Hess
and the other a detailed account of the affair by the Russian writer,
Annenkov, who was very close to Marx at the time and was introduced by
him to the Communists of Brussels. Annenkov gives the only living
description of Marx dating from those years, and it reproduces
incomparably the atmosphere of the movement at the time. Thirty years
later Annenkov could still call up a vivid picture of what young Marx
was like on that spring evening in Brussels in 1846.

'Marx was a type of man formed all of energy, force of will and
unshakable conviction, a type highly remarkable in outward appearance as
well. In spite of his thick, black mane of hair, his hairy hands, and
his coat buttoned up all awry, he had the appearance of a man who has
the right and the power to demand respect, although his looks and his
manners might appear peculiar sometimes. His movements were angular, but
bold and confident, his manners were contrary to all social practice.
But they were proud, with a touch of disdain, and his sharp voice, which
rang like metal, sounded remarkably in accordance with the radical
judgments on men and things which he let fall. He spoke only in the
imperative, brooking no contradiction, and this was intensified by the
tone, which to me was almost painfully jarring, in which he spoke. This
tone expressed the firm conviction of his mission to reign over men's
minds and dictate their laws. Before my eyes stood the personification
of a democratic dictator such as might appear before one in moments of
fantasy.'

In comparison with him Weitling appeared almost spruce--'a handsome,
fair young man in a somewhat foppishly cut coat, with a foppishly
trimmed beard.' He looked more like a commercial traveller than the
gloomy, embittered worker, oppressed by the burden of work and thought,
whom Annenkov had imagined.

Those present at the meeting were Engels, the Belgian, Gigot, Edgar von
Westphalen, Marx's brother-in-law, Weydemeyer, Seiler, a German
registrar who had fled from Germany, and the journalist, Heilberg. These
took their seats at a small green table with Marx at the head of it,
'pencil in hand, his lion's head bent over a sheet of paper.' The
question for discussion was what form propaganda should take in Germany.
Engels, 'tall, straight, grave and looking like a distinguished
Englishman,' rose and said how necessary it was to clarify opposing
views and settle on a general programme, but before he had finished
Marx, impatient and thirsting for battle, cut him short with a direct
question to Weitling. 'But tell us, Weitling,' he said, 'what are the
arguments with which you defend your social-revolutionary agitation and
on what do you intend to base it in the future?' Annenkov stresses his
remembrance of the exact form of this blunt question, which opened a
heated discussion in the little group round the green table.

Before this unaccustomed audience Weitling lost his usual confidence and
command of speech. He spoke indistinctly and confusedly, kept on
repeating himself, continually corrected what he said and only made his
points with difficulty. His speeches consisted of 'commonplaces of
Liberal rhetoric.' He declined to create new economic theories, in his
opinion the doctrines of the French were ample and sufficient. The
workers must open their eyes, put faith in no promises and rest their
hopes upon themselves alone.

He would probably have gone on speaking a long time yet if Marx, with
angrily contracted brows, had not interrupted him and started a
sarcastic reply, the essence of which was that to stir up the people
without giving them firm foundations on which to base their actions was
a simple act of treachery. The awakening of fantastic hopes led not to
the saving of suffering people but to their downfall. Trying to
influence the workers, in Germany especially, without a concrete
teaching and strong, scientific ideas was hollow, unscrupulous playing
with propaganda, like an enthusiastic apostle addressing a lot of
open-mouthed donkeys. '"Here," he added, pointing suddenly to me with a
powerful gesture, "here is a Russian among us. In his country, Weitling,
perhaps there would be a place for your rôle, in Russia alone, perhaps,
can successful unions be arranged between absurd apostles and absurd
young men!"' But in a civilised country like Germany, Marx continued,
nothing could be achieved without a settled, concrete teaching, and
nothing had been achieved so far but noise, harmful excitement and
destruction of the very cause that had been undertaken.

In a letter Weitling wrote next day he summed up Marx's speech by saying
that unsuitable people must at once be parted from the 'sources of
money.' It was his old illusion of an intellectual coalition that caused
him so thoroughly to misunderstand Marx's demand for a 'sifting' of the
party. He listened to Marx without understanding him. There could be no
talk of the immediate realisation of Communism, Marx had said. The
bourgeoisie must come to the helm first. How could Weitling possibly
understand that, Weitling who believed that he could destroy the old
form of society with forty thousand bandits and build up a new society
on the basis of Christian Virtue? An unbridgeable abyss separated him
from the Marxist interpretation of historical development. Marx said on
this occasion for the first time what he had to repeat again and again
in the next three years to those impatient souls who believed that only
will was needed to leap a whole economic and therefore political epoch.
Marx declared that the next revolution in Europe would have to destroy
the remnants of feudalism, bring the Liberal and radical bourgeoisie
into the saddle and thus for the first time create the political
conditions for proletarian action. It was for this reason that Marx
demanded the sifting of the party, the struggle against 'philosophical'
Communism and the Communism of the artisans. Weitling understood that
sentiment must be hooted from the stage. He did not understand that Marx
replaced crude sentiment by scientific understanding. When Marx demanded
that an end be put to 'secret propaganda,' that meant for Weitling the
end of the movement itself. He recognised only one form of propaganda,
that of the conspiratorial secret society. Because he believed the
masses to be unripe and incapable of becoming ripe, he wanted and could
want no mass movement.

Marx's criticism had struck Weitling in his weakest spot. With the
mistrust of the self-educated, he felt once more the feared and hated
pride of the intellectual. He replied that analysis in the study and
criticism carried out far from the suffering world and the afflictions
of the people accomplished nothing. 'At these words Marx struck the
table angrily with his fist, so powerfully that the lamp shook. He
jumped to his feet and exclaimed:

"'Ignorance had never yet helped anybody!"

'We followed his example and got up too. The conference was over. While
Marx was striding up and down the room in unusually angry excitement I
quickly said good-bye to him and the others and went home, greatly
surprised by what I had seen and heard.'

The definite breach between Marx and Weitling did not come till May,
1848. Weitling even sent Marx an article for the paper he was going to
start at the time, and he had no objection to accepting the help which
the 'chief of the intellectuals,' whom he alleged to be 'sitting on the
funds' though he was in fact short of them, continued to give him.

But Marx insisted on the sifting of the party and the first blow fell
upon Hermann Kriege, a close friend of Weitling's and a man of the same
way of thinking as he. Kriege, a young, not ungifted man whom Engels had
recommended to Marx only a year before as a. 'splendid agitator,' had
emigrated to America, where he published a weekly paper, the _People's
Tribune_. His never very substantial and 'emotional' Communism
degenerated in America into the most turgid sentimentalism. The
_People's Tribune_ only made Communism ridiculous. On top of it Kriege
applied quite indiscriminately for financial support to people who had
nothing whatever to do with Communism. The Brussels group felt the time
had come to declare openly before the world that this activity had
nothing whatever to do with them. Many of them found it hard to
repudiate a man who had so recently been their comrade. But, as Marx and
Engels stated in the circular letter they drafted, the cause took
precedence of everything else, the party must not degenerate into a
clique, and the party was more important than the persons who belonged
or had belonged to it. There were long discussions, and on May 11 the
group decided to make a public protest against Kriege's outpourings.
Weitling alone refused to sign. On May 16 the lithographed circular was
dispatched to the correspondence committees in Germany, Paris, London
and New York. On the same day Weitling demanded the immediate return of
his manuscript from Marx. This was the final rupture.

## Chapter 11: The Communist League

The German Communists, though they criticised the harsh wording of the
circular, took Marx's side. The Brussels committee thereupon demanded
that 'philosophical and sentimental' Communism be combated outright.
This hurt the feelings of Schapper and his followers, who rebelled at
the 'intellectual arrogance' of the Brussels committee. They claimed to
be free from sentimental aspirations themselves, but believed a milder
attitude towards the 'sentimental' Communists, who after all meant well,
to be preferable to the violence with which Marx attacked them. Marx did
not and could not give in. If the small Communist _élite_ did not have
clear, definite views, any attempt to influence the broad, working
masses was doomed to failure. Marx used his correspondence with the
German Communists in London, to which he attached supreme importance, as
he later wrote, 'to subject to merciless criticism in a series of partly
printed, partly lithographed pamphlets the medley of English and French
Socialism or Communism and German philosophy which then formed the
secret teaching of the League, and replace it by the only tenable
theoretical foundation, namely scientific insight into the economic
structure of bourgeois society; and, finally, to explain in popular form
that our task was not that of trying to bring any kind of Utopian system
into being but was that of consciously participating in a historical
revolutionary process by which society was being transformed before our
eyes.'

Where possible written propaganda was supplemented by oral propaganda.
Engels was particularly active in Paris, where he settled in the middle
of August, 1846.

Unwilling as the members of the League of the Just, both in London and
Paris, at first were to face the dilemma with which Marx confronted
them, namely, that of choosing between scientific or Utopian Socialism,
hard as it was for them to renounce what they had held dear for so many
years, they nevertheless overcame their doubts and followed Marx. What
they learned from him substantiated their own insight into affairs,
brought sense and coherence into their own experiences, enabled them to
understand the historical significance of the English workers' movement,
gave them the firm standpoint that they needed. This does not imply that
none of them fell back again in later years. But in the two years in
question Marx won over the vanguard of the class for scientific
Socialism.

The central offices of the League of the Just remained in Paris--mainly
out of tradition, for the preponderating majority of its members no
longer lived in France--until the autumn of 1846. The real headquarters
were in London. Legal organisations of workers of the kind that Schapper
and his comrades had created in London were impossible in Paris, and
France had no mass movement like that of the Chartists in England, not
even in embryo. In Paris the old forms of the conspiratorial secret
society were still kept up. They did not correspond to the needs of the
rising working-class movement. The first result of the Marxian criticism
was the reorganisation of the League of the Just. The officers of the
club were re-elected in autumn, 1846. Schapper and Moll and other
'Londoners' became the leaders.

They felt the approach of the revolution which, in the words of one of
their circulars 'would probably settle the fate of the world for
centuries.' They realised that their immediate task must be to carry out
Marx's injunctions of a year before. They must create a Communist Party
programme and decide on their tactics. A congress was to be held in
London to do these things. The proposal to hold it had been made by the
London correspondence committee in the summer of 1846. In November,
1846, a special circular letter was sent out, summoning the
representatives of all the branches of the League to a Congress to be
held on May 1, 1847.

Joseph Moll was entrusted with the task of getting into touch with Marx
and inviting him to join the League. Moll arrived in Brussels at the
beginning of February, 1847. He was authorised to give Marx 'an oral
report on the state of affairs (in the League of the Just) and receive
information from him in return.' After interviewing Marx in Brussels
Moll went to Paris and interviewed Engels. He explained in his own name
and that of his comrades that they were convinced of the rightness of
Marx's views and agreed that they must shake off the old conspiratorial
forms and traditions. Marx and Engels were to be invited to collaborate
in the work of reorganisation and theoretical re-orientation.

To Marx the invitation to enter the League was by no means unexpected.
If he hesitated to accept it it was because of his appreciation of the
power of tradition and his consequently inevitable uncertainty about the
genuineness of the League of the Just's determination fundamentally to
reorganise itself. Marx had kept away from the secret societies in
Paris. Repelled as he had been by their romanticism, which occasionally
expressed itself in the most ludicrous forms, standing as he did a whole
world apart from the doctrines of the insurrectionists and the Utopians,
now that he had recognised the historical mission of the proletariat in
all its immensity he had no choice but decisively and once and for all
to reject secret society conspiratorialism as the method of organising
the class movement. But Moll stated that it was essential that he and
Engels should join the League if it were really to shake off all its
archaic shackles, and Marx overcame his doubts and joined the League of
the Just in February or March, 1847.

The Congress met in London on June 1, 1847 (it had been postponed for a
month). Engels was the delegate of the Paris branch and Wilhelm Wolff
came from Brussels. Marx stayed in Brussels. His official reason was
lack of funds for the journey, and it appears from a letter that he did
in fact attempt unsuccessfully to raise the necessary sum. But money
cannot have been the decisive factor. If Marx had been really determined
to take part in the Congress it would not have been difficult for him to
have persuaded the branch to send him instead of the excellent but not
outstanding Wolff. No doubt the real explanation is the assumption that
before associating himself definitely with the League Marx wanted to
await the results of the Congress.

The Congress decided on a complete reorganisation of the League. In
place of the old name, to which any man could attach any meaning he
liked--this was actually encouraged because there were only a few real
initiates and to lead the profane astray could not but be useful--a new
name, the 'Communist League,' made its appearance. The statutes of the
League were entirely recast. The first sentence was: 'The aim of the
League is the downfall of the bourgeoisie and the ascendancy of the
proletariat, the abolition of the old society based on class conflicts
and the foundation of a new society without classes and without private
property.' This was the language of Marx. The whole organisation was
built up in the Marxian spirit. It was democratic throughout. Before
joining the League Marx and Engels had stipulated that 'everything
conducive to superstitious authoritarianism be struck out of the rules.'
All the officers of the League were appointed by election and could be
dismissed at any time by those who had elected them. This alone
constituted an effective barrier against machinations and intrigues of
the kind conducive to dictatorship, and the League was converted--at any
rate for ordinary times of peace--into a straightforward propaganda
organisation. The statutes were drafted and sent back to the branches
for discussion. They were accepted after further deliberation by the
second Congress in December.

Between now and the next Congress a statement of the League's programme,
the League's 'profession of faith,' was to be worked out. Before parting
the delegates also decided to publish a periodical. The 'trial number'
of the _Kommunistische Zeitschrift_, the only one that ever appeared,
came out in September, 1847. It was edited by the German Communists in
London, no doubt with Engels's collaboration. The old motto of the
League of the Just had been 'All men are brothers.' It was changed at
Engels's suggestion. Whether his reasons for regarding the change as
essential were the same as Marx's is not known. Marx declared that there
was a whole mass of men of whom he wished anything rather than to be
their brothers. The phrase that Engels proposed and the Congress of the
Communist League accepted appeared for the first time on the badly
printed little sheet on sale for twopence to German workers at the White
Hart Inn in Drury Lane in the autumn of 1847. It was: 'Proletarians of
all countries, unite!'

Marx had been trying for a long time to get hold of a legal newspaper in
Germany through which he could express his views. He thought out
innumerable schemes and conducted lengthy negotiations, all without
success. German Socialist papers competed for contributions from him and
his friends, and a few articles also appeared in the _Rheinische
Jahrbücher_, the _Deutsches Bürgerbuch_, the _Gesellschaftsspiegel_, the
_Westfälische Dampfboot_, and others. But Marx remained only an
occasional contributor, if a highly appreciated one. He had no power to
dictate the policy of any paper. Next to Engels's articles and his own
there appeared others favouring the 'true' socialism which Marx was
combating. The sharper the division between the Marxian group and the
others became, and the better organised they grew, the more essential
was it to have a mouthpiece the policy of which should be determined by
them and them alone.

The German censorship made it impossible to start a newspaper in
Germany. It must appear abroad, nay, in the town in which Marx lived.
Only in those conditions, with the control in Marx's own hands, would
there be a guarantee that it would represent his views entirely. But
that would require means which were not at the disposal of Marx and his
friends.

Impossible as it was to found an organ of his own, the opportunity
presented itself in 1847 of so influencing a paper already in existence
that it would in effect be as good as his own. Since the beginning of
the year the _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_ had been published weekly in
Brussels by Adalbert von Bornstedt, who had contributed in his time to
the Paris _Vorwärts_. Bornstedt was very anxious to secure Marx as a
contributor. But Bornstedt was a man with a very doubtful past and with
very doubtful connections. People stated quite openly, in speech and in
writing, that he was in the service of the political police. The only
thing they had any doubt about was in whose pay he actually was. He was
held by some to be an Austrian spy, by others to be a spy of Prussia.
Others again believed that it was 'Russian roubles that seemed to smile
towards him.' There is no doubt that Marx knew of these incriminating
allegations, which were frequently mentioned in the letters that passed
between him and Heine during the time of their friendship. Even
Freiligrath, whom in the first months of his Brussels exile Marx saw
practically every day, believed that Bornstedt was a spy who had come to
Brussels for the special purpose of keeping watch on the 'emigrants'
there.

At first Marx had no contact with the _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_, if
for no other reason than that politically it was completely colourless.
'So far it has no significance whatever,' the Prussian ambassador
reported to Berlin on January 20, 1847. But with every number the paper
became more oppositional, more revolutionary. The King of Prussia was
the special subject of its attacks, and on April 3 the ambassador
reported that the paper 'attacked His Majesty's Government with
revolting scurrility and savagery.' Not content with quoting the paper's
'scurrility,' he made representations to the Belgian police, who should
'curb' it. At the moment, however, they were not inclined to do the
Prussian's bidding. The _démarches_ of the Prussian ambassador only had
the effect of causing the Belgian newspapers to take up the matter and
of supplying the _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_ with new material. It
became 'even more scurrilous and violent in its attacks on foreign
governments and princes.'

In these circumstances the suspicion that had previously rested on
Bornstedt necessarily diminished. Marx started writing for the _Deutsche
Brüsseler Zeitung_ in April, 1847. Bornstedt 'had declared himself ready
to do everything possible for us.' Doubtless Marx had come to the
conclusion that there was no foundation for the allegations against him.
Suspicion was hurled about among the German exiles at that time just as
easily as it was among the Poles, among whom every political opponent,
because he was an opponent, was thought capable of being a spy.

Now that the dossiers of the secret police are available it is known
that there was substance in the denunciations of Bornstedt. He spied for
Austria, for Prussia and perhaps for a few of the smaller German states
as well. His reports, preserved among the secret state papers in Berlin,
contain a wealth of material about the German exiles. But all his
reports date from the thirties and the beginning of the forties. There
is, of course, no proof that he gave up his nefarious activities with
the cessation of his reports, but on the other hand the possibility that
he became a genuine revolutionary is not excluded. He was an adventurer.
He took part in Herwegh's expedition in 1848, fought against the troops
of Baden, was taken prisoner and died mentally deranged.

As soon as Marx started writing for the _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_ he
started trying to persuade others to do the same. He wrote to Herwegh
and complained that the Germans were always finding new faults with the
paper. Instead of taking advantage of it they were merely 'wasting an
opportunity of accomplishing something. Their attitude to my manuscripts
is rather like their attitude to the _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_, and
at the same time the asses write to me every other day, asking me why I
don't print anything, and they even try persuading me that it is better
to write in French than not to write at all. One will have to atone a
long time for having been born a Teuton!'

The advice to write in French annoyed Marx, in view of his criticism of
Proudhon, which had appeared in July, 1847. In his reply to the
invitation to co-operate from Paris in the activities of the
correspondence committees Proudhon had promised to write a book giving
his own solution of the social problem. He kept his promise and wrote
his _Système des Contradictions Economiques, ou la Philosophie de la
Misère_. The 'solution' turned out to be nothing but 'petty-bourgeois
reformism' wrapped up in misunderstood Hegelian dialectical formulas. In
his reply, _Misère de la Philosophie_, written in French in order to be
intelligible to Proudhon's readers, Marx mercilessly cracked the
'critical whip' that Proudhon had expected down on Proudhon's 'eternal
ideas' and 'eternal laws,' his philosophical confusion, his 'moral' and
'philosophical' explanations of economic conditions. Just as Marx had to
fight all his life against pupils of Weitling--most of them did not know
who their teacher was--so also had he to struggle against Proudhonism,
in France particularly but in Germany as well.

The _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_ was a very useful platform for keeping
every possible kind of pseudo-Socialist and pseudo-radical in check. It
very soon occupied a prominent position in the international democratic
movement. The London Chartist assembly of September, 1847, hailed the
_Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_, the Paris _Réforme_ and the _Northern
Star_ as 'the three greatest and most democratic organs of Europe.' That
in spite of all obstacles it was smuggled into Germany in fairly large
numbers appears from numerous complaints in the police reports. It was
read by all the German workers in Brussels.

Marx had already established good relations with them. After the
conversion of the Brussels correspondence committee into a branch of the
Communist League he and his friends formed the Brussels German Workers'
Educational Union. Wherever members of the League of the Just and later
of the Communist League went they founded legal organisations of this
kind as soon as ever it became possible. The Brussels Union was
patterned in every way, in aims, rules and constitution, on the London
German Workers' Union.

Regular meetings were held twice a week. On Wednesdays there were
lectures and the speaker was usually Marx. All that has survived of his
economic lectures is what was later printed in the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ under the title of _Wage-Labour and Capital_. Sundays were
devoted to entertainment, previous to which Wilhelm Wolff always gave 'a
review of the events of the day, which were invariably masterpieces of
popular description, humorous and at the same time vivid, duly
castigating the individual pettiness and blackguardisms of rulers and
ruled in Germany alike.' Afterwards there were recitations--sometimes by
Marx's wife--in addition to singing and dancing.

Police spies soon got excitedly to work on the paper and the club. A
confidential report to the police authorities at Frankfurt-on-Main
states: 'This noxious paper must indisputably exert the most corrupting
influence upon the uneducated public at whom it is directed. The
alluring theory of the dividing-up of wealth is held out to
factory-workers and day-labourers as an innate right, and a profound
hatred of the rulers and the rest of the community is inculcated into
them. There would be a gloomy outlook for the Fatherland and for
civilisation if such activities succeeded in undermining religion and
respect for the laws and in any great measure infected the lowest class
of the people by means of the Press and these clubs. ... The
circumstance that the number of members (of the Workers' Union) has
increased from thirty-seven to seventy within a few days is worthy of
note.'

The Brussels branch of the Communist League was closely allied to the
Left wing of the Belgian Democrats, not, of course, officially, but by
reason of close personal connections. The editor of the _Atelier
Démocratique_, a little paper published in a Brussels suburb, was L.
Heilberg, a German refugee who died young. It was therefore quite
natural for the Brussels branch of the League to take an active part in
the formation of the International Democratic Union in Brussels.

Several attempts had been made in the thirties and forties to realise
the idea of linking up all the revolutionary organisations in Europe and
setting up a holy alliance of peoples against the Holy Alliance of
kings. French, Germans, Greeks and other nationalities gathered round
the headquarters of the Carbonari in Switzerland. Mazzini's _Young
Europe_ had national sections for 'Young' Italians, Germans, Poles,
French, etc. Public banquets, which it was difficult for the police to
ban, were a favourite method of bringing representatives of
revolutionary movements together. Marx took part in a banquet of this
kind in Paris in the spring of 1844. Nothing is known about it except
that it took place and that French, Germans and Russians used the
occasion to discuss democratic propaganda.

More, however, is known about the celebrations in Weitling's honour held
in London on September 22, 1844. On this occasion Karl Schapper proposed
the formation of a propaganda organisation with a view to uniting the
democrats of all countries. There was unanimous enthusiasm for this
proposal, but a year passed by before it was possible to take steps to
carry it out. On September 22, 1845, more than a thousand Democrats of
all nationalities gathered in London to celebrate the anniversary of the
French Revolution. The initiator of the gathering was G.J. Harney, next
to Ernest Jones the most zealous of the Chartist leaders who had risen
above the prevalent insularity. Harney's words: 'We reject the word
"foreigner." It must no longer exist in our democratic vocabulary,'
became a reality in the society of Fraternal Democrats, formed on March
15, 1846. At first it was quite a loose association, intended to bring
foreigners living in England closer to their similarly-minded English
friends. In the summer of 1847 it was organised on a more formal basis.

Each nationality was given a general secretariat of its own. Harney was
the English representative, the revolutionary Michelet, whose real name
was Juin d'Allas, represented the French, and Karl Schapper represented
the Germans. Their motto, 'All men are brothers,' was that of the London
German Workers' Union.

In 1847 the Fraternal Democrats were extremely active, and there was no
important event in international politics to which they did not declare
their attitude, either in pamphlets or in the Press. In the autumn of
1847, they published a manifesto to all nations in which they outlined a
plan for the formation of a widespread organisation, an 'International
organisation eligible to people of all nationalities, with international
committees in as many towns as possible.' There was a particularly
lively response to the appeal in Belgium. In July, 1846, the Brussels
correspondence committee had congratulated Feargus O'Connor, the
Chartist, on his victory in the Nottingham election. _The Northern Star_
had printed an article sent by the 'German Democratic Communists' and
signed by Marx, Engels and Gigot, and the Fraternal Democrats greeted it
as 'another proof of the advance of fraternity, and the approaching
union of the Democrats of all countries in the great struggle for
political and social equality.'

On September 27, 1847, the _Association Démocratique, ayant pour but
l'union et la fraternité de tous les peuples_, was founded in Brussels.
Singularly enough, it was founded originally as a counter-stroke to the
local branch of the Communist League and was intended to resist the
growing influence of Marx among the German refugees and the Belgian
radicals. Bornstedt, who was consumed by ambition but was prevented by
Marx from taking a direct part in political activity himself, wanted in
all circumstances to play a political rôle. In Marx's absence from
Brussels he took advantage of the opportunity to summon a conference of
Democrats of various nations, at which it was decided to form a new
organisation.

Marx's friends, and the nimble Engels in particular, had no difficulty
in side-tracking Bornstedt, and Engels occupied the position of
vice-president himself until Marx should return. In the middle of
November Marx was formally elected as the German representative. The
veteran General Antoine-François Mellinet, national hero of 1830, was
elected honorary president. The Belgian representative was
Lucien-Leopold Jottrand, a lawyer and editor of the Brussels _Débat
Social_, the French representative was Jacques Imbert, a Blanquist with
a renowned revolutionary past, and the Polish representative was the
famous historian, Joachim Lelevel.

In the months that followed Marx worked for the Association Démocratique
with the greatest energy. At a public meeting in Brussels he spoke on
the question of Free Trade, and the association published his speech as
a pamphlet. He travelled to Ghent, where a meeting of more than three
thousand people, predominantly workers, decided to form a branch
association. There seemed excellent foundation for the hope that the
organisation might grow into a strong, well-organised Democratic party.

The Communist League, the Workers' Union, the Association Démocratique,
writing for the Brussels newspaper, an extensive correspondence with
Germany, England and France, to say nothing of his literary labours,
made ample claims on Marx's energy. But nothing would be more mistaken
than to imagine the young Marx--at the outbreak of the revolution of
1848 he was barely thirty years old--as a gloomy ascetic and fanatic.

The letters of Marx and Engels between 1844 and 1847 are an excellent
biographical source for the life of the latter. But only one letter of
Marx's has come down to us from that time. All the same there are a few
documents that throw light on Marx's personal life in Brussels.

His brother-in-law, Edgar von Westphalen, stayed in Brussels until the
late autumn of 1847. Jenny Marx was very fond of him. 'My one, beloved
brother,' she called him in a letter to Frau Liebknecht. 'The ideal of
my childhood and youth, my dear and only friend.' He was a Communist,
but apparently not a very active one. He was an enemy of philistinism
rather than of bourgeois society, a completely unstable and irresolute
person, but good-hearted and a cheerful companion. Marx was very fond of
him. Weydemeyer wrote to his fiancée in February, 1846:

'If I tell you what kind of life we have been leading here, you will
certainly be surprised at the Communists. To crown the folly, Marx,
Weitling, Marx's brother-in-law and I sat up the whole night playing.
Weitling got tired first. Marx and I slept a few hours on a sofa and
idled away the whole of the next day in the company of his wife and his
brother-in-law in the most priceless manner. We went to a tavern early
in the morning, then we went by train to Villeworde, which is a little
place near by, where we had lunch and then returned in the most cheerful
mood by the last train.'

Not nearly so many Germans found their way to Brussels as to Paris. But
no one who had even the most distant sympathy with Communism failed to
visit Marx. Stephan Born visited 'the spiritual centre of Communism' at
the end of October. This young printer had become a friend of Engels in
Paris, turned Communist and made an able defence of Communism against
the Republican Karl Heinzen, the 'caricature of a German Jacobin' who
was later known in America as the 'prince-killer.' In 1848 Born was one
of the leaders of the Berlin workers' movement, but when he wrote his
reminiscences in his old age at Bâle he was a tedious social-reformist
university professor. But he always retained a shy veneration for Marx.
'I found him,' he wrote, writing in retrospect of the autumn of 1847,
'in an extremely modest, one might almost say poorly furnished, little
house in a suburb of Brussels. He received me in a friendly way, asked
about the success of my propaganda journey, and paid me a compliment,
with which his wife associated herself, about my pamphlet against
Heinzen. She bade me a very friendly welcome. Throughout her life she
took the most intense interest in everything that concerned and occupied
her husband, and therefore she could not fail to be interested in me, as
I was considered one of his hopeful young men. ... Marx loved his wife
and she shared his passion. I have never known such a happy marriage, in
which joy and suffering--the latter in the richest measure--and all pain
were overcome in such a spirit of mutual devotion. I have seldom known a
woman, so harmoniously formed alike in outward appearance and heart and
mind, make such a prepossessing impression at the first meeting. Frau
Marx was fair. Her children, who were still small, were dark-haired and
dark-eyed like their father."

Marx's second daughter, Laura, was born in September, 1845, and his son
Edgar, in December, 1846. The irregular income he earned by writing did
not suffice to keep the growing family, and Marx was forced to borrow.
In February, 1848, his material position improved, although only for a
short time. For the six thousand francs his mother, after long
negotiations, at last paid him out of his father's estate, were applied
to political ends, to which all personal needs had to take second place.

The second Communist Congress was fixed for the autumn of 1847, and by
then the League's 'profession of faith' had to be ready. Schapper
attempted a first draft, Moses Hess attempted another, but the Paris
branch of the League rejected both. Then Engels applied himself to the
task. The form he chose for it was the one that was conventional at the
time for declarations of the kind by Communist and other Left wing
groups. It was drawn up in the form of questions and answers, like the
catechism. Engels's catechism was written in straightforward, easily
intelligible language and stated the fundamental ideas of scientific
Socialism tersely and with transparent clarity. But Engels was not
satisfied with it. In his opinion it was wretchedly written, and he
thought it would be better to abandon the form of the catechism
altogether, as it was necessary for the 'thing' to contain a certain
number of descriptions of events. He suggested to Marx the title of
'Communist Manifesto.'

The Paris branch appointed Engels their delegate to the Congress, and
this time the Brussels branch sent Marx. The two friends met at Ostend,
discussed the draft and agreed that the first statement of aims of the
Communist League to which they now belonged and of which they had become
the leaders must not be one of the conventional popular pamphlets,
however good it might be of its kind.

Marx, in addition to being the representative of the Brussels
Communists, had a mandate to represent the Association Démocratique at
the conference of the Fraternal Democrats on November 29. The Fraternal
Democrats had organised some celebrations in memory of the Polish revolt
of 1830. The celebrations were typical of those held in those years of
demonstrations of international solidarity in all the lands of Western
Europe. The Communist Congress was to meet next day in the same hall,
that of the London German Workers' Union, and the Communist delegates
took part in the celebrations in honour of the Polish revolutionaries.
Marx spoke side by side with English, French, German, Belgian and Polish
speakers. He spoke of the imminent revolution. 'The old Poland is lost,'
he said, 'and we should be the last to wish its restoration. But it is
not only old Poland that is lost, but old Germany, old France, old
England, the whole of our antiquated society. But the loss of our
antiquated society is no loss for those who have nothing to lose in it,
and the great majority in all the countries of the present day are in
that position. They have far more to win by the downfall of our
antiquated society, which will bring in its train the formation of a new
society, no longer resting on class-conflicts.' Marx announced that the
Association Démocratique proposed to summon an international Democratic
congress for the following year. It coincided with a similar proposal by
the Fraternal Democrats. It was decided to hold the congress in Brussels
on October 25, 1848. It was not held, for events were too fast for it.

Next day the deliberations of the Communists began. They lasted for ten
days, a time of strenuous activity for Marx and Engels. True, the
Londoners had been won over to Marx, but much human effort and patient
instruction and wary indulgence for old sensibilities were required
before the last traces of mistrust of the 'intellectuals' were
extinguished. The newly organised League--the statutes were definitely
fixed--was without a trace of the conspiratorial character which had
been such an essential element in the League of the Just. That it must
remain a secret society was obvious. Even outside Germany, in free
England, the Communists could not well have their organisation
registered with the police. But within these limits, which were set by
external necessity and were not self-imposed as they were in the case of
the League of the Just or the French secret societies, because the
Communist League had no secret teaching for initiates only and did not
plot, and because 'Communists scorned to keep their views and intentions
secret,' within these limits it was an association for propaganda on a
democratic basis.

Whether Engels laid his catechism before the Congress or not is not
known. The delegates decided to entrust Marx and Engels with the
drafting of their programme. The headquarters of the League remained in
London, and Schapper, Heinrich Bauer and Moll remained its leaders. They
were unanimous that the theoretical guidance of the League must be left
to Marx.

Marx worked on the Communist Manifesto from the middle of December till
the end of January. That was too slow for the German Communists in
London. On January 24 they admonished him to hasten. They would take
disciplinary measures against Citizen Marx, they wrote rather harshly,
if the manuscript were not in their hands by February 1. But the
ultimatum was superfluous, because Marx sent the manuscript to London
before the prescribed day.

The Communist Manifesto was the common work of Marx and Engels. It is
impossible to distinguish their respective contributions. But, as Engels
frequently repeated, the fundamental ideas, the groundwork, belong to
Marx alone. Marx gave it its form too. It is Marx's tremendous power
that flows from every word, it is his fire with which the most brilliant
pamphlet in world literature illuminates the times, to-day just as on
the day on which it was completed.

The Manifesto gave an unerring leader to the proletariat in its
struggle; not unerring in the narrow sense a dogmatist might attribute
to the word, not unerring in the sense that every word is valid for the
present day. It was written a few weeks before the outbreak of the
European revolution of 1848. It proposed revolutionary measures which a
quarter of a century later Marx and Engels called out-of-date because of
the development of economic, social and political conditions. Unerring
rather because, surveying the whole course of historical development, it
enabled the workers concretely to understand their historical situation.
The tremendous revolutionary pathos of the Manifesto does not dazzle but
sharpens the view for the direct task ahead. Because it saw into the
most distant future, it saw into the most immediate present. It was the
programme for the historical epoch of the struggle for the proletarian
revolution and at the same time the programme for the next day's sober,
disillusioned fight.

When the last sheets of the Communist Manifesto left the printing press
Marx was in the midst of revolutionary Paris.

## Chapter 12: The Revolutionary Tempest

The first sign of revolution came from Switzerland in November, 1847.

>The first shot was fired in the high country  
>Against the priests [^10].

The reactionary cantons which formed the Roman Catholic League rose
against the decision of the Federal Council to expel the Jesuits. The
governments of Russia, Austria, Prussia and France, always ready to step
in on the side of reaction, which was the very principle of their
existence, took the part of the Catholic cantons and threatened military
intervention. A local Swiss conflict flared up into a question of
European importance. Oxenbein, leader of the Swiss radicals, threatened
that if Austria dared to intervene he would send an army of twenty
thousand men into Lombardy and proclaim an Italian republic. The
Austrian troops gathered at the frontier but did not move and three
weeks later the Catholic cantons were beaten. The arrival in London of
the news of the fall of Lucerne, their capital, coincided with the
opening of the Communist Congress.

From the Alps the revolutionary avalanche poured down into the Italian
plain. In the face of the Swiss threat Austria beat a pitiful retreat.
The prestige of the alien ruler was shaken. There were stormy
demonstrations in Lombardy, and in some places the demonstrations
developed into open fighting. In January insurrection broke out in the
south, in Sicily.

>The dance started in the South; Scylla and Charybdis,  
>Vesuvius and Etna burst forth, outbreak on outbreak,  
>blow on blow [^11].

The revolutionaries defeated the troops of the Bourbon Ferdinand of
Naples in a five-day street-battle. Insurrection broke out in one
Italian state after another. Constitutions were declared in Naples,
Turin and Florence. King Ferdinand barely escaped trial by a people's
court.

The industrial crisis which had made Europe ripe for revolution was
particularly severe in Belgium, where economic development was
relatively high. In the winter of 1847-8 unemployment in the textile
areas rose from week to week, and in the workers' quarters, which were
accustomed to privation, famine stalked abroad. Not a single day passed
by, writes the historian of the Belgian workers' movement, without a
starving worker breaking a shop-window for the sake of appeasing his
hunger in prison.

The 1847 elections had brought the Liberals into power. They
demonstrated their incapacity to check the crisis, and the agitation of
the radical Democrats fell on fertile soil. The Association Démocratique
was the leading spirit. Branch associations sprang up one after another
in Ghent, Liege, Namur and elsewhere. Members streamed in in masses.
They came from the working classes, from the hard-pressed
petty-bourgeoisie and from intellectual circles too. Political tension
grew as the economic crisis became more acute.

Events abroad were followed in Belgium with the greatest interest. 'The
executioner is waiting,' Engels exclaimed with joy when in January,
1848, he summed up the progress of the movement during the past year for
the _Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung_. The revolutionary wave swept over all
frontiers, no firm-built dam was strong enough to hold it. Engels
actually anticipated by a century the collapse of the 'chequered'
Austrian Empire, 'botched together of bits stolen here and inherited
there.' Poland seemed to be striking a fatal blow at Europe's other
gendarme, Nicholas I of Russia. Poland, as has already been observed,
was the country to which the revolutionaries of all countries kept their
gaze constantly riveted during the three decades of reaction. The rising
of Poland must mean the rising of all Europe, the liberation of Poland
would be at once a symbol and a signal for all the oppressed. In the
winter of 1847-8 three great democratic demonstrations on behalf of
Poland took place in Brussels. On February 14 Belgians, Poles and
Germans demonstrated in honour of the heroes of the 1830 revolution and
the martyrs of the rising of the Russian Dekabrists. A week later, on
February 22, Marx spoke at a meeting in memory of the Cracow rising of
1846. Marx extolled the Polish revolution and lauded the rising at
Cracow for the glorious example it set Europe, 'in identifying the cause
of nationality with that of democracy and the emancipation of the
oppressed class [^12].' The meeting closed with a pathetic scene. Old
Lelevel, the veteran of the Polish revolution, embraced Marx and kissed
him.

The refugees, forced to restrain themselves for so many years, cast
themselves the more passionately into political activity now. There was
no meeting in which they did not participate. This applied in particular
to the German exiles, who threw themselves enthusiastically into the
Belgian movement, without of course, forgetting their more particular
German duties. There were innumerable contacts with the adjacent
territories of Prussia, particularly with the Rhineland. After Marx and
his comrades joined the Communist League they saw to it that every
Communist with whom they were in contact founded a branch of the League.
Illegal literature published abroad was smuggled into Germany in great
quantities, and the more important articles from the _Deutsche Brüsseler
Zeitung_ were reprinted as fly-sheets and fairly widely distributed.

The German Communists in Belgium prepared to hurry to Germany at the
first sign. Wilhelm Wolff was arrested by the Brussels police in the
middle of February, 1848, and stated openly that he and his friends were
directing all their attention to Germany, where they were carrying out
intense propaganda. 'Cologne and Aix-la-Chapelle,' he is quoted as
saying in a police report, 'were the places designated for the risings.'

Hitherto the Belgian police and the Belgian Conservatives had not paid
any particular attention to the German Communists. The Prussian
ambassador never kept them out of his sight, and from time to time
called the attention of the Belgian authorities to their 'criminal
activities,' but without result. This state of affairs altered when the
situation in the country became acute and the Germans became active.
Several newspapers started attacking the German exiles, and the Prussian
ambassador probably had a hand in the campaign. On January 20 he was
able to inform his Government that the Belgian police now considered it
necessary to keep a watch on the agitation being carried out and that
they intended to take definite steps against foreigners, and against the
Germans in particular. There is no doubt that the ambassador did all he
could to encourage police action. Meanwhile tension grew from day to
day. But everybody knew that the revolution could only conquer after it
had conquered in Paris. Everybody waited for the crowing of the Gallic
cock.

Unrest was rife in France. Suffrage reforms were demanded and, in
accordance with the custom of the time, a campaign of banquets was
organised. But nothing pointed to an immediate revolutionary outbreak.
Louis Philippe, an old cynic who had experienced many revolutions,
attempted to pacify his ministers. 'The Parisians won't start a
revolution in winter,' he said. 'They storm things in hot weather. They
stormed the Bastille in July, the Bourbon throne in June. But in January
or February, no.' The stout, phlegmatic Louis Philippe forgot that
salvoes fired into a crowd can cause a July temperature in February. On
February 23 the military fired at a peaceful demonstration. Next morning
Paris was filled with barricades. The people's cry was not for electoral
reform but a republic. On the evening of the 24th the Palais Royal was
in the hands of the insurrectionists. The king fled and a bonfire was
made of the throne. The same evening a Provisional Government was formed
and a republic proclaimed.

Events in Paris were known in Brussels, but even the greatest optimists
had not expected things to develop so rapidly and so successfully. After
the outbreak of the insurrection connection between Paris and Brussels
was interrupted.

'On the evening of February 24, 1848,' writes Stephan Born, 'half a
dozen German youths were standing on the Paris platform at Brussels
station. They were practically alone. Since morning there had been no
train from the French capital and no news about the unrest which had
broken out. The honest inhabitants of the Belgian capital were a
somewhat slow-blooded race and had to be warmed up before they got
going. Curiosity about what might have happened in Paris apparently did
not trouble them. We few Germans were, as I said, almost alone on the
platform, and we were foreigners. But no, there were two other people, a
lady and a gentleman, standing silently and anxiously in a corner. They
too were waiting for the train, which, even if it did not come all the
way from Paris, would at least be coming from the French frontier.
Occasionally one or other of them would cast a gloomy look at us as we
stood there chattering happily, expressing our conjectures and hopes
concerning the news the arrival of which could not be delayed much
longer now. They guessed our thoughts and advanced a few paces towards
us, but suddenly a protracted whistle announced the approach of the
long-awaited train. Another moment and it was in the station. Before it
came to a standstill, the guard jumped down and shouted at the top of
his voice: "The Red flag is flying on the tower of Valenciennes and a
Republic has been proclaimed."

'"Long live the Republic!" we shouted as with one voice. But the lady
and gentleman who had been waiting for news turned pale and beat a
hurried retreat. A station official told us that they were the French
ambassador, General Rumigny, and his wife.'

The victory of the Paris revolution disconcerted and dismayed the
Belgian Government, or at any rate so it appeared on the surface.
Rogier, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, opened negotiations with his
friend, Considérant, the Fourierist, who recommended a revolution from
above. The Government, which was in the hands of the Liberals, should
proclaim a republic itself. The king gave the Republicans the hint that
he would not oppose the people's will and was ready to abdicate if the
Belgians really wanted a Republic. All he wished was that everything
should happen in an orderly manner and without bloodshed, and besides he
hoped for a respectable pension.

Everything seemed to be developing excellently, but the whole thing was
only a manœuvre. In the meantime the Government called up the reserves
and the soldiers on furlough and marched the regiments to Brussels. So
far from trying to stop the spreading of rumours to the effect that they
were prepared to accede of their own accord to the most extreme demands,
they rather encouraged them in order to diminish the tension and pacify
the determined few.

The leadership of the movement was provided by the Association
Démocratique practically alone. On February 27 it summoned a mass
meeting, which decided to meet again on the following day, this time
outside the Town Hall, to demand the calling up of workers and artisans
to supplement the National Guard and provide the necessary pressure. An
appeal to arms was made at the meeting, in order not to be defenceless
in case of a police attack. Late that night there were a number of minor
demonstrations, which were broken up by the police and gave them the
desired opportunity to forbid the meeting on the following day. The
Government, now having a sufficiency of military power on which to rely,
suddenly adopted an entirely different tone. When the Democratic
deputies said in the Chamber that the triumphal march of the Revolution
would advance from Paris and conquer the whole world, the Government
spokesman replied that it was scarcely necessary for freedom to make a
world tour of that kind before it came to Belgium.

The German exiles were in the forefront of the revolutionary movement.
Marx helped to draft the address of greeting the Association
Démocratique sent the Provisional Government in France. The address
spoke of the great tasks that still lay ahead of the revolution. German
_émigrés_ took part in the demonstration of the night of February 28.
Wilhelm Wolff was arrested and a knife was found on him. According to
the police Marx gave five thousand of the six thousand francs he had
just received to buy weapons for the workers of Brussels. The police had
their opportunity of dealing with the exiles at last. They worked in
close touch with the Prussian ambassador, who had in his possession on
February 29, only a day or two after it was drawn up, a list of those
who were to be expelled. Marx's name was at the top of the list.

Marx had no intention of staying in Belgium in any case. The
revolutionary centre of Europe was Paris, where his old acquaintance,
Flocon, now a member of the Provisional Government, summoned him. He
invited the 'dear and brave \[_cher et vaillant_\]' Marx to return to
the land from which tyranny had banished him. 'Tyranny has banished you;
free France flings wide her portals for you, and all who struggle in the
sacred cause of the brotherhood of the peoples [^13].'

The letter was sent from Paris on the first of March. Marx received it
on the second or the third and its arrival practically coincided with a
police order giving him twenty-four hours to leave Brussels. The
expulsion order was handed to Marx at five o'clock on March 3. He had a
few hours in which to settle a mass of personal and political affairs.

Almost as soon as the news of the successful Paris rising reached London
Schapper, Heinrich Bauer and others at the headquarters of the Communist
League decided to hurry to Paris. The London branch of the League
resolved to transfer the powers vested in it to the Brussels branch. The
Brussels branch was Marx, but Marx was expelled from Brussels. On the
evening of March 3 the five representatives of the branch gathered in
Marx's room in the hotel in which he was living. The meeting dissolved
the newly appointed League central office, invested Marx personally with
full powers and entrusted him with the task of constituting a new
central office in Paris. Before they had time to leave the premises,
they were raided by the police. They failed to capture Marx's friends,
who managed to slip away in the general confusion. But the League papers
and documents fell into their hands, among them the minutes of the
meeting which had just taken place. Thus the names of the chief
officials of the League fell into their possession. As a sign and token
of their new-born friendship, a copy of the minutes and other documents
found in Marx's room was sent to the Prussian ambassador.

Marx described the disgraceful behaviour of the police in a letter to
the _Réforme_:

'After receiving on March 3 at five o'clock in the afternoon an order to
leave Belgium within twenty-four hours, on the evening of the same day,
when I was still busy with preparations for my journey, a commissary of
police, accompanied by ten municipal guards, entered my apartments,
searched the whole house and ended by arresting me on the pretext that I
had no papers. Apart from the highly regular papers which M. Duchâtel
supplied me with on expelling me from France, I had in my possession the
expulsion passport which Belgium had supplied me with but a few hours
previously.

'I should not have spoken of my arrest and of the brutalities to which I
was subjected were it not for one circumstance which would be difficult
to understand, even in Austria.

'Immediately after my arrest my wife called on M. Jottrand, president of
the Democratic Association of Belgium, to ask him to take the necessary
steps. On her return she found a policeman at the door who told her,
with exquisite politeness, that if she wished to talk to M. Marx she had
only to follow him. My wife eagerly accepted the offer. She was
conducted to the police-station, where the commissary started by telling
her that M. Marx was not there; he then rudely asked who she was, what
she wanted with M. Jottrand and whether she had her papers with her. M.
Gigot, a Belgian Democrat who accompanied my wife and the policeman to
the police-station, indignant at the commissary's absurd and insolent
questions, was silenced by the guards, who seized him and threw him into
prison. My wife was taken to the Hôtel-de-Ville prison on the pretext of
vagabondage and locked up in a dark room in the company of a number of
prostitutes. At eleven o'clock next morning she was taken by an escort
of gendarmes, in broad daylight, to the office of the examining
magistrate. She was kept in a cell for two hours, in spite of violent
protests which arrived from every quarter, and exposed to all the
rigours of the season and to the basest insults by the gendarmes.

'Eventually she appeared before the examining magistrate, who was quite
astonished at the police in their solicitude not having likewise
arrested my young children. Under these circumstances the interrogation
amounted to a complete farce, and my wife's only crime consists in
sharing her husband's opinions, though she is of Prussian aristocratic
origin.

'I shall not enter into all the details of this revolting business, but
merely add that when we were released the twenty-four hours' grace had
just expired and we were compelled to leave the country without even
being able to take with us even the most indispensable personal
effects [^14].'

The Belgian Liberal Press made a vigorous protest against the ignominy
with which their country was covering itself. Engels mobilised the
Chartist Press in England. The deputy Bricourt demanded an
interpellation in the Belgian Chamber. The commissary of police who had
arrested Marx and his wife was dismissed. But by that time Marx was no
longer on Belgian soil.

He was taken to the frontier under police escort. It was a journey with
many obstacles. The trains and the stations were packed to suffocation
with soldiers on their way to the south. The air positively hummed with
rumours. It was said that the French and Belgian legions which had been
formed on French soil intended to found a Belgian republic at the point
of the bayonet. They would be suitably received!

In France the victory of the Republic was still being celebrated. The
stations were beflagged, the red flag and the tricolour flew side by
side and enthusiasm was still running high. The railway lines had been
torn up at Valenciennes and a half-hour omnibus ride was imposed on the
travellers before they could resume their train journey. Here, as on the
stretch between Pontoise and St. Denis, coachmen and innkeepers had
taken advantage of the first days of confusion to avenge themselves on
their new competitor, the railway. They had torn up rails, burned down
stations, smashed engines and coaches. In spite of all these hindrances
Marx reached Paris on March 4.

Paris still bore fresh marks of the fighting at the barricades. Fanny
Lewald, the German writer, who arrived in Paris a few days after Marx,
described the scene that confronted the newcomer. The paving stones at
the street corners were lying loosely instead of being cemented down.
Here and there smashed bread carts and overturned omnibuses indicated
the scenes of former barricades. An iron railing outside a church had
been completely torn up, except for a few feet which showed where an
iron railing had been. At the Palais Royal, or Palais National, as it
was now called in big letters, all the windows, many window-frames and
much scaffolding were broken; the Château d'Eau, the guard-house
opposite the Palais Royal, in which the guards had been burned to death,
lay in smoke-black ruins; other guard-houses in the neighbourhood of the
Seine had been razed to the ground, and National Guards kept guard,
sitting in the nearest taverns which served them as guard-room. The
trees on the Boulevards had been cut down and the water-pipes and
pillars pulled down. Dirty white curtains fluttered from the paneless
windows of the Tuileries.

The town was still at the height of its brief republican enthusiasm.
'The workers,' in the words of Engels, 'ate bread and potatoes in the
day-time and spent the evening planting "trees of freedom" on the
boulevards, while enthusiasts ran wild and sang the _Marseillaise_ and
the bourgeoisie hid in their houses all day long, trying to mollify the
fury of the people by exhibiting coloured lanterns.' The old song of the
Gironde was sung:

To die for one's country is the most beautiful and enviable fate [^15].

The tricolour flew over the Palais Royal and the Tuileries, where Marx's
old friend, Imbert, was now installed as governor. Here and there the
red flag of the proletarian revolution was to be seen.

Revolutionary and Socialist clubs sprang up like mushrooms. Newspapers,
pamphlets and fly-sheets appeared every day. Paris seethed with
political life. Boundless possibilities, intoxicating perspectives
suddenly opened up before the exiles' eyes. It never entered their heads
for a moment that the revolution might stop at the borders of France.
The revolutionary flame that had been kindled in Paris would leap the
frontiers and set Germany, Austria, Poland, the whole of Europe alight.

Since the great French Revolution it had appeared self-evident that
democracies and autocratic monarchies could not live peacefully side by
side. If democracy were victorious it must necessarily come into
collision with neighbouring states which were still in the hands of
absolutism. The revolutionary war was inevitable if the revolution were
not to miscarry again. During the months that followed the events of
February the question of the revolutionary war was one of the most
important subjects of party controversy. The Blanquists, true to the
tradition of the Great Revolution, which with them was only too often an
obstinate obsession, kept agitating for a revolutionary war with all the
passion which was their best inheritance. They urged it not only on the
ground that it was the only thing that could save the new France, but
also because they believed that it was only by and through a war that
the revolution in France could really be fulfilled.

The Provisional Government, and Lamartine, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, wanted peace. From the very first he assured all the
governments of Europe that France was willing to have peaceful relations
with all states, whatever their form of government might be.

But the Belgian, Italian and Polish exiles were working for war and
feverishly preparing for it. Each group formed its own legion to take
its place in the great army which should march against the despots,
vanguard of the army of revolutionary France in the last war of all,
from which a brotherly alliance of free peoples should arise. The
Germans took enthusiastically to this idea.

Before Marx's arrival in Paris a huge meeting of German exiles and
artisans resolved to form a German legion. The resolution had been
proposed by Bornstedt, and Herwegh was elected chairman of the
committee. Appeals were already plastered on the walls of Paris:

'Appeal to the Citizens of France

'Arms!

'Arms for the Germans marching to the help of their brethren now
fighting for liberty, offering their lives for their rights, whom their
enemies are trying to deceive once more!

'The German Democrats of Paris have formed a legion to march and
proclaim the German Republic.

'They need arms, ammunition, money, clothing. Help them. Your gifts will
be gratefully received. They will help to deliver Germany, and Poland as
well.

'German and Polish Democrats will march together to the conquest of
liberty.

'Long live France! Long live Poland! Long live united Republican
Germany! Long live the brotherhood of the peoples [^16]!'

The first detachments of German legionaries had already started drilling
on the Champ de Mars. They even had their anthem ready: 'We march to
Germany in masses.'

The plan was to invade Germany and raise an insurrection in the
Odenwald, where the people were already stirred up and memories of the
great German Peasant War still survived. The whole of Germany, starting
with the Odenwald, was to be roused to revolt. For some, however, this
plan was not nearly ambitious enough. They actually visualised an
alliance with the Poles, who planned a rising in Posen and another in
Galicia, to be followed by an expedition against Russia. Everything
seemed possible. It was sufficient for the first revolutionary trumpets
to blow for the walls of the fortress of Peter and Paul, the citadel of
European reaction, to fall of themselves. The Polish Democrats, who at
that time were everywhere the heroes of the day, had already started
squabbling with the Russian Democrats about the frontiers of free and
independent Poland. Their revolutionary ardour seemed equal to the most
impossible tasks. 'Oh, just for one day, dare it!' was the verse with
which Herwegh spurred on the half-hearted. Only one thing was necessary:
determination and again determination.

One of the few not carried away by the enthusiasm and the tumult was
Marx. That France did not want war was plain enough to anyone who did
not take the wish for the reality. A Blanquist Government would make
war, but to bring the Blanquists into power would require another
revolution. If Lamartine supported and encouraged the legions it was not
on revolutionary grounds but for very much more sober and mundane
reasons. The Provisional Government wanted to be rid of the foreign
workers, who had been a disturbing element from of old. They were
actually willing to subsidise their journey to the frontier. The legion,
which consisted of at most two thousand men, had no prospects whatever
if it fought alone. It could at best hope for an initial military
success. To the attacked absolutist powers an inroad by the legion could
only be welcome; for it would rouse national and patriotic feeling in
the invaded country and willy-nilly strengthen the government.

Marx was from the first bitterly opposed to futile, nay harmful, playing
at revolution. He counselled the workers not to rush headlong to
destruction with the legion but to await developments in Germany, which
were bound to lead to revolution in a very short time. Their place was
Paris, not the Odenwald. Sebastian Seiler, then a member of the
Communist League and an acquaintance of Marx, later wrote:

'The Socialists and Communists were bitterly opposed to attempting to
establish a German republic by armed intervention from without. They
held public meetings in the Rue St. Denis, which some of the later
insurgents attended. Marx made a long speech at one of these meetings,
and said that the February revolution was only to be regarded as the
superficial beginning of the European movement. In a short time open
fighting would break out in Paris between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie (as it actually did in June). On its result the victory or
defeat of revolutionary Europe would depend. He therefore insisted that
the German workers remain in Paris and prepare in advance to take part
in the armed struggle.'

This was swimming against the stream. The majority of the revolutionary
and democratic German exiles were opposed to Marx. They called him
coward and traitor and hurled the great, fine-sounding phrases of the
French Revolution at his head. In spite of his outstanding authority in
the Communist League, he was opposed by some of its members. Marx did
not retreat a step. The interests of the revolution and of the
working-class were at stake.

At the beginning of March the Fraternal Democrats had sent a workers'
deputation to Paris with an address to the Provisional Government.
M'Grath represented the Chartist national executive committee, Jones the
London section of the Party, Harney the Fraternal Democrats, and
Schapper and Moll the London German Workers' Union. They were given a
friendly reception by Garnier-Pagès and Ledru-Rollin. The London and
Brussels branches of the Communist League, assembled now in Paris, were
able to constitute the new central office in all due form. Marx was
elected president, Schapper secretary, and the members were Engels,
Moll, Bauer, Wilhelm Wolff and Wallau. Marx was now able on the League's
behalf to break with the organisations which acknowledged Herwegh and
his legion. Bornstedt, who had been elected to the League in Brussels,
was expelled. The decision and the reasons for it were published and
some newspapers in Germany actually reprinted the news, including the
_Trierer Zeitung_, published in Marx's native town. Marx and his
adherents withdrew from the democratic organisation and founded an
organisation of their own, the German Workers' Union, which met at the
Café de la Picarde in the Rue St. Denis. This club consisted almost
exclusively of workers, especially tailors and bootmakers, men whom
Alphonse Lucas, the reactionary chronicler of the clubs of this period,
sneered at for arrogating to themselves the right '_indiquer à la France
la manière dont elle devait se gouverner_,' of showing France how she
ought to be governed. Marx, however, was successful. As early as March
20 the ambassador of Baden reported to his Government that Marx's
adherents were 'very numerous.' At the beginning of April the Union
numbered four hundred members.

Soon after his arrival in Paris Marx revived his contacts with French
revolutionary circles that he knew from 1844 and 1845. On the evening of
the day on which he left Brussels he spoke at the _club central_ of the
_Société des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen_, the leader of which was
Barbès, a Right Blanquist. Marx's relations with the groups which were
represented in the Provisional Government by Ledru-Rollin and Flocon
were particularly good. Both these ministers were praised in the letters
Engels wrote his brother-in-law, Emil Blank. Engels said the workers
would hear of no one but Ledru-Rollin, and they were quite right,
because he was more resolute than any of the others. The men round
Ledru-Rollin and Flocon were Communists without knowing it. Marx and
Engels were on terms of personal friendship with Flocon, whom they
frequently visited. Flocon offered them money to start a newspaper in
Germany, but they did not accept it. Marx's relations with Ledru-Rollin
and Flocon later changed, but to the end he criticised them
comparatively mildly.

The European movement advanced with a giant's stride. 'Marvellous' news
arrived daily. 'A complete revolution in Nassau; in Munich students,
artists and workers in full insurrection; at Cassel revolution is at the
gate; in Berlin there is unbounded fear and trepidation; freedom of the
Press and a national guard proclaimed throughout the West of Germany.
That is enough for a beginning. If only Frederick William IV remains
stubborn! If he does, everything is won and in a few months we shall
have the German revolution. If only he clings to his feudal ways! But
the devil alone knows what that moody, crazy individual will do next.'
Thus wrote Engels in Brussels to Marx in Paris on March 8.

On March 19 there was a parade of Herwegh's Democrats at the Butte de
Monceau, with sabre-rattling, fixing of bayonets, rifle-practice,
marching and counter-marching. At the final rally Herwegh read a German
address to the Polish Democrats. At about four o'clock some thousand men
marched back to Paris in military formation. When they reached it they
learned the news that had just come to Paris: a revolution in Vienna,
Metternich deposed, the Emperor forced to yield to all the demands of
the fighters at the barricades. Tens of thousands of Frenchmen
exuberantly fraternised with the Germans. Next day there came the news
of victory in Berlin. The boldest dreams were more than fulfilled.
Rumours spread beyond all bounds. The King of Prussia was said to have
been arrested by the insurgents and thrown into prison, Warsaw had risen
and the Russians had been put to flight, and the garrison of St.
Petersburg had hoisted the flag of insurrection.

The legion was no longer to be restrained. It left Paris on April 1. It
was given a magnificent send-off. The son of Marshal Ney, the Prince of
Moscow, made an eloquent speech in which he referred to the great
revolutionary traditions and spoke of the revolution's struggle against
the bulwark of absolutism in the north, and then the adventure which was
to end so quickly and so pitifully began. The leaders of the legion had
not yet even decided what they wanted; whether to kindle a peasant war
or march peacefully through Germany, their weapons in their hands, to
attack Russia, or fight a civil war in Germany until the French advance
began. When Ledru-Rollin tried to find out what the exact aims of
Herwegh's movement were, he is said to have brought a long conversation
to a close with the words: 'Ah, now I understand, you want to take a
corps of barricade professors to Germany.'

The 'barricade professors' were stopped at Strasbourg. That they carried
with them the heartiest good wishes of the Blanquists helped them not at
all. Lamartine had very guilefully and diplomatically done everything in
his power to give the German Government time to prepare their troops for
the legion's reception. The forces the legion met when it crossed the
Rhine were so infinitely superior and it was so inadequately armed that
it was overwhelmed and beaten at the first encounter.

This outcome had been foreseen by Marx. He had opposed the blind,
desperate enthusiasm, the reckless, plunging spirit of the insurgents
without heeding the mockery and scorn heaped upon him as a doctrinaire.
In his view it was infinitely more important for the revolutionaries to
make themselves acquainted with the programme dictated to them by the
precipitous course of events. The outcry against Marx among the
hyper-revolutionaries had reached its zenith at a moment when, they
believed, all true revolutionaries ought to be teaching the workers the
use of arms, while he spent his time lecturing them on political
economy, damping down their enthusiasm and turning them into
doctrinaires.

The outbreak of revolution in Germany gave the Communists new tasks.
Their place was no longer in Paris, but in the country in which they and
they only could show the working class the way. That country was
Germany. Marx advised the exiles to return to Germany individually and
start building up proletarian organisations.

By a coincidence the leaders of the Communist League left Paris on the
same day as Herwegh's legion; but without music and without a speech by
the Prince of Moscow. A young member of Herwegh's expedition sent a
report about it to some German newspapers. 'The German Communists left
Paris too,' he wrote. 'Unlike the German Democrats, they did not depart
fraternally and sociably, in closed ranks, but each man went to a
different point on his own initiative--travellers each carrying the
salvation of the world in his own breast.' The writer of those lines
soon saw how misguided was the contempt with which he wrote. He was
Wilhelm Liebknecht, then aged twenty-two.

The Communists left Paris. Four and a half years before Marx had
transplanted himself from the Prussia of Frederick William IV to the
Paris of Louis Philippe. Since then there had been the breach with the
Left Hegelians, the arrival at clarification, the rejection of
semi-demi, muddle-headed, sentimental Socialism, the Communist
Manifesto, the Communist League. When Marx left Paris the flag of the
Republic was flying from the Palais Royal and Germany was in flames.

## Chapter 13: The 'Mad Year' in Cologne

In Germany the members of the Communist League scattered in all
directions. Most of them went to their native town or to the place where
they had lived before going into exile. Engels spent April and May in
the Wuppertal, Wilhelm Wolff went to Breslau, Schapper to Wiesbaden,
Born to Berlin, Wallau to Mainz. In practically every place where
workers' unions arose in the months that followed the lead was taken by
members of the League or of organisations affiliated to it.

The immediate task was to bring together the workers' organisations that
had been founded before the outbreak of the Revolution. The first appeal
for unity came from the Mainz Workers' Educational Union. Marx, who
stopped for two days at Mainz on the way from Paris to Cologne, helped
to draft it.

Marx went to Cologne because he had connections with that city which had
never been entirely broken off during his years of exile and because
Cologne, the biggest city in the most highly industrialised part of
Germany, was the obvious place for the headquarters of the Communist
League. He arrived on April 10, accompanied by Engels and Ernst Dronke,
a gifted young political writer who had earned himself a good reputation
by his books and stories and been made famous by his big trial for
_lèse-majesté_, when he was condemned to two years' imprisonment. His
daring escape from the fortress of Wesel made him still more famous.

A branch of the Communist League had existed in Cologne since the autumn
of 1847. Its leaders were Andreas Gottschalk, a physician, and August
von Willich, a former artillery lieutenant. Both these highly
distinctive personalities, each in his own way characteristic of the
'mad year' of 1848, will be repeatedly mentioned in the pages that
follow, and a few words about their careers will not be out of place.

Gottschalk, son of a Jewish butcher, was born at Düsseldorf in 1815. He
studied medicine and philosophy at Bonn--he was at Bonn at the same time
as Marx--and passed his finals with distinction in 1839. In 1840 he
started a medical and surgical practice in Cologne. From the first he
worked almost exclusively in the working-class quarters of the city, as
healer, helper and friend of the poorest workers. 'It is intelligible,'
states a pamphlet written in his memory in 1849, 'that the man who had
the most abundant opportunity of observing poverty, misery and distress
at close quarters and was also a warm sympathiser with the sufferings of
the proletariat, who were almost on the brink of utter destitution--it
is readily intelligible, I say, that such a man should reflect upon the
ways and means of most rapidly and effectively redressing pauperisation
and distress.' Gottschalk made the workers' cause his own. The Cologne
workers idolised their warm-hearted doctor and friend. He was their
undisputed leader.

August von Willich was a man of entirely different type. He was
descended from an ancient, aristocratic, military Prussian family,
attended the military academy at Potsdam, and at the beginning of the
forties was a captain in an artillery brigade stationed in Westphalia.
The ideas of the time--democracy, Socialism, revolutionary substitution
of a new world for the old--found their way even into the stuffy
atmosphere of a Prussian barracks. Willich belonged to the not so very
small group of officers to whom these ideas appealed. When Lieutenant
Fritz Anneke, later Gottschalk's closest friend and colleague, was
deprived of his officer's status because of his courageous avowal of
Socialism, Willich wrote an open letter to the king on his behalf. For
this he was placed before a court of honour and deprived of his rank. He
went to Cologne and joined the local branch of the Communist League. He
earned his living as a carpenter. When the former Prussian army captain
made his way across the Cologne parade ground, as he did deliberately
every morning on his way to work, walking very slowly past the drilling
squads, wearing his leather apron and with his tools on his back, it had
a very provocative effect. This was just what Willich intended. He
wanted to get himself--and consequently democracy and Socialism--talked
about. The Cologne Communist group attached great importance to
propaganda in the army.

Its members met twice a week, discussed 'Communism and history,' and
carried on 'retail propaganda,' to employ an expression Gottschalk used
in a letter to Hess. The branch did not yet number twenty members. Its
influence on the working-class population of Cologne was effectively
demonstrated when things started to happen.

The revolution in Paris made a great impression throughout Germany, but
nowhere was its effect so great as in the Rhineland. In every Rhineland
town petitions to the Government were drafted, demanding radical reforms
in an altogether unprecedented manner. They were promptly covered with
thousand and tens of thousands of signatures. The initiative for all
this activity came from Cologne, and in Cologne itself the initiative
came from the branch of the Communist League. On March 3 it organised a
mass-meeting outside the town hall. A deputation led by Gottschalk and
Willich appeared in the council chamber and announced their demands to
the startled city fathers. The four thousand people outside lent
emphasis to what they said. Soldiers were brought to the scene, there
were collisions between them and the demonstrators, the soldiers fired,
there were dead and wounded and Gottschalk, Willich and Anneke were put
under arrest. Three weeks later they were freed by the victory of the
revolution in Berlin. The demonstration had attained its purpose of
setting the movement on the Rhine under way.

At the end of March, when Gottschalk and his friends were set at
liberty, the situation had completely altered. As Marx had foreseen, the
news that a republican legion was coming from France to invade Germany
had visibly helped the forces of conservatism. A panic fear of the
French seized the south and west of Germany. The French were visualised
going through the land, looting and burning. The governments of Germany
diligently fostered the general alarm. 'You have no idea of how our
bourgeoisie fear the word "republic,"' Gottschalk wrote on March 26 to
his friend Hess. 'For them it is synonymous with robbery, murder, or a
Russian invasion, and your legions would be so execrated as bands of
murderous incendiaries that but few proletarians would come to your
aid.' Georg Weerth wrote to Marx on March 25 almost in the same terms,
also from Cologne. Communism, he added, was a word people shuddered at,
and anyone who came out openly as a Communist would be stoned. And when
the legion crossed the frontier and on top of it the rapidly suppressed
Republican rising took place in Baden, the word 'republic' took on the
most evil connotations, at any rate for the time being, in people's
minds. Another thing that added strength to the counter-revolution was
that the newspapers printed lies about letters of Marx said to have been
found on captured leaders of the legion, so that Republican, Communist
and national enemy became synonymous.

A furious hue-and-cry for the ringleaders of the dispersed demonstration
started in Cologne, a 'veritable _battue_,' as one newspaper put it, and
Willich felt the place had become too hot to hold him. He went to Baden
and took part in the insurrection there, and Cologne saw him no more.
Gottschalk remained to defy the storm. Finding himself defended by the
moderate Democrats either faint-heartedly or not at all, he did not
mince matters but turned his face from them and confined the whole of
his agitation to the workers. On April 6, four days before Marx's
arrival in Cologne, he issued an appeal for the foundation of a
'Democratic Socialist Union.'

Three hundred people were present at the inaugural meeting on April 13.
The overwhelming majority were workers. For this reason they promptly
adopted the additional title of 'Workers' Union.' The success of the new
organisation was astonishing. At the beginning of May the newspapers
estimated its membership at between three and four thousand. By the end
of June the membership had risen to nearly eight thousand. Every one of
its meetings at the Gürzenich-haus was packed to overflowing. The
workers in their blouses sat before a platform adorned with the red
flag, wearing red sashes across their breasts, some of them with red
Jacobin caps on their heads. Many of the audience were women, and many
were illiterate workers, porters and boatmen, who were particularly hard
hit by the prevailing unemployment.

Popular as Gottschalk was among the workers of Cologne, his name alone
would not have sufficed to hold this great mass of people together had
he not skilfully and effectively represented their most immediate
interests. The Workers' Union was at one and the same time an
educational association, a political club, and also a breeding ground of
trade unionism. Gottschalk divided the union into occupational sections,
and what with the prevalent trade crisis--for the employers, hampered by
no law, lowered wages, lengthened hours, gave their apprentices worse
victuals--these sections had enough and more than enough to do. They
worked out wage rates, tried to establish standards for the working day,
busied themselves with conditions of labour. The workers brought their
troubles and needs to the Union as though it were omnipotent.

It was hated by the employers in proportion. Not only the employers but
the whole propertied class regarded the Workers' Union as a nefarious
assault upon humanity. The most incredible rumours gathered round the
Union and its president, Gottschalk, 'the Communist apostle.' One
reactionary journal stated that the demagogue was putting the craziest
ideas into the workers' heads. The workers no longer worked but spent
all their evenings at the political clubs, from which they went home
drunk and beat their wives and children, whom they left to starve.
Gottschalk was credited with hatching the most infamous plots. It was
said at the end of April that Gottschalk nightly had 'terrible troops of
workers drilling with the eleven thousand flints that Abd-el-Kadr had
sent him.'

However absurd it may sound, all this was taken perfectly seriously by a
great many people. The more sinister the Workers' Union came to appear
in the eyes of the property-owners, the more willingly did they listen
to the voice of reaction. But dislike of the Workers' Union was
widespread even among the most democratically-minded artisans of
Cologne. The 'Association of Employers and Employed,' the leader of
which was Hermann Becker, a Democrat, who became active in the Communist
League in 1850 and 1851, though later he underwent a complete change of
view and eventually became burgomaster of Cologne, was mainly an
association of small master-craftsmen and educated artisans. It took its
stand on the basis of class peace.

Such was the situation when Marx arrived in Cologne. At first he
naturally enough adhered to the party of Gottschalk. He took part in the
first meetings of the Workers' Union. But in a very short time
differences of opinion concerning the policy of the Union arose between
Gottschalk and him. A contemporary record has survived of a meeting
which took place shortly after Marx's arrival between the leaders of the
Communist League on the one side and the members of the Cologne branch
on the other. The discussion is said to have become 'very violent' and
Dr. Gottschalk was harshly criticised in regard to the organisation of
the Workers' Union. Further information is not available, but from the
subsequent development of the dispute it is safe to conclude that as
soon as he had surveyed the situation in the first few days after his
arrival Marx resolutely opposed Gottschalk's policy. The situation in
Germany being what it was, Gottschalk's programme could not result in
anything but parting the proletariat from the Democratic movement and
completely isolating it.

The Revolution had created, for the first time in German history, a
Parliament for the whole of Germany, including Austria. The National
Assembly was to meet in Frankfurt. In Prussia a Chamber was to be
elected by a secret and universal indirect ballot. Gottschalk demanded a
boycott of the elections both for the Frankfurt and the Berlin
assemblies. He claimed that indirect voting was objectionable in itself,
and besides there was not sufficient time for the necessary preliminary
campaign. The majority of the workers who supported Gottschalk followed
him in this, and other extreme Left groups also proclaimed an election
boycott, in which they may have been influenced by the example of the
Blanquists in France. There is no doubt that the Blanquist example
influenced Gottschalk. Blanqui was not Gottschalk's model in this alone.
Gottschalk may well have had some contact with Blanqui as early as 1848.
Herwegh bears witness to his having visited Blanqui in prison when in
Paris at the beginning of 1849.

Marx condemned the extreme Left boycott of the elections as an idle and
futile demonstration, ultra-revolutionary in form, reactionary in
content. By it the Lefts cleared the political battlefield for the
forces of Reaction and the lukewarm centre. Marx's dispute with
Gottschalk became intensified.

Gottschalk's standing out for a boycott was merely the consequence of
his general attitude. He utterly rejected all and every compromise and
would not hear of even the most temporary coalition with non-proletarian
Democratic groups. The probable effects of his demands and slogans on
others than his own followers did not trouble him at all. He conducted
his propaganda openly under the Republican banner, and not just the
Republican banner, but the Socialist banner too--the banner of the
Republic of Labour. Gottschalk simply shut his eyes to the whole
political backwardness of Germany.

The Democrats were not themselves agreed as to how the three dozen
Fatherlands of Germany were to be united. There were advocates of
constitutional monarchy upon the broadest democratic basis, there were
advocates of a 'republic with hereditary royal officials,' there were
those who wanted the several states to be republics subject to an
all-German monarchy, while others again wanted their own state to be a
constitutional monarchy subject to a German federal republic. Between
the advocates of extreme federalism and extreme centralisation there
were advocates of every conceivable form of compromise. Even among the
Democrats, to say nothing of the Liberals, there were but few who
favoured the 'one and indivisible republic' which was the first of the
seventeen demands which the Communist League formulated and distributed
in the form of a pamphlet. Marx was convinced of this by letters sent
him by friends and sympathisers from all over Germany. Engels wrote from
Barmen: 'If a single copy of our seventeen points were distributed here,
as far as we were concerned all would be lost.' Marx issued warnings
against illusory hopes in the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ not long
afterwards. 'We do not at the outset make the Utopian demand for a
single and indivisible German republic,' he wrote, 'but we demand of the
so--called Radical-Democratic Party that it do not confound the point of
departure of the struggle and of the revolutionary movement with its
final aims. It is not now a matter of realising this or that point of
view, this or that political idea, but of insight into the course of
development. The National Assembly (in Frankfurt) has only to perform
the immediate and practically possible steps.'

In these circumstances Gottschalk's line of action meant parting the
advanced workers not only from the Liberal and Democratic bourgeoisie
but also from the great mass of the workers themselves. It meant
destroying the coalition of proletariat and revolutionary bourgeoisie in
the struggle against absolutism, a coalition that the Communist
Manifesto had proclaimed as inevitable but temporary.

Marx's attitude was clearly defined in the very first months of
revolution. He was opposed to coming out prematurely and independently
with the seventeen points. 'When we founded a great newspaper in
Germany,' Engels wrote in 1884, 'the banner for us to take our stand
under presented itself. It could only be the banner of democracy, but
the banner of a democracy which emphasised its specifically proletarian
character in details only, since it was not yet possible to proclaim its
proletarian character once and for all. Had we been unwilling to do this
... we should have had no choice but to content ourselves with teaching
the doctrines of Communism in an obscure local paper and founding a
small sect instead of a great party of action. The time had passed for
us to be preachers in the wilderness. We had studied the Utopians too
well not to know that. We had not drafted our programme for that.'

In the middle of April Marx and his friends participated in the
formation of the Democratic Union in Cologne. It did not at first stand
out in any particular way, but took the line that the form of government
of the future united Germany should be left to be decided by the
National Assembly at Frankfurt and that the relations between throne and
people in Prussia should be left to the Chamber in Berlin. This evasion
of a clear answer to the most elementary questions left the members of
the Democratic Union more than dissatisfied. Someone at the meeting
asked what the members of the Democratic Union wanted themselves.
Seven-eighths of them were in favour of a republic, as the discussion
showed, but no resolution in favour of a republic was made. The few who
had not yet made up their minds should not be antagonised and driven
over to the moderates.

The Democratic Union's first definite action was taking part in the
elections for Frankfurt and Berlin. Marx's critics maintained that
thanks to his tactics not so much as a single Democrat was sent to
Parliament, but only a fortuitous Left of the type of Franz Raveaux,
whom Marx himself was very soon forced to criticise in the _Neue
Rheinische Zeitung_. But there is no doubt that but for the Democratic
Union Cologne would have been represented by Rights and moderates only.

The Communist League was not equal to the situation the Revolution had
created. It was inadequate in every way. It very soon demonstrated
itself to be incomparably weaker in Germany than the central office had
supposed. All the emissaries of the League, who were dispersed in every
direction, were unanimous to that effect. In Berlin there was no
organisation whatsoever, and the handful of approximately twenty
sympathisers had practically no contact with each other. In Breslau the
League was entirely unrepresented. In Mainz the organisation was on the
point of collapse, and in other centres the story was the same. The
League's emissaries were certainly not lacking in energy and enthusiasm,
but the branches, in the places where they did manage to found them,
very soon demonstrated that they had no real life in them. All the
really active members devoted themselves to legal work in the workers'
unions, on newspapers and so forth. Marx refused to keep the Communist
League alive artificially and go on leading a movement because it had
once existed. Besides, there were difficulties Marx had to contend with
within the League itself.

In Marx's opinion the appearance of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ did
away with the excuse even for the appearance of the Communist League's
existence. A secret organisation had become entirely superfluous, and
all that Marx had to say, all the general guidance he had to offer,
could be made public through the Press. Because of the infinite variety
of conditions in Germany, which varied from state to state and from
province to province, it was not possible to give more than general
guidance. Marx therefore proposed to the central office that the League
be dissolved. Schapper and the other members of the London group put up
some opposition to this course. Though they agreed with him on general
political questions and sided with him in the struggle with Gottschalk,
they had lived in the League and with the League and for the League and
it had been dear to them too long for them to be able to consent to its
dissolution. So Marx, in the words of a contemporary, 'made use of his
discretionary powers and dissolved the League.'

Gottschalk had agreed with Marx with regard to the dissolution of the
League. In the Workers' Union he had an incomparably more powerful
weapon than the small local branch of the Communist League, so he was
able to watch it die with a light heart. Another motive may also have
influenced him. He wanted to sever all party connection with Marx in
order to be able to attack him with the less restraint. Even before the
appearance of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ sharp collisions arose
between Marx's, and Gottschalk's followers. After the collapse of the
republican rising in Baden, Willich fled to France and gathered the
fugitives at Besançon. Most of them were workers, and their state was so
piteous that Willich appealed to the Democrats in Germany to assist
them. Anneke had joined the Democratic Union in spite of his friendship
with Gottschalk. At a meeting of the Union he rose, read Willich's
letter of appeal and proposed that the Union collect money for the
Republican refugees at Besançon. A lively discussion ended in a vote
heavily turning down the proposal. Anneke was the only one to vote for
it. According to the newspapers the Democrats, in spite of their
sympathy for the hungering and exiled worker-refugees, declined to help
them because doing so might be interpreted as approval of the policy by
which they had been guided. Anneke resigned from the Democratic Union.
At his and Gottschalk's suggestion the Workers' Union started a
collection which raised quite a respectable sum. That made it perfectly
clear, of course, that Marx and his Democrats were cowardly and inhuman,
while Gottschalk and the Workers' Union were noble and courageous
Republicans.

Marx's name had not yet been mentioned and the second attack was not
directed openly at him, either, but at the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_,
the first number of which had recently appeared. The printer did not pay
the wages which the Workers' Union was trying to establish as the
minimum for the trade. No other printer in Cologne paid the minimum wage
either, but Gottschalk had no need to mention that. The editorial staff
of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_, i.e. Marx, had nothing whatever to do
with the printer and the wages he paid his staff. Gottschalk's newspaper
started a violent campaign against the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_, which
described itself as an organ of democracy but was in the hands of a
group of inveterate aristocrats--indeed the most dangerous kind,
money-aristocrats. They were 'trampling on the proletariat and betraying
the people.'

Marx had just obtained an organ in which he could state his position
clearly. His task was by no means confined to defending himself against
the agitation carried on against him by the ultra-Lefts in Cologne. The
paper was to be a substitute for the Communist League throughout
Germany, and over and above that the organ of the 'great party of
action' of the German Revolution. A few radicals, in particular Georg
Weerth and Heinrich Bürgers, both friends of Marx from earlier years,
had busied themselves with the project of founding a newspaper before
Marx's arrival in Cologne. Bürgers was no Communist, and the paper was
not originally intended to be more than a local Cologne newspaper, and
Marx had not been intended to work on it. When he arrived he was advised
to go to Berlin. He declined. 'We knew the Berlin of that time only too
well from personal observation,' Engels wrote later. 'Berlin with its
barely arisen bourgeoisie, its loquacious but timid and obsequious lower
middle-class, its completely undeveloped workers, its teeming
bureaucracy, its swarms of nobles and courtiers.' The decisive factor,
however, was that the _Code Napoléon_ was in force in Cologne, involving
freedom of the Press, which was not even remotely conceivable in Berlin
even after the events of March.

Marx succeeded in gaining control of the paper within a very short time.
For this purpose it was necessary to secure the consent of the Cologne
Democrats. The newspaper had to be 'edited from the German Democratic
viewpoint, which regarded the question of whether Germany should have a
monarchy or a republic as an open one, though it gave the advantage to
the republican idea both from the practical and the theoretical point of
view.' This was how Bürgers formulated the conditions on which the
editorship would be given to Marx. Bürgers was himself on the editorial
board. Marx naturally accepted these terms.

There was greater difficulty in raising the money for the paper than its
backers had expected. The upper bourgeoisie would have nothing whatever
to do with the Democrats, particularly with those suspected of having
anything whatever to do with Communism. Marx appealed to Engels to try
to place some of the shares in the Wuppertal. His success was meagre.
According to his son, old Engels would rather send him a thousand
bullets than a thousand thalers. Marx did not fare much better in
Cologne. Meanwhile events were pressing. The National Assembly met at
Frankfurt and from the first day showed itself so timid, so undecided,
so conscience-stricken that the future of this half-revolution seemed to
promise the worst. It was essential that the paper should appear as soon
as possible. Marx plunged his hand in his own pocket and produced every
penny he possessed. All the money available, such as it was, was laid
down, and the first number of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ appeared on
June 1, 1848.

With the exception of Bürgers, the editorial board consisted entirely of
ex-members of the Communist League: Dronke, Weerth, Ferdinand Wolff,
Wilhelm Wolff. Marx was the editor. The organisation of the editorial
staff, in the words of Engels, was 'a simple dictatorship by Marx. A
great daily which had to be ready by a definite time could not maintain
a consistent attitude in any other way. Marx's dictatorship was accepted
as a matter of course. It was undisputed and gladly acknowledged by us
all. It was above all his clear views and firm principles that made it
the most famous newspaper of the revolutionary years.'

Marx's editorship was distinguished by the fact that he did not publish
any general theoretical articles of the kind that filled the other
Democratic newspapers of the time to a surfeit. Facts were the language
of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_. While Democratic professors explained
the advantages of the republican form of government at interminable
length--to which they were particularly prone in the South German
Press--lectures of this kind were completely absent from the _Neue
Rheinische Zeitung_. The reason for this was not alone because of the
agreement with Bürgers. Marx's task was to give his readers an 'insight
into the course of development.' The way in which Marx presented his
facts, made them demonstrate the inevitability of a republican solution,
was the most effective possible propaganda for republicanism, though the
word was never mentioned.

The paper's policy was determined by Marx and Marx alone. Marx edited it
as he had edited the _Rheinische Zeitung_ five years before. Just as
behind every word of the _Rheinische Zeitung_ there had been the voice
of Marx, so did he now make every word of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_
his own. The paper called itself the 'organ of democracy' and in
speaking of the battle-front against the forces of feudal absolutism it
used the phrase 'we Democrats.' During the first months it avoided
anything that might possibly disturb the united front. Not a word was
spoken of the antagonism between proletarian and non-proletarian,
bourgeois or petty-bourgeois democracy. There was not a word about the
special interests of the working classes, of the workers' special tasks
in the German Revolution. Neither Engels or Marx wrote a word about the
position of the workers until the end of 1848. Engels, writing to Marx
from Barmen before the appearance of the paper, expressed himself very
strongly on this question of the policy of the united front at any
price. 'The workers are beginning to stir a little, still very crudely,
but in a mass. That, however, does not suit us,' he wrote. The
proletariat must march in the great democratic battle-line, always at
the extreme Left wing, always taking care not to lose connection with
the rest of the army. It must be at its most impetuous in attack, its
fighting spirit must animate the host in the storming of the Bastille.
For the Bastille is not yet taken, Marx cried to those who threatened to
tire, absolutism is not defeated yet. As long as the Bastille is still
standing the Democrats must remain united. The proletariat must not
isolate itself; however difficult the task may be, it must reject
everything tending to divide it from the rest.

The Communist Manifesto had allotted the Communist Party a twofold task,
not only that of taking part in the common struggle of the bourgeoisie
against the reactionary classes but of 'instilling into the workers the
clearest possible recognition of the antagonism between bourgeoisie and
proletariat, so that the German workers may straightway use as so many
weapons against the bourgeoisie the social and political conditions
which the bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce with their supremacy,
and in order that the fight against the bourgeoisie may immediately
begin after the downfall of the reactionary classes.'

First the bourgeoisie must come into power, but really into power. The
proletariat must support it in this, urge it forward, pitilessly scourge
every weakness, every hesitation, every compromise the bourgeoisie might
want to make with the forces of reaction. But so long as the
revolutionary advance of the bourgeoisie continued it must maintain a
united front with it. After the victory the united front must be
destroyed. Once the bourgeoisie had in all essentials got the power, the
struggle against it would begin. In Germany it could not, must not begin
yet. In France and England it was different.

The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ gave more space to events abroad than any
other German paper. What had already come to pass in France and England
must come to pass in Germany to-morrow. There could be no better way of
creating the 'clearest possible awareness of the antagonism between
bourgeoisie and proletariat' than by constantly drawing the workers'
attention to events abroad. But in Germany the Bastille must first be
stormed. In Germany compromise was inevitable. In Germany 'we Democrats'
must fight shoulder to shoulder until victory was gained. In France the
time for compromise had passed. Strenuously as Marx avoided anything
that might have weakened the joint Democratic forces in Germany, he
sided just as resolutely with the insurrectionary Paris workers in those
days of June.

Consideration for his allies in the struggles did not mean that he
spared their weaknesses. The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ treated its
contemptible opponents, the monarchy, the military camarilla, the whole
of the forces of reaction, with the greatest contempt. That goes without
saying. It poured just as much scorn and contempt upon the irresolution
and pusillanimity of the Left. The revolution had not yet been
accomplished. It was an illusion to suppose that nothing was left now
but to gather in its fruits. The Assembly at Frankfurt was only a timid
beginning, and if it stood still it must be whipped forward. 'The very
first number began with an article which ridiculed the ineffectiveness
of the Frankfurt Parliament, the uselessness of its long-winded
speeches, the vanity of its timid resolutions. It cost us half our
shareholders.' Engels still remembered that with pleasure nearly forty
years later.

War with Russia would drive the revolution forward, cut off every
possibility of a bourgeois retreat, destroy half-slain feudalism with a
single mighty blow. The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ demanded it from the
very first day. There was no other way of freeing Poland than by war.
Russia was the mainstay of European reaction; it must be overthrown in
war. With every month it became clearer that only war with Russia could
save the German Revolution. The German Revolution had got stuck in 'a
tedious philistine _cul-de-sac_,' as Engels complained in September,
1848. It failed to overcome the old impediment of its division into
innumerable petty states. Prussia, though it had sustained some heavy
blows, was fundamentally intact, and remained the single serious
internal opponent. Austria stood firm in spite of all shocks and
threatened to become strong once more. The only possibility of uniting
Germany was for Germany to make a united war on Russia. 'If Germany
could be brought to war with Russia, it would be all up with Habsburgs
and Hohenzollerns, and the Revolution would be victorious all along the
line.' Marx scarcely expected the war to revolutionise Russia. The
liberation of Poland, though a desired aim, was nevertheless a
by-product. The war must be fought for the salvation and completion of
the German revolutionary will. The Tsar would be the saviour of the
German Revolution, because he would centralise it. That was how Marx
regarded the question of war.

But the Tsar hesitated and did not attack the Revolution, and the
Revolution in its turn was too feeble, too little centralised, to take
the offensive itself.

A perceptible change took place in Cologne after Marx started addressing
the workers directly. The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ found its way to the
workers and to the members of Gottschalk's Union, who obviously started
by mistrusting it. The Workers' Union published a pitiful little sheet
which contained practically nothing but minutes of Union meetings and
short paragraphs about the workers' everyday life. It did not satisfy
even the most modest demands. Complaints about it were made at meetings,
but Gottschalk, a good speaker and organiser, was a less than mediocre
journalist.

Marx's field of activity also extended in another direction. The various
Democratic Unions, which were distributed all over Germany, sent their
representatives to a Congress which took place in Frankfurt-on-Main on
June 14 and 15. The Workers' Union in Cologne also took part in it. If
Gottschalk had been consistent he would have boycotted the Democratic
Congress just as he had boycotted the two Parliaments. He did not do so.
The Workers' Union sent him to Frankfurt as their only delegate, because
'Gottschalk alone was completely competent to represent the Workers'
Union of Cologne.' He was to demand an open avowal of a republic and an
open disavowal of the Frankfurt and Berlin Parliaments.

Gottschalk played an important rôle at the Democratic Congress. One
delegate described him as a man 'born to be a dictator, possessing
indefatigable energy and intelligence as sharp as a guillotine, an image
of Robespierre.' Of the two resolutions that he proposed the
anti-Parliamentary one was rejected and the other accepted with a highly
significant alteration. A Democratic republic was declared to be not, as
Gottschalk demanded, the 'only possible' system of government but as the
'only tenable' one. He did not leave the Congress on this account but
actually gave his vote in favour of the resolutions which determined the
constitution of the Union itself. These declared the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ to be one of the three official organs of the Democratic Party,
and appealed to all Democratic associations existing at any one place to
unite.

Three organisations had sent their representatives to the Congress from
Cologne: the Workers' Union, the Democratic Union and the Association of
Employers and Employed. These ought now to have united. Gottschalk
wanted a complete fusion of the three, which, in view of the great
numerical preponderance of the Workers' Union, would have meant the
complete submergence of the other two organisations in his. The
Democratic Union declined to be submerged and proposed that a bureau of
co-operation be created instead. Negotiations were still in progress
when events occurred which fundamentally altered the situation of the
Cologne Democrats.

The bourgeoisie were not alone in their hatred of Gottschalk. The police
had had an eye on him for a long time, and they stepped in now.
According to the police report Gottschalk and Anneke were said to have
proposed to the Workers' Union 'the foundation of a republic by violent
means.' Gottschalk and Anneke were arrested on July 3. The prison gates
closed behind them for six months.

An interregnum in the Workers' Union now began. Not one of Gottschalk's
adherents was capable of replacing him. Joseph Moll was elected
temporary president. Although he was an opponent of Gottschalk's, his
energy, courage and knowledge had earned him general respect. He and
Schapper now became the leaders of the Union, and both of them were
political partisans of Marx. An attempt to attack Marx from another
quarter miscarried. Marx's old opponent, Wilhelm Weitling, came to
Cologne in the middle of July. On July 21, at the Democratic Union, he
made 'an exciting speech in which he proclaimed the necessity of a
complete reorganisation of our political and social institutions,' in
the words of a newspaper favourably disposed towards him. This speech
was reported in full in the official organ of the Democratic Union. In
America Weitling had learned nothing whatever. He still preached
government by the 'judicious' because neither in Germany nor in America
nor even in the Democratic Union, as he not very politely added, was the
mob capable of recognising where its real interests lay. Marx answered
him at a meeting on August 4. In their social development, he said, the
Germans were now where the French had been in 1789. To set up a
dictatorship to realise any one man's ideas would be absurd. The
sovereign power, as in the case of the provisional government in Paris,
must be formed of the most heterogeneous elements, which then, by the
exchange of ideas, must decide on the most effective method of
government. The drafting of the report cannot be said to be very clear,
but Marx's line of argument can be detected through the muddled
statement. He demanded that the German Revolution be completed, the
bourgeois revolution, the German 1789, representing the coalition of all
the forces of Democracy, all 'the highly heterogeneous elements.'

In the meantime a joint committee of Cologne Democrats had been formed.
Marx and Schneider, a lawyer, represented the Democratic Union, Schapper
and Moll the Workers' Union, and two others represented the Association
of Employers and Employed. This combination assured the leadership of
Marx. The committee displayed tremendous activity. In the middle of
August it organised the first Rhineland Democratic Congress, at which
forty delegates represented sixteen organisations. Marx was the life and
soul of the Congress. Karl Schurz, the German-American statesman, who
was a young student at Bonn at the time, described forty years later the
impression that Marx made upon him. 'Marx was thirty years old and
already the recognised head of a school of Socialism. A thick-set,
powerful man, with his high forehead, his pitch-black hair and beard and
his dark, flashing eyes, he immediately attracted general attention. He
had the reputation of great learning in his subject, and what he said
was in fact solid, logical and clear.' People with unclear minds were
always repelled by Marx's clarity and logic. Schurz was of the opinion
that he had never met a man of such wounding and intolerable arrogance
of manner. He never forgot the tone of biting contempt with which he
uttered, almost spat the word 'bourgeois.' Albert Brisbane,
correspondent of the _New York Tribune_, who was staying in Cologne at
the time, also saw Marx but saw him through different eyes. 'His
features gave one the impression of great energy, and behind his
sober-minded reserve one could see the passionate fire of a courageous
spirit.'

The more outspoken the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ became, the more
energetically it denounced the Lefts for an irresolution bordering on
cowardice if not positive treason to the Revolution, the more plainly it
hinted that the co-operation of bourgeoisie and proletariat could only
be temporary, however necessary it might be in Germany at the moment,
the more alarmed the shareholders became. Half of them were lost as soon
as the newspaper appeared, and articles about the June fighting cost
Marx the other half. The paper was brought sharply up against serious
practical difficulties. The printer refused to extend credit any
further, and one issue of the paper failed to appear. Fortunately
another printer was found, but the position became so threatening that
at the end of August Marx had to undertake a journey through Germany and
Austria to raise the funds necessary to continue. His travels took him
to Berlin, to Vienna, then to Berlin again. In Vienna Marx addressed the
local Democratic Union and he lectured on wage-labour and capital at the
first Vienna Workers' Union. In both cities he negotiated with the
leaders of Left organisations. Whether he obtained the assistance he
required is not known. All that is known is that the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ received very generous support from the Polish Democrats. On
September 18 Vladislav Koscielsky sent the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ two
thousand thalers in their name.

Marx returned to Cologne just when the events of September, the
stormiest period of the 'mad year' in Cologne, were beginning. Their
outbreak coincided with the resignation of the Prussian ministry of
Auerswald-Hansemann. Marx had castigated it for the cowardice with which
it retreated step by step before the forces of reaction, which were
growing bolder every day. Incompetent a government as it had been, it
had by no means been reactionary in intent, and all the key positions in
it had been occupied by members of the bourgeoisie. Its resignation was
an indication of the impending crash. Marx summoned the Democrats to
mass action. In the midst of this critical situation a number of clashes
which had been brewing for a long time and had no connection, at least
no direct connection, with the political change of scene, broke out in
Cologne. In Cologne, as everywhere else along the Rhine, feelings
between townsmen and soldiery were very strained. The garrisons
consisted predominantly of troops from east of the Elbe and were
systematically incited against the people by their officers. There had
been serious collisions between military and civilians in Mainz and
Aachen during the past spring. Cologne's turn came now. Soldiers
attacked and beat civilians without any cause whatever. There was
general indignation at this, and it was by no means confined to the
Democrats. It was widespread among the otherwise entirely 'loyal'
population. The editorial staff of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ took
the protest in hand. Wilhelm Wolff and Engels summoned an open-air
mass-meeting at which the brutality of the soldiery was denounced and a
committee of public safety, thirty strong, was elected to prevent a
repetition of such attacks. Marx was a member of the committee.

To the excitement caused by these events in Cologne there was now added
indignation at the advance of reaction in Prussia and at the Prussian
armistice with Denmark. This indignation swept through the whole of
Germany and created a situation which caused many to believe that the
outbreak of a second revolution was at hand. To the Democrats and
Liberals, even the most moderate of them, the war with Denmark was an
affair of the whole of the German people. Schleswig-Holstein was German
territory subject to the Danish throne; to liberate it from its Danish
overlords was one of the foremost tasks of the United Germany movement.
When the war broke out students and workers who had just been fighting
at the barricades in Berlin hurried to volunteer for the army. The
struggle for Schleswig-Holstein had become a symbol of German unity. And
now Prussia signed an armistice with Denmark. That meant its abandonment
of the United German front and its return to the old, purely Prussian
and purely dynastic policy. The armistice at Malmö was felt as a
deliberate challenge, an insolent slap in the nation's face. As for the
National Assembly, it vacillated, swung unworthily this way and that,
and on September 16 expressed its consent to the armistice.

On September 17, a huge mass-meeting gathered at Worringen, near
Cologne. It was attended by delegations from innumerable Rhineland towns
and many peasants from the surrounding district. It resolved, on
Engels's proposal, that should Prussia and the National Assembly at
Frankfurt come into conflict they would stand by Germany 'through thick
and thin.' That the National Assembly had capitulated to Prussia in the
meantime was not yet known at Cologne. When the news arrived anger knew
no bounds. Indignation was widespread throughout Germany. There was
serious fighting in Frankfurt on September 18, and two of the most hated
reactionary deputies were lynched. The Democratic Union and the Workers'
Union at Cologne declared their solidarity with the fighters at the
Frankfurt barricades and the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ started a
subscription fund for the insurrectionaries and their families. Next day
the king appointed General Pfuel Prime Minister of Prussia. Pfuel was
hated by the Democrats as the Oppressor of the Poles. His nomination
only served to pour oil on the flames.

The military had made their preparations, the troops in the fortresses
were ready for action and guns were directed on the town. The second
Rhineland Democratic Congress was intended to meet on September 25. On
that day, at seven o'clock in the morning, Hermann Becker and Karl
Schapper were arrested. Moll escaped arrest because a crowd quickly
gathered and prevented the police from seizing him. The City Militia
refused to help the police. The whole city was in an uproar. Marx
hurried to the Workers' Union. He and Bürgers, who were informed of the
situation in full, 'declared in the name of the Congress that in no
circumstances, least of all at the present moment, did they want a
rising.' The workers, exasperated at the loss of their leaders, listened
'with gloomy looks.' Other meetings took place, here and there people
actually started putting up barricades, but no actual fighting took
place. The preponderance of the military was so great that the City
Militia, who in any case were not so very determined to carry matters to
extremes, held back, and the workers, unarmed or badly armed, could not
fight alone. The outbreak must not be confined to Cologne and could not
start yet. The crisis must first become even more acute. Marx declined
to consent to a local riot. Germany was not ready for a general rising
yet.

Not a single shot had been fired in Cologne, but the military wished to
savour their triumph to the full. Martial law was proclaimed, all
political associations were dissolved, all meetings were forbidden, and
the radical papers, starting with the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_, were
suspended. The reactionary Press could scarcely contain itself with joy
at the end of its hated enemies. 'The entire editorial staffs have had
to take flight,' it exulted. This was an exaggeration. Warrants were
issued for the arrest of Engels, Dronke and the two Wolffs. Marx not
having spoken at any public meeting, the police had no excuse for taking
proceedings against him. But the position of the newspaper was more than
difficult. Besides Marx, only Georg Weerth, who was in charge of the
_feuilleton_, remained. All the rest of the staff had been forced to
fly.

If the Reaction thought the time had come for rejoicing, they rejoiced a
little too soon. Marx had no intention of laying down his arms. In spite
of the paper's financial position, which was now, of course, more
desperate than ever, he promptly opened negotiations to continue
publication at Düsseldorf should the state of martial law be prolonged.

The negotiations turned out to be superfluous. The unnecessary
declaration of martial law roused even the tamest citizens of Cologne
against the military command. The city council unanimously demanded its
withdrawal. There were debates about' it in the Berlin Chamber, and they
were very embarrassing to the Government. On October 3 the military
authorities withdrew martial law very reluctantly, but under orders from
Berlin. The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ appeared again a week later. Marx
prominently announced that the editorial staff remained unchanged, but
with the addition of Ferdinand Freiligrath, who had just been acquitted
of a charge of high treason. Before the period of martial law the
newspaper had had six thousand subscribers, which placed it in the front
rank of German newspapers in circulation as well as in influence. In a
short time it reached its old position and even surpassed it.

Marx's influence on the Workers' Union had grown stronger and stronger.
It was only natural that the Union should now invite him to become its
leader. It had lost its president for the second time since Gottschalk's
arrest. Moll was a fugitive and Schapper in prison. A delegation
approached Marx, but it was only after a good deal of hesitation that he
agreed to accept the position. He explained his reasons at a meeting on
October 16. His position in Cologne was precarious. He was no longer a
Prussian subject, and although the Cologne Council had granted him a
permit to stay in the city, the State authorities would not hear of his
being renaturalised. Besides, he would shortly have to appear before a
jury because of an alleged offence against the Press Laws, to say
nothing of his being overwhelmed with work on account of the temporary
dispersal of the editorial committee of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_.
'Nevertheless,' according to the minutes of the meeting, 'he was
prepared temporarily to comply with the wish of the workers until Dr.
Gottschalk should be released. Government and bourgeoisie must be
convinced that despite all persecution there are always people ready to
place themselves at the workers' disposal.'

Marx, who had in effect been president of the Workers' Union ever since
the temporary election of Moll to that position, now became its
president in name as well. It was the outward sign of his victory in the
struggle he had been carrying on for six months in the ranks of the
workers' organisations and the Communist League in Cologne.

## Chapter 14: Defeat with Honour

The reactionary Press poured scorn on the workers for their 'cowardice'
in retreating when things grew difficult. Marx denied that it was
cowardice. It merely meant that they were not reckless. The moment for a
general rising would only come when great questions and mighty events
urged the united population into battle.

The October rising should have been such a moment. The revolutionaries
of Vienna rose once more, in alliance with Kossuth's Hungary, to fight
the decisive battle with the rehabilitated forces of Habsburg
absolutism. On its outcome depended not the victory or defeat of the
Revolution in Austria alone. The fate of the whole German Revolution
would be decided in Vienna. If the Habsburgs conquered, so would the
Hohenzollerns, and March would have been in vain. For Germany's sake
they must not win.

The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ issued impassioned appeals to the
Democrats of Germany, employed its most powerful arguments, used the
glowing verses of Freiligrath, urging them to make Vienna's cause their
own:

>If we could only kneel we should down on our needs  
>If we could only pray, we should pray for Vienna [^17].

The Left produced their usual resounding rhetorical phrases in praise of
the Viennese. But they failed to understand, would not listen, no longer
had the strength to carry out the task of the moment: that of defending
Vienna in Berlin, Dresden and Frankfurt. Germany's calamitous division
into minor states meant that every general question assumed a variety of
local forms--a Prussian form, a Saxon form, a Badenese form, a Bavarian
form and so on. As local questions they were incapable of solution.
There could be only one German Revolution. The alternative was the
German counter-revolution.

The second Democratic Congress met in Berlin at the end of October.
There were debates and more debates, and the time was frittered away
with eloquent but empty speeches. In its appeal for the Viennese 'pulpit
pathos' was substituted for 'revolutionary energy,' in the words of
Marx; Germany did not rise, and Vienna was left to its fate. The
imperial troops entered the Austrian capital on November 1.

Prussia's turn, quite logically, came next. On November 2 Pfuel's
cabinet resigned in Berlin. It was not reactionary enough for the king,
who felt himself strong enough now. The new Prime Minister he appointed
was Count Brandenburg, an illegitimate son of Frederick William II.
Brandenburg ordered the Berlin Parliament out of Berlin. It was
unwilling to go, so a regiment of guards quite easily dispersed it. In
March the king had said that soldiers were the only thing of any use
against Democrats.

The Assembly opposed force not with force but with phrases. It had spent
its whole time retreating step by step. Now, when its members should
have organised armed resistance, acted like revolutionaries, ready to
face every peril, even a sanguinary defeat, which would have been a
thousand times better guarantee of a resurrection than a timid
capitulation, the Chamber ceremoniously 'took its stand on the law.' The
soldiers, of course, took their stand on the more solid ground of
Berlin. The Chamber offered passive resistance, which meant in effect no
resistance at all. The utmost to which they roused themselves was to
issue an appeal to the country not to pay taxes to an unconstitutional
government.

That was only the first and most obvious answer to the reactionary
onslaught. Marx had proclaimed a tax-boycott in the Rhineland before the
Chamber made its decision. Now blow after blow must inevitably follow.
Cologne waited for the sign of battle from the capital. News was spread
that the Berlin City Militia had refused to hand over their arms. This
was the moment that Marx had been waiting for. Now the hour had struck.
He appealed to the West of Germany to go to the assistance of Berlin,
'with men and arms.'

But the news was false. The people of Berlin remained quiet. The City
Militia handed over their arms. Junker officers promenaded up and down
Unter den Linden as of yore, full of contempt for the civilian rabble.
Even the forcible dispersal of the Prussian National Assembly failed to
enliven the feeble glow of the German Revolution.

Cologne was swarming with soldiers. The military were thirsting for an
opportunity to shoot and stab to right and left to their heart's
content. It would have been madness to have stood up to be butchered by
them. Marx issued warnings against false heroism. At the same time he
did everything possible to extend the movement. To open an attack in
Cologne alone would merely have resulted in the riot he had condemned as
hopeless in September. Berlin did not stir. But at all costs something
must be done. The German Revolution must not be allowed to go down to
defeat so ignominiously.

On November 18 Marx, jointly with Schapper and the lawyer, Schneider,
issued an appeal for a tax-boycott in the name of the Rhineland district
Democratic committee. Passive resistance presupposed active resistance,
the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ proclaimed, otherwise it would be
equivalent to the struggles of a calf in the slaughter-house. Marx
therefore appealed for a general levy of the people, of all men of
military age, for the distribution of weapons, for the forming of
committees of public safety and for the removal of officials who
remained faithful to the Government.

The Prussian National Assembly might still, perhaps, have been able to
carry the people with it, although the most favourable moment had
passed. But it grew afraid of its own courage. It had been banished by
the king to the reactionary little country town of Brandenburg.

It spent two weeks raging and fuming and then, with plaintive whines and
ineffectual murmurs, went to Brandenburg. Once there it was promptly
dissolved.

On December 5, 1848, Prussia was granted a new constitution.

A rising for such a Chamber, a popular revolution for the benefit of a
bourgeoisie such as this would have been senseless. Marx explained to a
Cologne jury a few weeks later what the struggle was about. 'What
confronted us,' he told them, 'was the struggle between ancient feudal
bureaucracy and modern bourgeois society, the fight between the society
of landed property and industrial society, between the society of faith
and the society of knowledge.' Between these two forms of societies
there could only be a struggle to the death. But the bourgeoisie, who
should have fought for their own interests, their class interests, cried
off, shirked, evaded their task. They wanted the revolution, they could
not help wanting it, but they shrank from the cost. They cast fearful
glances at the masses whom they had set in motion because they
themselves were too weak to face feudalism alone, the masses whom they
also feared. For behind their own revolution they could already perceive
the second revolution lurking, the revolution that would be against
them. Lacking initiative, lacking faith in the people and faith in
themselves, they failed to exert the strength to seize the power as they
might have seized it. They did not even go half-way. They allowed the
whole of the old state apparatus to remain intact, in the ingenuous hope
of establishing their supremacy and preserving it with its help. The
nobility, the army, the bureaucracy allowed them to hold sway as long as
the elementary popular movement threatened to sweep everything away. The
bourgeoisie were good enough as a screen to shelter behind, while danger
threatened. As soon as they were no longer necessary for this purpose
the feudal classes dispensed with their services.

The experiences of the past nine months had made one thing plain beyond
all doubt. Vienna and Berlin, the Prussian Chamber and the National
Assembly at Frankfurt, the speech-making and still more the behaviour of
the parties, all pointed to one thing. The revolution could only be
accomplished _against_ the bourgeoisie. In a series of articles in which
he summed up the progress of events Marx concluded that the alternative
before Germany now was the counter-revolution of feudal absolutism or
the 'social-republican revolution.'

'Social-republican,' was the term he used, not 'Socialist' or
'proletarian.' The seventeen points of the programme of the Communist
League had demanded a republic with socialistic institutions, a Republic
with equal suffrage for all, which should free the peasants of
all feudal burdens, assure the workers a livelihood by national
workshops, the breaking of the power of the aristocracy of finance for
the benefit of industry and the petty-bourgeoisie, a state bank to
replace the private banks and control credit. Social-republicanism
involved neither the abolition of private ownership of the means of
production nor the abolition of class-conflicts. It meant capitalism
still, but capitalism in a State in which workers, petty-bourgeoisie and
peasants had maximum concessions. The social-republican revolution did
not emancipate the proletariat; it merely prepared the ground for the
struggle for its emancipation. If the bourgeoisie failed, if they did
not manage to attain what was expected of them, i.e. a constitutional
monarchy in theory but their own supremacy in fact, the other
anti-feudal classes must part from them and workers, petty-bourgeoisie
and peasants must advance for the social republic.

From the autumn of 1848 onwards the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ started
changing its tone. If previously it had only paid slight attention to
specifically working-class questions, wishing to avoid anything tending
to disturb harmonious co-operation between bourgeoisie and proletariat
against the forces of absolutism, it now set itself to demonstrating the
full extent of the antagonism between proletariat and bourgeoisie. It
gave publicity to the work-book that the municipal authorities of
Cologne imposed on its workers, a shameless document demonstrating the
workers' lack of rights. The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ declared that
this was evidence of what kind of constitution the German bourgeoisie
would give the people if it came into power.

The weakness of the German Revolution was now manifest. Its most
deep-seated cause lay in Germany's defective economic development. All
the negative factors which had come to light, the splitting up of the
revolutionary movement in the separate states, the weakness of the
bourgeoisie, the inertia of the petty-bourgeoisie, the uncertainty of
the workers, all had their deepest roots in it. After the collapse of
Vienna and Berlin, in the face of the growing apathy and paralysis which
seemed to be extending its grip from day to day, all hope that the
German revolution might once more find sufficient strength within itself
seemed to disappear. Towards the end of 1848 Marx rested all his hopes
upon a blow from without. The Gallic cock must crow again. The
revolution in its course through Europe had started out from Paris, in
Paris the counter-revolution had gained its first victories, in Paris
likewise it would suffer its next defeat. Not a country in Europe now
lived its own life alone; the same battle-front ran through" them all.
The Revolution could not conquer in any country unless the
counter-revolution were overthrown in France. The article with which the
_Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ greeted the New Year ended with the words:
'Revolutionary rising of the French working class, world war, that is
the programme for 1849.'

In the Revolution's period of decline the respective social forces stood
out far more plainly than during its period of advance. The strength and
weakness of the various classes were now apparent. The ultra-Lefts chose
just this moment to lose all sense of proportion. They clung the more
fanatically to their wish-picture the farther reality departed from it.
At the beginning of 1849 a fresh attack on Marx was hatched in the
Workers' Union.

In spite of the unrelenting efforts of the public prosecutor, supported
by the partisan president of the court, to secure a conviction of
Gottschalk, 'who appealed to the crude masses, the lowest section of
society, the most incapable of all of forming an opinion,' the jury had
acquitted him. Marx's acceptance of the presidency of the Workers' Union
had only been provisional. Now that Gottschalk was free once more, he
was able to resume it. But in the meantime a great deal had changed in
the Union, and Gottschalk's long imprisonment had not been without its
effect on him. The school through which the Union had passed in those
stormy days under the leadership of Marx and his friends had not been in
vain. It had evolved, its understanding of the course of development had
become infinitely clearer, it no longer only differentiated between
black and white, between heaven and hell as it had done in the past; it
had learned to differentiate both in the camp of the counter-revolution
and in its own, it no longer stood for all or nothing.

Gottschalk was bitterly disappointed. 'His' Union, which he regarded so
tenderly as his own creation and believed he could sway this way and
that as if it were his own property, had been stolen from him. He
decided that it needed reorganisation, and proposed that full powers be
vested in the president--that, of course, meant Gottschalk himself--to
appoint his own officers, for he alone possessed the necessary
knowledge, understanding and authority. The Union declined to submit to
a dictatorship of this sort, and Gottschalk was enraged at its
'ingratitude.' His vanity was so wounded that at the beginning of
January, 1849, he left Cologne without saying anything to anybody and
went to Brussels. But before leaving he gained control of the Union
newspaper, and the new editor whom he put in charge was his
unconditional adherent, as he was destined soon to show by what he wrote
about the forthcoming elections.

Gottschalk may have asked the members of the Workers' Union to put him
up as candidate for the Prussian National Assembly and they may have
refused. This was later believed to have been the chief reason for his
departure from Cologne. Gottschalk denied it, however, and recalled his
attitude to the elections of 1848, to participation in which he had been
so strongly opposed. But that had been in 1848. In 1849 Gottschalk
became a candidate, though not in Cologne. He stood in Bonn and also in
a peasant constituency near Bonn, on both occasions without success.

The elections, under the new Constitution granted by the king, were due
to take place on February 22, 1849. The Workers' Union spent weeks
discussing whether to participate in them or not. Anneke, who was a
friend of Gottschalk, though he did not remain a partisan of his to the
end, was in favour of the Workers' Union putting up their own candidate.
Marx opposed this, in the first place for the practical reason that the
time till the election was too short to make the necessary preparations.
In principle, of course, he was in favour of putting up workers'
candidates, but for the moment it was not a question of 'doing something
on grounds of principle but of creating opposition to the Government, to
absolutism and to feudal domination.' He was far from agreeing on
matters of principle with Raveaux, whom he had relentlessly criticised,
and with Schneider, both of whom were standing as candidates. But it was
not a question of a struggle between 'red' and 'pink' Democrats now. 'In
view of the impossibility of putting one's own principles into effect it
was necessary to unite with the other opposition party in order not to
leave the victory to absolute monarchism.'

This was another attempt to go part of the way with the radical
bourgeoisie. It was an attempt undertaken without much hope of rallying
the ranks in a battle that was almost lost. Yet it was the only course
open in Germany as long as a blow did not come to clear the stifling
atmosphere from without. In this situation, with the forces distributed
as they were, anything else would have amounted to so much empty
verbiage.

The second Prussian National Assembly was also elected by indirect
voting. The primary voters elected the electors who elected the actual
deputies. The Left bloc were successful in Cologne. Of the 344 electors
two hundred were Democrats and opponents of the Constitution the king
had granted. They sent two deputies to Berlin, Kyll and Schneider, the
lawyer, with whom Marx had worked for months in the Democratic Union.

The majority of the members of the Workers' Union were followers of
Marx. Gottschalk's closest followers, utterly opposed to compromise as
of old, clinging to their principles all the more obstinately because
they were utterly incapable of practical political thinking, wrong even
when an error in their calculations accidentally produced the right
result, now threw all discretion to the winds and used their paper to
attack Marx more and more violently. Gottschalk still retained his
control of the Union paper, and the Union failed to regain it.
Consequently it was forced to start a new paper of its own. From
February onwards there were two workers' newspapers in Cologne, fighting
each other hammer and tongs. Gottschalk's paper declared relentless
warfare on 'all parties, from that of the _Neue Preussische Zeitung_
(the mouthpiece of the extreme Right) to that of the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_.' In the issue of February 25, 1849, there appeared an open
letter 'to Herr Karl Marx,' which laid plain the substance of the
dispute between Gottschalk and him. It was not signed but was written by
Gottschalk, who remained behind the scenes but took a very lively part
in the sectional squabble as before. Wounded pride was not the smallest
of his motives. At the Frankfurt Democrats' Day Schapper had said that
Marx was destined to play a great rôle, and this had hurt him. He
consoled himself with the thought that this Goliath must meet his David
too.

The 'open letter' seized on an article of Marx's in the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ of January 21. Gottschalk chose well. Never before and never
again in the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ did Marx express with such
clarity his interpretation of the tasks of the revolution and the rôle
played in it by the various classes.

The elections for the second Prussian National Assembly were at hand.
The bourgeoisie were prepared to put up with the new constitution. Marx
laid bare once more, in words that were crystal-clear and were this time
entirely lacking in that scorn which he usually never spared, how
inseparably their interests were interwoven with this constitution. It
was not a question now of a Republic or even of a red Republic, but
simply of the old absolutism with its hierarchy on the one hand and the
representative system of the bourgeoisie on the other. Prussia must
either attain the political organisation corresponding to the social
conditions of the century or retain a political constitution
corresponding to the social conditions of the past. The struggle against
the bourgeois system of private property could not yet be. It confronted
England and was on the order of the day in France. In Germany the
struggle was rather against a political system which threatened
bourgeois private property because it left the helm of the ship of state
to the representatives of feudal private property, to the king by the
grace of God, the army, the bureaucracy, the provincial Junkers, and a
number of finance barons who were their allies.

Marx then proceeded to demonstrate in detail how Prussian feudalism had
injured and was continuing to injure the bourgeoisie, how it was
restricting the development of modern big industry, hampering foreign
trade, delivering German industry helpless into the hands of English
competition. He demonstrated how Prussian fiscal policy and the Prussian
bureaucratic machine had out everything, great and small, to the measure
of the feudal classes. The class-interest of the bourgeoisie was to
destroy the feudal state themselves. That was their historical task, and
this revolution was their revolution.

What of the workers and the petty-bourgeoisie. 'We say to the workers
and the petty-bourgeoisie: rather suffer in modern bourgeois society,
which by the development of industry creates the material means for the
foundation of a new society which will free you all, than step backwards
into an obsolete form of society, which, under the pretext of saving
your class, will plunge the whole nation back into mediaeval barbarism.'

In these words Marx expressed, brutally and without the slightest regard
for fondly nourished illusions, the fact that the revolution, on
whomsoever's shoulders it might be borne, must be the bourgeois
revolution first and could be no other, because it was necessary to free
bourgeois conditions of property, i.e. in later language, capitalist
economy, from all the fetters that hampered its development. The
proletarian revolution would only be possible after capitalist economy
had created the conditions that presupposed it.

Gottschalk's reply to Marx was: 'What is the purpose of such a
revolution? Why should we, men of the proletariat, spill our blood for
this? Must we really plunge voluntarily into the purgatory of a decrepit
capitalist domination to avoid a mediaeval hell, as you, sir preacher,
proclaim to us, in order to attain from there the nebulous heaven of
your Communist creed?'

It was the question that Weitling put, it was the question that Willich
and his supporters were to put a year later, it was the question that
Bakunin's followers put in the seventies. Every time the bourgeois
revolution was on the order of the day this question was put to
scientific Socialism, expressing the same impatience as that to which
the London Communists gave its classic formula in 1850--'We must come
into power at once or lay ourselves down to sleep.'

Gottschalk's open letter also contained the reproach that such ideas
could only come from an intellectual. 'They are not in earnest about the
salvation of the oppressed. The distress of the workers, the hunger of
the poor have only a scientific, doctrinaire interest for them. They are
not touched by that which stirs the heart of men.' Thus did Gottschalk,
himself an intellectual in the guise of a proletarian, make play with
the mistrust of intellectuals felt by many workers; as if the threatened
relapse into barbarism held terrors for Marx, i.e. for aesthetes and
cultivated minds, but not for the workers. No, said Gottschalk, the
party of the revolutionary proletariat knew no fear. He derided Marx for
making the outbreak of revolution in Germany dependent on an outbreak in
France and an outbreak in France dependent on an outbreak in England. He
maintained that the proletariat must carry out its revolution here and
now, without hesitations or misgivings. The revolution must be permanent
and must continue until the victory of 'the proletariat. It was obvious
that, holding these views as he did, Gottschalk was bound to reject
co-operation with the bourgeois Democrats even if they were not (and
this was another dig at Marx) such 'weaklings and nobodies' as the
Cologne deputies whom Marx had recommended for election.

If Gottschalk expected Marx to continue the controversy he was sadly
disappointed. Marx ignored the attack. He had succeeded in keeping his
controversy with Weitling behind the scenes and he did not engage in
polemics 'towards the Left' this time either. Instead of indulging in a
theoretical battle with Gottschalk in a situation which demanded the
concentration of all forces against the Right, instead of engaging in a
controversy that might easily be misconstrued and was in any case
inopportune, he preferred setting forth his own positive point of view.
Later, in a situation that was in many respects similar, on the occasion
of Lassalle's agitation against the Prussian Progressive Party, Marx
adopted the same attitude. But it was impossible for his comrades in the
Workers' Union to keep silence. The breach between them and Gottschalk's
followers was so great that the Union ended by splitting into two.
Gottschalk's adherents resigned and formed their own organisation. It
only survived for a few months. A year later the old Union also expired,
shattered by the blows of the Reaction.

After Gottschalk's return to Cologne in the summer of 1849, he took
practically no more part in political activity. He resumed his medical
practice as a faithful and selfless helper of the poor. Cholera broke
out in the autumn, and Gottschalk, actuated by the sympathy for the poor
which was the whole reason of his being, was the first and for a long
time the only doctor to work in the infected slum districts. He caught
the disease himself and died, after a day's illness, on September 8,
1849. Many hundreds of workers followed their dead friend to his grave.

In the struggle against the majority of the Workers' Union, a
substantial proportion of Gottschalk's adherents had been actuated by
personal motives and emotional attachment to their leader. Gottschalk
had expressed, in however distorted and mutilated a fashion, an
under-current of feeling in the revolutionary movement that grew
stronger and stronger as time went on and affected even those who had
hitherto followed Marx in his policy of coalition with bourgeois
democracy. The same aspiration, to liberate the workers' movement from
all burdensome and oppressive ties, called the Communist League into
being once more.

Its old leaders, with Schapper and Moll at their head, had never been
entirely reconciled to the dissolution of the League, although they had
not been able to resist Marx's arguments for its dissolution. The
branches of the League abroad had never acknowledged its dissolution. At
the second Democratic Congress in Berlin, Ewerbeck, leader of the Paris
branch, had conversations with former League members, with whom be
arranged to summon a general League Congress in Berlin for December,
1848. The Congress was to appoint new executive officers in place of
those previously appointed by Marx. The victory of Reaction in Berlin
prevented the Congress from taking place, but the will to revive the
League was there. Moll, who settled in London after fleeing from
Cologne, was particularly active in the matter. Members of the London
branch co-operated with him in drafting new League statutes. Moll,
Heinrich Bauer and Georg Eccarius were to be the leaders of the
resuscitated League.

At the beginning of 1849 Schapper was informed by Moll of the London
decision and invited to found a branch in Cologne. Schapper summoned the
old members of the League and a few of the most active members of the
Workers' Union and established a branch. Marx, Engels and the rest of
the editorial staff of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ seem to have been
invited to join it in vain. A short time afterwards Moll appeared
surreptitiously in Cologne as the representative of the new central
office. He travelled all over Germany establishing contacts on behalf of
the organisation. His chief aim was to persuade Marx and Engels to
rejoin the League.

A meeting took place at the editorial offices of the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_. Marx, Engels and Wilhelm Wolff were present, besides Moll and
members of the Cologne branch. 'The discussion centred on whether the
League ought to be re-established or not,' one of those present at the
meeting later wrote. 'Those who took part in the debate were chiefly
Marx, Engels and Wolff on the one side and Schapper and Moll on the
other. Marx declared once again that under existing conditions, with
freedom of speech and freedom of the Press, the League was superfluous.
Schapper and Moll, on the other hand, insisted that the League was
absolutely essential. Marx and his colleagues also objected to the
statutes that Moll proposed.' Marx's objections were based on the
League's proposed programme--its aims, as set forth in the statutes,
were not those of the Communists--as well as on its proposed
organisation, which 'tended towards the conspiratorial.' Marx was
supported by Engels and Wolff, besides a few members of the Cologne
branch, and Moll left Cologne without attaining his object.

The freedom of speech and of the Press, which in Marx's Opinion made the
re-establishment of the League superfluous, still existed, certainly,
but they were increasingly menaced every day. The _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ had to defend itself against more and more violent attacks. The
officials whom it so pitilessly criticised had harassed it with
complaints ever since the first day of its existence. They felt
themselves 'slandered' every other minute. Among those who complained
were Drigalski, a high official named Zweiffel, a policeman, and Hecker,
the attorney-general. Some of their objections were so absurd that they
had obviously been inspired from above. For instance, after Marx printed
a republican appeal by the notorious Gustav Hecker, Hecker, the
attorney-general, protested at his not having pointed out that Gustav
Hecker was not the same man. He claimed that this omission might
possibly have led the reader to suppose that he, an official of royal
Prussia, was making a Republican appeal. Far more serious was an
accusation against Marx and his comrades based on his appeal to the
people to refuse to pay taxes.

At first the officials persecuted Marx with accusations which they knew
to be baseless obviously for the sole purpose of temporarily silencing
him by a longer or shorter period in prison on remand. The Democrats of
Cologne became alarmed at the persecutory zeal of the courts. The
workers had already lost two presidents of their Union, and they were
not minded to permit a third to be incarcerated. In the middle of
November, when Marx was asked to appear before 'the examining magistrate
on account of some trivial libel allegation, a large crowd of workers
gathered outside the court and refused to disperse until Marx
reappeared. They received him with jubilation and he was forced to make
a short speech, the only one he ever made in the streets of Cologne. But
there was even greater indignation, to say nothing of very justified
anxiety, a week later when Marx and the other members of the committee
of the Democratic Union were ordered before the court once more, this
time for an alleged 'treasonable' appeal against a Government which was
guilty of violating the Constitution. Before the accused appeared before
the examining magistrate, a special delegation insisted on a high
administrative official assuring them that they would not be arrested.

The civil officials preserved at least the outward appearance of legal
forms. The military took more solid measures. The _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ had by no means soft-pedalled its exposures of the excesses
committed by the soldiery at the instigation of their officers,
particularly during the period of martial law. The officers, naturally
enough, loathed the paper and plied the War Ministry with appeals for
the suppression of the 'pernicious rag.' Threatening letters poured in
by every post. One day two non-commissioned officers presented
themselves at Marx's private address and announced that the newspaper
had insulted the rank of non-commissioned officer and made threats of
violence against the editorial staff. 'Marx received them in his
dressing-gown, with the butt of an unloaded revolver protruding from one
of the pockets,' Engels relates. 'This sight was sufficient to cause the
gentlemen to refrain from further parleying, and they withdrew meekly,
in spite of the fact that they were carrying their side-arms.'

These crude attempts at intimidation had no effect whatever. The civil
authorities had no better success. In February, 1849, Marx twice
appeared before a jury to answer their accusations. On the first
occasion he was accused of insulting officials; on the second occasion
the charge arose out of his November tax-boycott appeals. The first
charge was easy to rebut, and the jury acquitted him after very short
deliberation. Marx took advantage of his second trial to make a
brilliant speech showing up the whole hypocrisy of the Reaction, who
themselves tore the law to shreds and then, when men denounced them and
called for violence against them, they, the law-breakers, accused them
of violating the law. 'When the Crown makes a counter-revolution the
people rightly reply with a revolution.' They could rid themselves of
him as a conquered enemy but they could not condemn him as a criminal.
The jury acquitted Marx once more, and, the foreman thanked him, on
behalf of his colleagues, for his 'extremely informative speech.'

The courts having failed them, the now completely infuriated officials
were compelled to resort to other measures. A favourable opportunity
appeared to present itself in March. Though Joseph Moll had failed by a
long way in attaining the objective of his journey in Germany, he had
succeeded in establishing some connections and he had managed to found a
branch in Berlin. The police were very soon on its track, for there
appear to have been spies among its members. They did not know a great
deal, but they did know some things; the rest they guessed or invented.
At the end of March, 1849, the police conducted a number of
house-searches, in the course of which some papers fell into their
hands, including the statutes drafted by Moll. They also secured a clue
which led them to suppose that the headquarters of the secret
organisation were in Cologne. The police decided that the leaders must
necessarily be Engels, Gottschalk, Moll and Marx, who in turn took their
orders from a Paris committee of three, consisting of Herwegh, Heinzen
and Ewerbeck. Thus truth and falsehood were inextricably mingled, partly
in sheer defiance of common sense, partly as a consequence of sheer
ignorance. But a sinister conspiracy had been discovered, the Fatherland
was in danger, and it was possible to act at last. A special
commissioner travelled from Berlin to Cologne, entrusted with the task
of searching the houses of those implicated, confiscating their papers
and issuing warrants for their arrest in accordance with the result of
his investigations. In addition the correspondence of the conspirators
was to be watched. The police visualised their hated enemies as already
in prison. They were bitterly disappointed. The Cologne authorities were
anxious 'in all friendliness and willingness' to oblige the police, but,
in view of the mood of the city and the, complete unreliability of the
assize courts, they were unwilling to risk another fiasco. They would
not even agree to a house--search being undertaken without specific
instructions from the higher authorities in Berlin. So this step
misfired as well.

The Rhineland was not Berlin, and the sympathies of the overwhelming
majority of the population on the Rhine were to the Left. Steps the
Reaction were able to take with impunity elsewhere in Prussia had to be
pondered well here. The political situation became more strained every
day. The new Prussian National Assembly was far more radical than its
predecessor and its Left wing was stronger and more active. The
Democratic Party, under the leadership of D'Ester, of Cologne, prepared
an armed rising. During the Easter holidays deputies from various parts
of Germany discussed common action should that eventuality occur.

A 'live' section of the bourgeoisie, especially the petty-bourgeoisie,
had roused themselves once more at the eleventh hour. But it was a
section only. The vast majority of the bourgeois Democrats befuddled
themselves with talk and nothing but talk. The experiences of the past
year had taught Marx that when things grew serious they would cower by
their firesides just as timidly as they had done in September and
November. The republican question was discussed by the Cologne
Democratic Union. There were two long meetings at which the question
whether it should continue to call itself 'Democratic' or
'Democratic-Republican' was debated. It remained faithful to the
democratic title. But what had been good and right in April, 1848, no
longer sufficed in April, 1849. According to the _Neue Kölnische
Zeitung_, which was edited by Anneke, the Union was thus determined 'to
plunge deeper into the wide waters of Democracy, which nowadays has
quite taken the place of Liberalism.' On April 14, Marx, Schapper,
Wilhelm Wolff and Anneke resigned from the Rhineland sectional committee
of the Democratic Union. Their reasons were that the 'present
organisation of the Democratic Union included too many heterogeneous
elements to permit of activity beneficial to the cause.' Three days
later the Workers' Union decided to summon a Congress of all the
Workers' Unions of the Rhine province and Westphalia and all other
organisations which acknowledged Social Democracy at Cologne on May 6.

Thus was the separation between bourgeois and proletarian democracy
finally achieved. In August, 1848, Marx had been in favour of a
coalition of the 'most heterogeneous' elements. In April, 1849, he
parted from the Democrats because they embraced too many heterogeneous
elements. In 1848 he had been in favour of a united front of all the
anti-feudal classes; now he directed that the alliance be dissolved. A
cleavage had become inevitable. The differences in equipment, tempo,
_élan_, fighting spirit, between the various columns of the great army
which should have marched as a united front and with a single objective
against the forces of absolutism and compelled the victory had become
too great. A close connection with bourgeois Democracy had been
maintained as long as possible, but it no longer worked, and it was
necessary to abandon it. That did not exclude the possibility of future
coalitions between the workers' unions and Democracy if circumstances
should demand it. In February Marx supported the candidature of the
Democrats, in April he parted from them, in June he went to Paris as a
representative of a Democratic committee.

Marx may have had an additional reason for deciding on a public
separation from the Democrats at that particular moment. In the spring
of 1849 the resurrected Communist League was to all appearances still
very weak. But it existed nevertheless, and it was to be anticipated
that it would soon be of greater importance. The closer the
counter-revolution approached the greater would be the justification for
its existence. The workers had been only reluctant adherents of the
necessary but disagreeable alliance with the Democrats, and the pick of
them were obviously disposed to join the League and thus sever all
connection with the Democratic unions. Marx may well have foreseen the
danger that, if he postponed parting from the Democrats too long, it
might result in isolating himself and his colleagues from the impatient
workers. When Marx rejoined the Communist League is not known. It may
have been at the time when he resigned from the Democratic committee.
The journey he started in the middle of April may possibly have been a
tour of organisation. The immediate reason for it was, of course, the
increasing financial difficulties of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_.

Its circulation increased from month to month, and it was read all over
Germany. But its difficulties were increased by its very success.
Printers, compositors, paper-makers, dispatch clerks had to be paid in
cash, and subscriptions flowed in irregularly and belatedly. After the
desertion of practically all the shareholders no capital was left. The
newspaper swallowed up the remnants of Marx's legacy and all his wife's
capital. This staved off things for a short time, but in the spring of
1849 the paper was once more on the brink of ruin. Marx tried to raise
money in Westphalia and the north-west of Germany, but with little
success. When he returned to Cologne on May 9 he brought only three
hundred thalers with him.

Cologne was quiet, but in other Rhineland towns fighting had begun. In
May, 1849, the German Revolution flared up for the last time. Dresden
rose and fierce fighting raged in the streets for four days. The
revolutionaries--among whom was the director of the Royal Saxon
Orchestra, Richard Wagner--were defeated, for the Prussian forces were
overwhelming. The Bavarian Palatinate was in wild insurrection. Baden
was in the hands of a revolutionary Democratic government. In Rhenish
Prussia the workers rose at Elberfeld, Iserlohn and elsewhere. The
Government's military supremacy was so great and the few fighters were
so pitifully left in the lurch by the petty-bourgeoisie that the
isolated outbreaks in the Rhineland collapsed in a few days. This was
also the fate of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_.

Even now the Government did not dare to ban the paper outright. They
still feared an open rising, though Cologne teemed with soldiers. True
to their nature, they adopted crafty bureaucratic measures. They took no
steps against the paper, they 'only' banished Marx. Marx having become
an 'alien' by reason of his loss of Prussian nationality, they had the
formal right to do so. He was a disturber of peace and order, so he was
desired to leave Prussia at short notice. Marx received the expulsion
order on May 16. On May 18 the last number of the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung_ appeared, printed in red. A prominent position was given to
Freiligrath's powerful valedictory poem:

>Defiance and scorn quivering on my lips, the gleaming dagger in my
hand, still exclaiming: rebellion! in death, thus am I honourably
defeated. Now farewell, farewell, you world of battle, farewell, you
struggling hosts; farewell, you powder-blackened fields, farewell, you
swords and spears. Farewell, but not for ever; for they cannot kill the
spirit. Soon I shall once more be on high; soon I shall return on a
steed [^18]!

The last issue of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ warned the workers
against any sort of rising. In view of the military situation in Cologne
they would have been irretrievably lost. 'The Prussians will be
infuriated by your quiet. In taking their farewell the editors of the
_Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ thank you for the sympathy shown them. Their
last word will always and everywhere be: "The emancipation of the
working class!"'

The Reaction were highly gratified at the disappearance of the paper
'with which the _Moniteur_ of 1793 paled in comparison.' 'Its surviving
friends will be incapable of rivalling their Rhenish master in
scurrility and desecration of the holiest in mankind.' The attitude of
the people of Cologne to its disappearance is demonstrated by the words
of a correspondent who was anything but sympathetic: 'No number of the
_Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ caused a greater sensation than the last. It
was printed in red from beginning to end. The rush at the editorial
offices and the demand for this number were really extraordinary. About
twenty thousand copies must have been printed, and some of them are
already fetching a thaler a piece. Real idolatry was roused by the issue
of May 18. One hears again and again of instances of the paper being
expensively framed.'

Marx liquidated the affairs of the newspaper with all speed. He devoted
the cash in hand, the proceeds of the sale of the printing press (which
belonged to him), etc., to pay the paper's debts. His own and his wife's
fortune had been swallowed up to the last penny. Frau Marx had to pawn
her silver to pay for immediate necessities. The staff distributed
themselves among those parts of Germany where risings had, or had not
yet, taken place. Marx and Engels went south, to the area of
insurrection in the Palatinate of Baden.

Not that they expected a great deal from it. They had got to know the
nature of the petty-bourgeoisie, even the best and most upright
revolutionaries among them, and of the German lower middle class in
particular, too well to be able to have great expectations. But even
their most moderate expectations were disappointed. Marx travelled by
way of Frankfurt and tried to persuade the Left representatives at the
German National Assembly to summon the revolutionary troops from Baden
and the Palatinate to Frankfurt by Parliamentary decree. But that might
perhaps have been falsely construed, they held. No, no, even the Lefts
intended to keep themselves 'within the framework of the law.' It was no
better in areas where risings had taken place. Marx represented to the
leaders that if anything at all could save them it could only be the
most resolute offensive. They must promptly occupy Frankfurt, place the
National Assembly under their protection, even if the Assembly did not
explicitly ask for it, and so turn the struggle into an all-German one,
i.e. one of the National Assembly against the reactionary governments.
But the men of Baden and the Palatinate did not look beyond Baden and
the Palatinate. They stayed where they were and there they were crushed.
The last rising of the German revolution, like all the others, foundered
on its local limitations.

In Germany there was no more work that Marx could do. He was no soldier,
and his place was not in the army. He went to Paris as the
representative of the Palatinate Democratic committee to get as much
help for the insurrection as he could from the French Democrats. Engels
was unwilling to miss an opportunity of gaining a little practical
experience of war. 'As after all it was necessary _honoris causa_ that
the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ be represented in the army of Baden and
the Palatinate, I girded on a sword to my side and went to Willich.'

Gottschalk's followers warned the workers against taking up arms. Their
ultra-radicalism ended in a passivity which was in fact
counter-revolutionary. Their paper claimed that the workers should
quietly wait until the absolutists and the constitutionalists had
exhausted each other. The Communists, faithful to the words of the
Manifesto which urged them to support every revolutionary movement aimed
at existing social and political conditions, stepped without a moment's
hesitation into the ranks of the insurrectionary army.

## Chapter 15: The End of the Communist League

The more desperate the situation in Germany became the greater hopes did
the revolutionaries entertain of France. 'In France the battle will
start again in the spring,' Marx wrote at the beginning of 1849. The
'revolutionary volcano' in France seemed on the eve of an eruption, and
it seemed to him that its flames must inevitably overflow into Germany,
Austria and Hungary. The German counter-revolution could only be, must
only be an incident in the European revolution. What did Baden and the
Palatinate matter? If Paris rose the whole of Europe would be in flames.

Marx went to Paris. But Paris viewed from within was different from
Paris viewed from without. Cholera was rampant in the city. 'The air was
sultry,' wrote Alexander Herzen, the Russian revolutionary, who was in
Paris at the time. 'A sunless heat oppressed mankind. Victims of the
contagion fell one after another. The terrified population, and the
procession of hearses dashing to the cemeteries as if they were racing,
seemed in keeping with events'--i.e. the political events of June, 1849.
The irony of history had once more placed revolutionary warfare upon the
order of the day, but it was very different from what it had been a year
before. At the end of May an expeditionary force of the French
Republican Army, sent to Italy for the official purpose of defending
Italy's freedom and independence, had stormed Rome, the last stronghold
of Italian liberty, and delivered its Republican defenders into the
hands of the Papal Inquisition. The French Constitution still contained
the fine phrase: 'The Republic never employs its forces against the
liberty of any people [^19].'

On June 11, only a few days after Marx's arrival in Paris, Ledru-Rollin,
leader of the Montagnards, proposed in the Chamber that the President,
Louis Bonaparte, and the cabinet be arraigned for violation of the
constitution. To quote Marx's words in his _Class Struggles in France_,
his words were 'plain, blunt, unpretentious, matter-of-fact, pithy and
powerful.' The Chamber postponed the debate on this proposal, but its
fate was not destined to be settled in the Chamber.

In the evening a meeting took place between the leaders of the
Montagnards and the delegates of the workers' secret societies. Marx's
account of the meeting indicates that he either was present himself or
was given detailed information by one of the principals at the meeting.
He very successfully fulfilled the task entrusted to him by the German
Democrats, namely that of making contact with the French
revolutionaries. There is some evidence that would seem to indicate that
he actually became a member of one of the secret Communist organisations
in Paris. As he wrote to Engels, he came into contact with the whole of
the revolutionary party and had good grounds for hoping that within a
few days he would have every revolutionary journal in Paris at his
disposal. But a week later no revolutionary journals were left.

The Montagnards were not one whit behind the German Parliamentarians of
the 'Left' in indecision. They rejected the proposal of the workers'
delegates that they should strike that very night. True, the chances of
a successful rising were no longer very great, but the refusal to act
cost the Montagnards their last chance. For when they summoned a
demonstration to the streets on June 13 the Government had long
completed its preparations. It was a simple matter for their dragoons
and riflemen to drive the unarmed masses from the streets. Some of the
Montagnard deputies were arrested, others escaped. From that day on the
National Assembly was 'nothing but a committee of public safety of the
Party of Order.'

The last resistance of the revolutionaries in Central Europe collapsed
at the same time. In the Danube basin the army of independent Hungary
capitulated to the Russian troops, which were far superior in numbers
and equipment. Those of its leaders who fell into the hands of the
counter-revolution were hanged. Those who managed to escape to Turkey
lived in fear of being handed over to the Austrian hangmen by the
Sublime Porte. In dismembered Germany the revolution died piecemeal.
Even to the very last everything was done to make the victory of the
counter-revolution as easy as possible. The risings in the spring of
1849 broke out one after another, each outbreak coinciding with the
suppression of its predecessor. There was brave fighting in Dresden and
on the Rhine, and many hundreds, most of them workers, left their lives
on the barricades. The words 'artisan,' 'miner,' 'day-labourer,' etc.,
constantly recur in the lists of dead.

Many of them were members of the Communist League. Only the extreme Left
wing of the workers' movement, the group that followed Gottschalk and
Weitling, opposed the rising. The organ of Gottschalk's followers warned
the workers against participation in a movement which was not the
immediate concern of the proletariat but of the bourgeoisie. This was
but a consequence of an attitude which started out from extreme
revolutionism and necessarily ended in complete passivity. Whatever
their position may have been in 1848 and 1849, the overwhelming majority
of the members of the League flung themselves headlong into the struggle
and fought to the bitter end. Joseph Moll, who was unable to return to
London after his German journey, helped in the preparations for the
rising in Baden. With characteristic courage he even managed to enlist
in the insurrectionary army under the fire of the Prussian guns. Then he
went to Baden, where he fought bravely and fell in the fighting on the
Murg, shot in the head by a Prussian bullet.

Engels took part in the campaign, first as a simple infantryman, later
as an adjutant to Willich, who was in command of a corps of volunteers.
His was one of the best units of the revolutionary army and consisted
almost entirely of workers. The sober, clear-thinking, sceptically
inclined Engels entered the struggle without any great expectations, for
the weak sides--and it had practically nothing but weak sides--of the
whole enterprise did not escape his keen intelligence; but he could not
deny himself the pleasure of heartily and unceremoniously laughing at
the mixture of excitement and alarm manifested by the petty-bourgeois
revolutionary statesmen. During the course of the expedition he drew
nearer to Willich, the 'one practical officer' who took part in it, and
he praised him as bold in action, cool-headed, clever and quick in
decision. Engels took part in four engagements, two of which were fairly
important. 'I have discovered,' he wrote to Frau Marx soon afterwards,
'that the much-lauded quality of impetuous courage is one of the most
ordinary properties that man can have.' He fought to the very end and
marched into Swiss territory with his corps, which was one of the very
last units of the revolutionary army to survive.

That was the end of the revolution of 1848, the beginning of which had
been so full of promise; moreover, it was the end of the period of
European history which culminated in it. But those who had been in the
thick of the fray did not believe it, could not and would not believe
it. The more fervently they identified themselves with the world that
had departed, that world in comparison with which the new and greater
world which it had engendered dwindled practically into non-existence in
their eyes, the greater was their difficulty in acknowledging the
existence of the new. The whole thing could not be over. To-morrow or
the day after it would all break out again and everything would be
altered. He who in such a situation thought anything else would have
been no revolutionary. But he who remained subject to this mood too
long, unable to shake it off and reconcile himself sternly to the fact
that a new historical epoch had begun, was no true revolutionary either.

Marx had battled so ardently that for a time he too was subject to these
inevitable illusions. He was dominated by them for a whole year. A
letter he wrote to Weydemeyer on August 1, 1849, gives some clue to the
extent to which his analytical intelligence, generally so accurate,
could err. Disagreeable as the situation was at the moment, he belonged
nevertheless to those who were _satisfaits_. '_Les chose marchent très
bien_, and the Waterloo of official Democracy is to be regarded as a
victory. The governments by the grace of God have taken over the task of
revenging us on the bourgeoisie and are chastising them for us.'

Marx searched for the weakest point in the enemy's front. England
attracted his particular attention, and he began to hope that the next
blow might come from there, and that England would be the scene of the
'beginning of the next dance.' England seemed to him to be on the eve of
a tremendous economic crisis, and not long afterwards he confidently
predicted its outbreak for August, 1850.

In spite of the hopes he had of England in the immediate future he had
no intention of going there. At the beginning of July, 1849, his wife
and children came to Paris. Marx rented a small flat and settled down as
if for a long stay. He was an optimist. From June 13 the Reaction was
the undisputed master of Paris; and it was not to be expected that the
police would allow a man like Marx to remain completely unmolested for
long.

The police devoted great attention to refugees from Germany, who were
said to be playing the leading part in an 'international revolutionary
committee' which did not exist outside the police imagination. One
prominent _émigré_ after another was arrested and expelled. Marx's turn
was not long postponed. His expulsion order was signed on July 19. Quite
possibly the police learnt of his presence in Paris from the German
Press, which was indulging at the time in 'sketches from emigrant life.'
The police were not very well informed, and some weeks passed before
they discovered his address.

'We stayed one month in Paris,' Frau Marx wrote in her diary, 'but we
were not allowed to stay there long either. One fine morning the
familiar figure of a police-sergeant appeared, to inform us that Karl
_et sa dame_ must leave Paris within twenty-four hours. They were kind
enough to offer us permission to stay at Vannes, in Morbihan.'

Frau Marx was expecting her fourth child and Marx was in desperate
financial straits. Morbihan was considered one of the unhealthiest
departments of France, the 'Pontic Marshes' of Brittany. Banishment to
such a place was 'equivalent to a disguised attempt at murder,' as Marx
wrote to Engels. Marx did not accept it. He tried hard to have the
expulsion order revoked, but in vain. He stated in an open letter to the
Press that he was staying in Paris purely for purposes of scientific
research. The only concession he obtained was a respite for his wife. He
had no choice but to leave France. If he attempted to return to Belgium
he was certain to be turned back at the frontier. In Switzerland a
regular hue-and-cry after the German _émigrés_ was beginning, and
England alone remained. Marx crossed the Channel on August 24, 1849, and
his wife followed on September 15. Fate cast him into the land in which
he believed the 'next dance was going to begin,' perhaps to cure him of
his illusions the more quickly.

When Marx came to England for the third time in his life in the summer
of 1849, he did not believe his visit would be much longer than the two
previous ones. It might last a few weeks, possibly months, at the very
most a year; but instead of the short visit he anticipated, he spent the
second half of his life in England, which became his second home.

A great deal had changed in England since his last visit to London two
years before. The Chartist Movement had not recovered from its serious
defeat in April, 1848, and the whole political landscape had undergone a
profound alteration. Marx nevertheless met some old acquaintances. The
Fraternal Democrats, at whose meeting on November 29, 1847, he had
hailed the approaching revolution, still existed, and so did the German
Communist Workers' Educational Union, with whose leaders Marx had
discussed the programme and statutes of the Communist League. Not a few
of the old members had answered the call of the revolution in their
native land, but many were too deeply rooted in England to be able to
tear themselves away. They had shared Germany's hopes, exhilarations and
disappointments. The Union was the obvious centre for the new refugees
to gather in.

When Marx came to London very few of them had yet arrived. But every
Channel boat brought a fresh influx. At first they were almost
exclusively workers and artisans. The 'great men of the emigration,' of
whom Marx was destined to have such unpleasant experiences, made their
appearance gradually. The refugees arrived in a state of pitiful
distress. Many had not a penny in their pockets. The continuation of the
crisis meant that even the most highly skilled workers had difficulty in
finding work, and often had to be content if the pittance they could
pick up as day-labourers sufficed to enable them to stave off the pangs
of hunger with a loaf of bread. 'Many of these unfortunates,' a
newspaper recorded, 'consider themselves fortunate in finding a job the
nature of which makes one recoil. The work is stamping raw pelts at a
German fur factory in East London. Imagine a big barrel in a very warm
room, filled to the very top with ermine and sable skins. A man climbs
into the barrel stark-naked and stamps and works with his hands and feet
from morning till night. The perspiration pours from his body in
streams. This soaks into the skins and gives them their suppleness and
durability, without which they would be useless for more elegant
purposes. Thus our rich ladies, with their boas and muffs, though they
do not suspect it, are literally clothed in the sweat of the Democrats.'
Most of them, however, could not even find work of this kind.

To help the hungry was the first and most important task. Marx was among
the founders of the London Assistance Committee. Similar relief
societies came into being wherever German refugees were gathered. The
difference between the London committee and the rest was that it was
controlled by Communists from the start. Of the five leading members
three were Communists, with Marx at their head. This was in accordance
with the social composition of the London refugees. It was a period of
wearing and exhausting work, involving dozens of interviews every day,
dashing from one end of London to the other, collecting money and
distributing it. Marx had an enormous amount of work to do. He succeeded
in inducing the Fraternal Democrats to co-operate in the work of relief,
but the results were meagre. The total receipts of a fund the Fraternal
Democrats kept open for three months amounted only to £1 14s.

Marx's active participation in the relief work was a matter of course,
but however urgent and necessary the work of relief might be, to him
political work in the Communist League was incomparably more urgent.

The London branch, which Moll had used in his efforts to resuscitate the
League at the beginning of the year, had survived the revolution. The
central office Marx found in London was the only one that had any sort
of contacts, though not very close ones, with Germany and other refugee
centres abroad. Marx at once got in touch with the branch and soon
joined it. The central office was reorganised and completed in the
months that followed. Willich, who had come to London with a
recommendation from Engels, was at once elected to the central office.
Although Engels considered him 'a "true" Socialist and a more or less
tedious ideologist,' he was of the opinion that he would be useful at
the central office. Engels soon appeared 'on the scene himself. Three of
the members--Heinrich Bauer, Eccarius and Pfänder--survived from the
committee of November, 1847. A fourth, Schapper, arrived in the summer
of 1850, and a number of new members were elected as well. There were
altogether ten members of the central office in the summer of 1850, more
than had ever been known in the history of the League.

The election of Willich was the event that had the most lasting
consequences. He was a personal friend of Gottschalk and shared many of
his views, though he had not gone so far as Gottschalk and Weitling in
refusing to take part in the democratic insurrections. Willich was the
representative of the 'Left' wing of the Communist movement. Willich's
presence at the central office was an indication of Marx's and his
friends' political compromise with the 'Lefts.' This compromise was the
natural consequence of Marx's new estimate of the European situation, of
which mention has been made above. It found its expression in the
so-called first circular of the central office of March, 1850, which was
drafted by Marx and Engels. Whether the document in all its details
really represents Marx's ideas is difficult to decide. There is a good
deal that points to the fact that at this period Marx once more
considered it necessary to warn his followers against extreme
maximalism. But in any case Marx believed that he could achieve a
compromise with the 'Lefts' on the basis of this circular.

The document criticised Marx's own tactics of 1848 and 1849, and in
particular the decision to dissolve the League and not put up workers'
candidates of their own. 'A large number of members who took part in the
revolutionary movement believed that the time for secret societies was
past and that activity in the open was adequate by itself. ... While the
organisation of the Democratic Party in Germany, the party of the
petty-bourgeoisie, constantly improved, the working class lost its one
firm hold, remained at best organised for purely local aims in single
localities and thus came completely under the domination and leadership
of the petty-bourgeois Democrats in the general movement.' In these
phrases Marx and Engels criticised themselves and admitted to the
'Lefts' that they had been wrong on a very definite issue.

But the point of the document lay not in its liquidation of the past but
in its statement of the movement's future tasks.

The fundamental assumption, on which all the rest depended, was the firm
expectation of a new revolutionary outbreak in the immediate future.
Marx, while engaged in drafting this document, was also busy writing the
article in which he prophesied that there would be a crisis in England
in August, 1850, a crisis with which the renewal of the revolution would
coincide. He assured Engels that the English would take it up just at
the point at which the February revolution had interrupted it. And in
France and Germany it could not be otherwise. In England and France the
proletariat would be engaged in the direct struggle for the state power.
In Germany the revolution had suffered a defeat. The bourgeoisie had
been forced once more to relinquish the power to the party of feudal
absolutism, but 'all the same they had assured the conditions which
meant in the long run that, because of the Government's financial
embarrassments, the power would fall into their hands and all their
interests would be safeguarded; it was possible that from now on the
revolutionary movement might assume a so-called peaceful development.'
The bourgeoisie had ceased to play a revolutionary rôle. Only two
revolutionary classes were now left in Germany; the petty-bourgeoisie
and the proletariat. There was not the least doubt that there would be a
moment in the further development of the revolution when petty-bourgeois
democracy would have the predominant influence in Germany. It was
therefore imperative that the relations of the proletariat with this
petty-bourgeois democracy be accurately determined. They must strive for
a democratic state, whether it be constitutional or republican, which
would give them and their allies, the peasants, the majority. They must
fight for a change in social conditions which would render the existing
state of society as tolerable and as comfortable as possible for the
petty-bourgeoisie. But democracy was far from being disposed to
revolutionise the whole of society for the benefit of the revolutionary
proletariat. Therefore the proletariat must rise together with the
petty-bourgeoisie, but it must not for one moment forget the treacherous
rôle which democracy would continue to play in the future. 'While the
democratic petty-bourgeoisie will be inclined to bringing the revolution
to as speedy a conclusion as possible, it is our interest and our duty
to make the revolution permanent, until all the more or less possessing
classes are forced from power, the state-power is seized by the
proletariat and the partnership of the proletarians of the world has
advanced to such an extent that competition between the proletariats has
ceased, not just in one country but in all the principal countries of
the world, and at least the vital forces of production are concentrated
in the hands of the proletariat.'

In the forthcoming German revolution the proletariat must in all
circumstances preserve the independence of their organisations. 'Next to
the new official government they must set up their own revolutionary
workers' governments, whether in the form of local committees, branch
councils, workers' clubs or workers' committees, so that the bourgeois
democratic government not only be promptly deprived of the workers'
support but also be supervised and threatened from the very outset by
organisations which have the whole mass of workers behind them.' The
immediate consequence of the downfall of existing governments would be
the election of a National Assembly. The proletariat--here once more the
criticism of Marx's own activities in 1848 and 1849 is particularly
significant--must see to it that 'workers' candidates are put up
everywhere beside the democratic candidates, even where they have no
prospect whatever of being elected. The progress which the proletarian
party is bound to make by coming forward independently in this way is
infinitely more important than the disadvantage of a few reactionaries
being elected.'

Henceforward the necessity of establishing contacts with related
revolutionary parties in England and France was urgent. The Fraternal
Democrats were an open propaganda society, they were capable of doing
something in the way of putting workers' educational unions in touch
with one another, but they were not adequate to the new tasks of the
times. It was necessary to create an association of secret societies for
simultaneous action in the revolution which might break out any day. The
circular was issued to the branches of the League in March 1850, and an
international militant alliance was formed in April. It was called the
'_Société Universelle des Communistes Révolutionnaires_.' Its statutes
bore the signatures of Vidil and Adam, representing the London Blanquist
'emigrant' organisations, Marx, Engels and Willich representing the
Communist League and Harney representing the Chartists. These six men
also constituted the central committee of the new society.

Their programme and organisational structure are of great interest. 'The
aim of the association,' paragraph one of the statutes reads, 'is to
make an end of the privileged classes, to submit these classes to the
dictatorship of the proletariat by maintaining a permanent revolution
until the realisation of Communism, which shall be the last form of
constitution the human family [^20].'

This goal, to which the members of the association swore an oath of
loyalty, was to be attained by 'bonds of solidarity between all sections
of the revolutionary Communist Party by breaking down the barriers of
nationality in conformity with the principle of republican fraternity
[^21].'

The rank and file of the secret societies did not themselves become
members of this secret society, which was restricted to their leaders.
Thus it was a secret society of higher degree. An essential feature of
this organisation was that it should not come out into the open. What
appears to be an allusion to it is the statement in the second circular,
issued by the central office in June, 1850, to the effect that delegates
of the secret Blanquist societies were in permanent contact with the
delegates of the League and that the League delegates had been entrusted
by the Blanquists with important preparatory work in connection with the
next French revolution. Who these delegates were and the nature of their
duties is unknown. But what the Blanquists were occupied with during the
years 1850 and 1851 is known. They were engaged in preparations for an
armed rising, just as they had been before 1848 and just as they
continued to be afterwards. They were engaged in plotting, devising
schemes to gain the political power by simple surprise attacks. Their
confident assumption was that a comparatively small number of resolute,
well-organised men, given a favourable moment, would be capable not only
of seizing the rudder of the ship of state, but, by the exercise of
great and unflinching energy, of maintaining their position until such
time as they had brought over the whole of the people to the revolution
and caused them to adhere to the small leading group. The fact that Marx
accepted this kind of revolutionism, which he condemned so violently
both before and afterwards, and was 'so utterly foreign in every way to
the essential nature of the proletarian revolution, the fact that he
formed an alliance with the Blanquists, proves better than anything else
the extent to which his judgment had been affected by the breakdown of
his immeasurable hopes. In later years Marx by no means excluded
co-operation with the Blanquists as a matter of principle to be adhered
to rigidly in all circumstances. However violently he was opposed to
their methods, he valued their determination highly. But after 1851 it
would have been inconceivable for him to have encouraged the members of
any organisation which he led to join a Blanquist group. It should be
observed, however, that the rules of the super-secret society assured
the existence of the Communist League and--a highly important
consideration in Marx's eyes--preserved it from the danger of being
outvoted by the other organisations. A two-thirds majority was needed to
pass a resolution and new members could only be elected unanimously.

However greatly Marx's outlook as indicated in the first circular
differed from his attitude in 1848 and 1849, the same fundamental ideas
were at the heart of both. Sooner or later these ideas were bound to
part him from the ultra-Lefts again. Marx was in the first place
convinced that the development of the revolution in one country was
closely bound up with its development in all other countries; in the
second place he was convinced that the revolution had quite definite
phases to go through and that the various classes must necessarily come
into power in a definite order conditioned by economic facts. It was at
these points in the Marxian doctrine that Gottschalk had directed the
spearhead of his attack. Gottschalk had criticised Marx for the
'heartlessness' with which he asked the workers to 'wait,' for his
'deviation' from action in his own country by referring to the coming
revolution in France, England, etc. Marx still firmly maintained that
the democratic petty-bourgeoisie must become the ruling class before the
proletariat could follow in its shoes. He yielded to his former
opponents, now his colleagues, in their estimate of the time that must
intervene. In Cologne he had talked of decades, but now the process of
development seemed concentrated into an incomparably briefer period,
though he still avoided defining it more closely than that.

Marx was in error He had impatiently anticipated a process of
development. He leapt across the years--and who at that time would not
have wished to have done so? But in his fundamental attitude to the
revolutionary process he took back nothing of what he had maintained in
1848 and 1849.

If the new revolution was at hand the Communist League must do
everything in its power to be forearmed. Marx was intensely active in
the spring and summer of 1850. Heinrich Bauer was sent to Germany as an
emissary and had a successful journey through North Germany, Saxony,
Württemberg and the Rhineland. Bauer was a skilful organiser and an
excellent judge of men, and he was able to bring once more into the
League organisation ex-members who had either lapsed into inactivity or
started working independently on their own. In the summer of 1850 the
League had as many as thirty branches. Karl Schurz, the subsequent
American statesman, who was travelling in Germany at the time on behalf
of a democratic organisation founded in Switzerland for the purpose of
reviving broken contacts, was forced to admit that 'all the usable
forces were already in the hands of the Communist League.'

The League was far bigger, stronger and better organised than at the
time of the revolution of 1848. The revolution had come too soon for it,
but the next revolution, contrary to expectations, seemed to be
tarrying. Marx was convinced that an economic crisis was due in the
autumn of 1850. But summer passed and autumn came and the crisis failed
to appear. There was not even the slightest indication of its approach.
In June Marx obtained admission to the Reading Room of the British
Museum and made an intense study of the economic history of the past
decade, and the economic history of England in particular, His notebooks
of this period are full of long columns of figures, tables, statistical
information of every kind. The more Marx mastered his material, the more
plainly did he see the vanity of his hopes. Europe was not on the verge
of a crisis but on the threshold of a new era of prosperity. 'To him who
had eyes to see and used them,' Engels wrote later, 'it was obvious that
the revolutionary storm of 1848 was gradually dying away.'

At the beginning of 1850 Marx once more had his own paper. He had a
great deal of difficulty in raising the money for it, in spite of the
help of Engels and friends in Germany. 'The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_, a
politico-economic review, edited by Karl Marx,' appeared in Hamburg in
February, 1850. It started as a monthly, but was intended to develop as
soon as possible into a fortnightly or if possible a weekly, so that as
soon as conditions permitted a return to Germany, it could promptly
emerge as a daily again.

The first three numbers contained Engels's description of the rising in
the Palatinate of Baden, as well as Marx's analysis of the revolution in
France from February, 1848, to November, 1849. Marx ended his survey
with an estimate of the prospects of the imminent revolution: 'The
result (of Bonaparte's fight with the Party of Order) is postponed, the
_status quo_ is upheld, one section of the Party of Order is
compromised, weakened, made impossible by the other, and repression of
the common enemy, the great mass of the nation, is extended and
stretched to the breaking-point, at which economic conditions will once
more have reached the point of development at which a new explosion will
blow the whole of these quarrelsome parties into the air, together with
their constitutional republic.'

The last double number of the review appeared at the end of November.
Marx summarised the result of his studies as follows: 'In view of this
general prosperity, in which the productive forces of bourgeois society
are flourishing as exuberantly as they possibly can under bourgeois
conditions, there can be no talk of a real revolution. Such a revolution
is only possible at periods when the two factors, modern forces of
production and bourgeois forms of production, come into conflict. The
incessant squabbles in which the representatives of the individual
fractions of the continental Party of Order are now indulging and
compromising one another are remote from providing an opportunity for a
new revolution. On the contrary, they are only possible because
conditions for the time being are so secure and--what the Reaction does
not know--so bourgeois. All attempts of the Reaction to put a stop to
bourgeois development will recoil upon themselves as certainly as all
the moral indignation and enthusiastic proclamations of the Democrats. A
new revolution is only possible as the result of a new crisis. But it is
just as inevitable as a new crisis.'

To have clung any longer to a policy which had been correct as long as a
crisis and with it a revolution had Seemed imminent would have meant
being guided by 'sheer wish' instead of by 'real circumstances.' At
first it was by no means easy for Marx to reconcile himself to
acknowledging that the years that followed would belong to the
bourgeoisie. Willich and his supporters simply ignored the altered
situation. In their view real circumstances might be what they would. If
they were adverse, all that was required was the will to change them.

Willich's immediate reaction to Marx's analysis of the class-struggle,
of the position of the classes in the revolution, and of the necessary
phases of the revolution was that it was nothing but a lot of
intellectual theorising. He felt Marx's view of historical development
was false. That the classes--capitalists, middle class and
proletariat--that is to say the victory of their class-interests--must
necessarily follow one another in succession seemed to him entirely
absurd. He hated the middle classes and shrank from the thought that the
petty-bourgeoisie would ever rule in Germany. They would smash all the
big factories and there would be 'a hue-and-cry after the loot and a
demoralisation that would be all the greater the more proletarians
managed to grab a share of it for themselves.' Willich only admitted the
existence of two social classes. One was opposed to oppression of every
kind, whether on ideal or practical grounds. The other was the class of
the selfish oppressors. With men of the first class he was convinced the
proletariat could work together towards bringing about the downfall of
the political powers-that-be. By these men the proletariat would not be
betrayed.

From this simplified view of society he deduced practical consequences.
Just as at night all cats are grey, political exiles are always inclined
completely to deny the very power which has driven them abroad. The
German exiles of the fifties were no exception. Practically all of them
accused their enemies of 'every kind of oppression' and were, at least
according to their words, determined to struggle relentlessly against
their oppressors. Willich found in them the colleagues he sought, not
just as companions for a portion of the way, as the Democrats had been
for Marx in 1848 and 1849, but as comrades in the activity he was pining
for. The only form this activity could take was that of conspiracy. He
hatched every conceivable kind of plot with' every conceivable clique of
exiles. As Marx later wrote, Willich and his friends demanded, 'if not
real conspiracies, at least the appearance of conspiracies, and hence
direct alliance with the Democratic heroes of the day.' The more such
alliances with other groups of exiles led to adventurous conspiracies
the more violently Marx repudiated them.

Marx had become associated with some conspirators himself, the
Blanquists. But in France conspiracy had a historical tradition. It had
become an essential part of the revolutionary movement and it had to be
reckoned with. Marx knew its negative sides only too well. He signed an
agreement with the Blanquists in April and the _Neue Rheinische
Zeitung-Revue_ appeared in the same month, with book-reviews by A. Chenu
and Lucien de la Hodde. Marx's judgment of the professional conspirators
was annihilating. 'To begin with their social position conditions their
social character,' he wrote. 'Proletarian conspiracy, of course, offers
them only a very limited and uncertain means of existence. They are
therefore perpetually forced to lay their hands on the conspiratorial
purse-strings. Many of them, of course, fall foul of bourgeois society
and make more or less of a good show in the police-courts. ... It goes
without saying that these conspirators by no means confine themselves to
organising the revolutionary proletariat. Their business consists in
forestalling the process of revolutionary development, spurring it on to
artificial crises, making revolutions extempore without the conditions
for revolution. For them the only condition required for the revolution
is a sufficient organisation of their own conspiracy. They are the
alchemists of the revolution, and they share in every way the
limitations and fixed ideas of the alchemists of old. ... The police
tolerate the conspiracies, not merely as a necessary evil. They tolerate
them as centres, easy to keep under supervision, uniting the most
powerful revolutionary social, elements, as workshops of insurrection,
which in France have become just as necessary a means of government as
the police itself, and finally as recruiting grounds for their own
political spies. ... Espionage is one of the chief occupations of the
conspirator. No wonder, therefore, that the small jump from routine
conspirator to paid police spy is made so frequently, encouraged as it
is by distress and imprisonment, threats and promises. Hence the huge
ramifications of suspicion within these organisations, suspicion which
so blinds its members that they end by taking the best among their
colleagues for spies and accept the real spies as reliable men.'

The conspirator, Marx continues, busy with his scheming and plotting and
having no other aim before his eyes but that of the immediate downfall
of the existing régime, has the most profound contempt for the
theoretical enlightenment of the workers concerning their
class-interests. At a moment when, in their opinion, it behoved every
revolutionary to act, i.e. plot and prepare risings, Willich and his
followers certainly regarded the lectures Marx delivered to the workers
as a senseless waste of time. Wilhelm Liebknecht, who had come to London
in the summer of 1850 and attached himself to Marx, writes vividly of
Marx's lectures in his memoirs.

'In 1850 and 1851 Marx gave a course of lectures on political economy,'
he says. 'He had been very unwilling to give them, but after addressing
a small circle of friends a few times he allowed himself to be persuaded
by us to address a larger audience. In this course ... Marx laid bare
all the broad outlines of the system which lies before us in _Das
Kapital_. In the hall of the Communist Workers' Educational Union, which
was full to overflowing ... Marx manifested a remarkable talent for
popularisation. No one hated the vulgarising, the devitalising, the
falsifying, the watering down of science more than he, but no one
possessed in a higher degree the capacity for clear exposition. Clarity
of speech is the result of clarity of thought. Clear thought demands a
clear form of expression.

'Marx's method was methodical. He would lay down a proposition as
briefly as possible, and then elucidate it at greater length, taking
extreme care to avoid using expressions unintelligible to the workers.
Then he would invite questions from his audience. Should there be none,
he would subject them to an examination, exhibiting such pedagogic skill
that no loopholes or misunderstandings escaped. ... Marx had the
qualifications of a first-class teacher.'

Liebknecht only heard the lectures on economics. Marx also dealt with
other questions, more concrete ones, dealing with the situation as it
had developed in the Communist League. In a letter he wrote in July,
1850, to P. G. Röser, a member of the League in Cologne, Marx mentions
that he lectured on the Communist Manifesto at the London Workers' Union
in the winter of 1849-50. Röser remembered the details of this letter
four years later. In the course of an interrogation by the police Röser
said that Marx demonstrated in these lectures that Communism could not
be attained for a good many years yet, that Communism itself would have
to go through a number of phases and that it could not be attained at
all except by the way of education and gradual development. But Willich
opposed him violently with his 'rubbish,' as Marx called it, and said
that Communism must be introduced by the next revolution, if necessary
by the power of the guillotine. Marx was afraid that the idea of
advancing at the head of his bold Palatinate troops and imposing
Communism by force, if necessary against the will of the whole of
Germany, had become so firmly rooted in 'General' Willich's head that it
would lead to a split in the Communist League.

Every word of this letter, which Röser repeated from memory, need not be
weighed too carefully in the balance. But it throws light once more on
the conflict between Marx and Willich. Marx assigned the Communist
League one task, the task of propaganda. He repudiated conspiracy, rash
adventure, insurrection. All Willich's meditations and aspirations were
concentrated on insurrection. Marx saw in revolution a historical
process as the result of which the proletariat could only seize the
power after passing through quite definite phases, which could not
possibly be skipped. Willich's attitude was: now or never. In all
essentials Marx returned to his views of 1848 and 1849. One thing he
stood out for, now and in the future--the absolute necessity of an
independent party.

Willich regarded the theoretical discussions in the Communist League
with contempt. He considered himself 'a man of action,' and when he
started to act Marx was forced to break with him. The danger that
Willich might involve the Communist League in his insurrectionary
adventures had become too great.

The situation in the League was a complicated one. Marx had a majority
at the central office. Of the four members who had been elected at the
Communist Congress of November, 1847, three, Heinrich Bauer, Pfänder and
Eccarius, supported Marx. The minority supported Willich, Schapper alone
of the 'old' members of the central office among them. But Willich had a
majority in the London branch, as well as in the London Workers'
Educational Union. There were several reasons for this. Willich's crude
revolutionism was bound to appeal to the hungry, desperate workers
assembled in both organisations. Moreover, Willich was closer to them as
a man. While Marx, 'scholar' and 'theorist,' lived his own life and only
came to the Union to lecture, Willich, who had no family, shared in the
joys and sorrows of the exiled proletarians. He had created co-operative
society and lived with the workers, ate with them and addressed them all
in the familiar second person singular; Marx was respected but Willich
was popular.

Marx proposed to the members of the central office that the headquarters
of the League be transferred to Germany and that the central office
transfer its authority to the central office at Cologne, the
headquarters of the most important branch of the League, both by reason
of its activity and its numerical strength. Marx's majority at the
central office accepted his proposal, which was viewed with favour at
Cologne. Willich's minority declared it to be contrary to the statutes
and founded a new central office of its own. Part of Marx's speech is
recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made.
'In place of a critical attitude the minority set up a dogmatic one,' he
said, 'in place of a materialistic attitude an idealistic one. They make
sheer will instead of real conditions the driving-wheel of the
revolution. While we say to the workers: you have fifteen or twenty or
fifty years of bourgeois and national wars to go through, not just to
alter conditions but to alter yourselves and qualify for political
power--you on the contrary say: we must obtain the power at once or we
might as well lay ourselves down to sleep. While we specifically draw
the German workers' attention to the undeveloped state of the German
proletariat, you outrageously flatter the national sentiment and social
prejudices of the German artisan, a course which, of course, is far more
popular. Just as the Democrats make a sacred entity of the word
"people," so do you do the same with the word "proletariat."' The
meeting took place on September 15, 1850. Willich believed that the
revolution would break out at any moment, and went on believing it even
when the crisis, and with it the basis for the revolution, came to an
end. On September 6 the Bank of England met banknotes with gold for the
first time for a long period. The crisis was over.

The split in the League took place just in time, for Willich plunged
into activities that were henceforward entirely quixotic. He was
positive that things were going to happen quite soon, and sent off
letter after letter to Germany. He had high hopes of the Cologne branch,
whom he believed to be on his side, or at least hoped to bring over to
his side. A conflict between Prussia and Austria was threatening, and
the reserves had been called up. Willich believed the Communists should
take advantage of the opportunity to seize Cologne, confiscate all
private property, ban all newspapers but one, and establish a
dictatorship. Thereupon he, Willich, would arrive and march to Paris at
the head of the revolutionary troops, turn Louis Napoleon out, and
promptly return to Germany to proclaim a one and indivisible republic,
etc. He circulated his crack-brained appeals to his followers, but
fortunately no one took any notice of them. The Cologne branch did
everything in its power to counteract all such wildcat schemes.

Three weeks after severing connection with Willich, Marx liquidated the
Société Universelle. Nothing is known of the activities of this
organisation, and it is doubtful if it was ever really active at all.
The Blanquists had set up a fencing and shooting establishment in
London, obviously intended for training and preparing plotters for a
rising. Liebknecht relates that Marx went there to practise shooting and
fencing, not so much with the aim of leading an attack on the Paris
Hôtel-de-Ville within the next few weeks as in memory of his year at the
university of Bonn. When the Blanquists invited Marx and Engels to a
joint discussion with Willich of questions arising out of the Société
Universelle, the answer given them was that Marx and his friends
regarded the society as long since dead. From that time onwards the
London Blanquists had the most intense hatred for Marx, and one of them,
the adventurous Barthélemy, described Marx as a traitor, and 'traitors
deserved death.' But the quarrel did not go farther than words.

The London Communists who stood by Marx after the split in the League
were fairly regular at first in their attendance at the weekly meetings,
but gradually started dropping out. Marx's own attendances became more
and more infrequent. 'The public isolation in which you and I now find
ourselves pleases me very much,' Marx wrote to Engels in February, 1854.
'It is entirely in accordance with our position and our principles. The
system of mutual concessions and compromises, which one had to put up
with for decency's sake, and the duty of bearing one's share of ridicule
in common with all the other asses of the party has now ceased.' Marx
had joined the revived Communist League on the assumption of the
imminence of a new revolutionary outbreak, which made the League, with
its secret organisations, its branches, emissaries and circulars,
necessary, as it had been before 1848. The assumption had turned out to
be false, and the League had lost the reason for its existence. There
was no longer any necessity to make concessions to the Blanquists,
compromises had become superfluous, the League itself had become
superfluous. Soon after the rupture with Willich, and as soon as the
danger of Willich's stirring up the branches in Germany to senseless
insurrection had been eliminated, or at any rate notably diminished,
Marx 'postponed' his further activities in the League 'indefinitely.' He
only had occasion to busy himself with League affairs once more, but the
occasion was a highly important one. It arose out of the trial of the
leaders of the Cologne branch.

The Communists in Cologne, which was now the centre of the movement in
Germany, had little experience of illegal work, and they worked with
incredible carelessness, sometimes to the point of _naïveté_. The
Prussian police were not very clever either. They themselves did not get
on to the track of the 'conspirators,' but had to be given a fillip from
outside. In May, 1851, the Saxon police arrested an emissary of the
League, a tailor named Nothjung, in Leipzig, and discovered from his
papers the existence of the organisation in Cologne and the names of its
most important members. The Prussian police took no steps whatever until
practically the whole of the essential facts had been communicated to
them. What they lacked in professional skill they made up for by brutal
treatment of prisoners under arrest and shameless provocation.

The genuine documents which came to light in the course of the
house-searches in Cologne were quite sufficient to bring the members of
the Cologne branch before a court of justice. But under the _Code
Napoléon_, which was in force in the Rhineland, the accused would have
to appear before a jury, and police and public prosecutor, not without
reason in view of past experience, feared that the accused, charged as
they were with activity as part of an organisation which stood for
Marx's point of view and was concerned with propaganda, might be
acquitted. Therefore more substantial material must be produced. If
there were none, it was necessary to create it. The authorities were
aware of the existence of Willich's crack-brained letters to the Cologne
Communists, and although the Cologne branch had specifically repudiated
his plans for an insurrection, their repudiation made no difference.
According to the police, they and Willich were all the same, and no
distinctions were recognised. In the eyes of the police no such thing as
a rupture because of fundamental political differences existed. Willich
and Marx were the same, and the quarrel between them was a purely
personal one, arising out of rivalry for the leadership of the secret
society. The police made promises to all sorts of people, including
convicts and prisoners on remand. They promised them every sort of
favour--withdrawal of proceedings against them, quashing of their
convictions--if they would agree to give suitable evidence. Not content
with that, they sought for documents--evidence in writing that would
compromise Marx and implicate him personally.

The Cologne police even spread their net to London, where most of the
better-known refugees, above all the leaders of the 'Marx Party,' and
the 'Willich Party' were living. An army of spies was set to watch the
political refugees. The Germans were trailed not only by the police
agents of Austria, Prussia and other German states but also by French
spies, Belgian spies, Dutch spies and Danish spies. A regular trade in
information about the German refugees sprang up, with a veritable market
at which information was bartered or paid for in cash. Information was
anxiously sought by diplomats, who used it to curry favour with the
German potentates, and the agents formed rings or engaged in fierce
competition with each other. It was a dirty and lucrative business.

In many reports Marx appeared as a desperate terrorist who used London
as a base for organising attempts on the crowned heads of Europe. The
Prussian ambassador in Brussels reported in December, 1848, that there
were rumours in Belgium that Marx was preparing an attempt on the King
of Prussia. Consequently, when a good royalist non-commissioned officer
made an attempt on the life of Frederick William IV in the spring of
1850, special agents were sent to London who naturally confirmed the
fact that Marx was the organiser of the outrage. The chief of the
Belgian police passed on to the Prussians his own agents' report that
Marx forgathered every evening at a tavern with a group of desperadoes,
to whom he made inflammatory speeches--'he teaches his partisans whom he
one day counts on sending individually to Germany on missions the nature
of which may easily be guessed [^22].'

The police also discovered that Marx, not satisfied with the
assassination of German princes, had aims on the lives of Queen Victoria
and the Prince Regent. The Prussian policeman who sent this sensational
report to Berlin asked whether it might not be advisable, in view of the
tremendous importance of the matter, to seek a personal audience of the
Queen. The audience was not granted, but on May 24, 1850, Manteuffel,
the Prussian Prime Minister, sent copies of the report to the British
Foreign Office. Verbal representations seem also to have been made to
the British authorities, for in the summer of 1850 Marx feared he was
going to be expelled from England. The English police were more
intelligent than the Prussians believed them to be, for they soon
discovered what lay behind the Prussian denunciations.

During the preparations for the Cologne trials police activities were
redoubled. Their agents, having unlimited resources at their disposal,
got busy among the starving refugees and succeeded in buying several of
them. One of the most important refugee-spies was the Hungarian Colonel
Bangya, who was in the confidence of Kossuth and in the pay of the
French, Austrian and Prussian police at the same time. The police
dossiers of the time are full of reports of his having attended a
refugee meeting yesterday, of having read certain letters the day
before, and having gained the friendship of this leader or the other.
These bought ex-revolutionaries were able to give information about
Marx, and sometimes their reports were very well informed. Bangya
supplied particularly detailed reports, for he enjoyed Marx's friendship
for several months and was a frequent visitor at his house.

The reports of the properly informed agents did not help the police, for
they tended rather to vindicate than incriminate the Cologne accused.
They were unanimous in stating that Marx repudiated armed risings and
plots. So the police had recourse to other methods. They had the house
of one of Willich's followers broken into, and the records of the
'Willich-Schapper Party' fell into their hands almost complete. They
rounded these off with letters they forged themselves. The 'Marx Party'
documents were in the possession of Marx and Engels and were better
looked after, but the police managed to get at them too. They
manufactured a minute book with forged reports of meetings that never
took place. And now the case was ready to begin.

For months Marx did practically nothing but work for the accused, to
whose defence he devoted all his energies, both before and during the
trial, which lasted for weeks. At the end of October, 1852, Frau Marx
wrote to a friend in America:

'You will have followed the Communist monster trial in the _Kölnische
Zeitung_. On October 23 the whole thing took such a splendid and
interesting turn, and one so favourable to the accused, that our spirits
began to revive a little again. You can imagine that the "Marx Party" is
active day and night, and is working with head, hands and feet.

'The whole of the police case is lies. They steal, they forge, they
break desks open, they commit perjury and give false evidence, and
consider they have a perfect right to do so in the case of the
Communists, who are beyond the pale. This and the blackguardly way the
police have of taking over all the functions of the public prosecutor
and producing as proof, as legally proved fact, unverified documents,
sheer rumours, reports and hearsay evidence is really hair-raising. My
husband has to work all day and far into the night, for all the proofs
of forgery have to be elaborated in London. Whole documents have to be
copied six or eight times over and sent to Germany by the most various
routes, via Frankfurt, Paris, etc., for all letters addressed to my
husband, and all letters from here to Cologne are intercepted and
opened. The whole thing is now a struggle between the police on the one
side and my husband on the other, for everything, the whole revolution
and now the whole conduct of the defence, has been thrust upon his
shoulders.

'Forgive my confused writing, but I have been somewhat immersed in the
plot myself, and I have been copying so much that my fingers ache. Hence
the confusion. Whole masses of business addresses and fake business
letters have just arrived from Weerth and Engels to enable us to
despatch documents, etc., safely. A regular office has been established
here. Two or three of us write, others run messages, still others scrape
pennies together to enable the writers to keep themselves alive and
furnish proofs of the scandalous behaviour of the official world. At the
same time my three merry children sing and whistle and their papa keeps
on losing patience with them. Such a hustling and bustling.'

Marx's efforts resulted in the unmasking of some of the chief forgeries
and four of the eleven accused were acquitted, but the pressure of the
police and the Government on the jury was so great that the other seven
were convicted. They were sentenced to from three to six years'
imprisonment in a fortress.

That was the end of the Communist League. After the arrests in Cologne
in 1851 it ceased to exist. In England it only continued as an
organisation to help the accused. Sentence was pronounced in Cologne on
November 12, 1852. Five days later the League, at Marx's proposal, was
declared dissolved. Marx's reason for this decision was that the League
was 'no longer opportune.'

Marx never again belonged to a secret organisation. General political
grounds and private grounds united in causing him to refrain. Some
American Communists proposed to reorganise the League at the end of the
fifties, but he would have nothing to do with it. He told them he was
convinced he could do more good to the working classes by his
theoretical labours than by participation in organisations the time for
which had gone by. He refused to join any secret organisations, 'if only
on the ground that such organisations might endanger human beings in
Germany.' The conviction of his Cologne comrades was a terrible blow to
him. Roland Daniels, the man for whom Marx had more affection than for
any other, succumbed early to illness contracted in prison. 'His was a
delicate, finely organised, thoroughly noble nature,' Marx wrote in his
letter of condolence to Frau Daniels. 'In him character, talents and
aesthetic vision were in unusual harmony. Daniels stood out among the
people of Cologne like a Greek statue thrust by some whimsical mischance
among a lot of Hottentots.' Marx never got over the fact of men like
Daniels dying a sacrifice to Prussian police infamy. He was convinced
that the time for the workers' movement in Western Europe to organise
itself into secret societies had gone.

Marx wrote his pamphlet, _Revelations of the Communist Trial in
Cologne_, in November and December, 1852. He exposed all the abominable
practices of the police, produced documentary evidence of their
forgeries, utterly demolished the web of lies that they had spun. But
the pamphlet did not reach Germany. A fairly large edition of two
thousand copies was printed in Switzerland, but was confiscated when an
attempt was made to smuggle it over the frontier.

Another of Marx's works had not fared much better shortly before. Joseph
Weydemeyer had founded a weekly paper in America, where he emigrated in
the autumn of 1850. It was the only German paper at Marx's disposal
after the death of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung-Revue_. Marx started
writing for _The Revolution_, as it was called, an essay on _The 18th
Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte_, referring to the Bonapartist _coup d'état_
of December 2, 1850. But Weydemeyer was not able to proceed with his
first number, and the most brilliant of Marx's shorter historical works,
in which, as Engels said, he gives a magnificent example of how the
materialist interpretation of history can explain an event which remains
baffling from all other viewpoints, might have remained unpublished had
a German worker not given Weydemeyer forty dollars, the whole of his
savings, to enable him to print it. The _18th Brumaire_ appeared as the
first number of the monthly _The Revolution_. Although several hundred
copies found their way to Germany not a single one appeared in any
bookshop.

After the dispersal of the Communist League Marx resigned from the
Workers' Educational Union and the refugees' assistance committee. He
shared in none of the busy inactivity with which the more or less
well-known Democratic leaders in London, 'the great men of the
emigration' as Marx called them, filled their time waiting for the
outbreak of the revolution which they believed to be imminent. He had
nothing but bitter sarcasm and contempt for their empty pathos, their
cliques and their factions, the whole of the hollow motions through
which they went. They regarded him as a mischief-maker, a proud,
unsociable man who went his own way alone. They hated him for being an
obstinate Communist. An example will suffice to show what excesses the
bourgeois 'emigrants' were capable when they wanted to make Marx appear
contemptible.

In the summer of 1851 a rumour was spread in London that Marx had become
a contributor to the _Neue Preussische Zeitung_, the paper of extreme
Reaction. It was partly under the control of Ferdinand von Westphalen,
the Minister of the Interior of whom Marx had said to his wife in jest
in 1848 that her brother was so stupid that he was sure to become a
Prussian minister one day. Neither Marx nor his wife had had the
slightest contact with him for many years. An obscure German paper
published in London eagerly took up the slander and surpassed itself in
innuendoes about the excellent relations existing between the red
revolutionary and the minister of state. At that Marx, who granted the
Press the right to insult politicians, comedians and other public
figures, but not to slander them, lost patience and challenged the
editor to a duel. The editor was frightened out of his life and printed
in his next issue the apology that was dictated to him and thus the
incident was closed.

Since Engels had gone to live in Manchester, Marx was practically alone
in London. Material needs became more and more pressing. In 1848, when
the German revolution began to peter out, Engels looked back with a
smile of regret to the 'sleepless night of exile' during the years that
led up to the Revolution. The real and 'dreadful 'sleepless night of
exile' started now.

## Chapter 16: The Sleepless Night of Exile

Bonaparte's _coup d'état_ put the finishing external touch to the
European counter-revolution, which now held the whole Continent in its
grip. In Hungary, where the defence had been heroic, the hangman now
held sway. Austria was ruled as it had been in the time of Metternich.
In Prussia nothing was left of the triumphant achievements of March but
a pitiful mock-constitutionalism which served as an admirable prop of
military despotism. The inner enemy was everywhere defeated. The way was
once more clear for an active foreign policy.

The revolution had not succeeded in solving a single one of the numerous
European national problems. Germany remained carved into little pieces,
Poland remained divided, Italy was still rent asunder and Hungary
enslaved. In the last resort Austria and Prussia had been saved by
Russia. Russian troops had kept down the Poles and suppressed the
Hungarian revolution; and now the Tsar proceeded to claim his recompense
for saving Central Europe from 'chaos.' The opportunity of coming a step
nearer to the capture of Holy Byzantium, the principal aim of Russian
foreign policy, was more favourable than it had ever been before.
Austria, just saved by Russia from Kossuth and practically bankrupt in
any case, was bound to remain inactive, and Prussia was a vassal state.
No danger threatened from the West. France, or so they believed in St.
Petersburg, was not yet strong enough to resist Russia alone, and the
Tory Government in England could not well defend the Crescent against
the Cross.

The calculation was erroneous. France and England, much as they wished
to avoid war, were forced to come to the assistance of Turkey. It was
impossible for them to tolerate Russia, even in the guise of a champion
of Christianity, gaining a foothold on the Dardanelles. In the spring of
1854 Russia found herself at war with England, France and Turkey.

This was not the war Marx had longed for in 1848 and 1849. This was no
war against the stronghold of counter-revolution, but a war of the three
most important counter-revolutionary powers among themselves. Marx
welcomed it, for he who fought Russia was working for the revolution,
though he knew it not and willed it not. Recent experience had shown
once more that the overthrow of Russia was an essential preliminary to
the victory of the proletariat. In the nineties Engels summarised Marx's
reasons in two sentences. 'In the first place the Russian Empire
constitutes the great stronghold, reserve position and reserve army of
European reaction. The mere fact of its existence is itself a danger and
a threat to us. In the second place it constantly interferes in European
affairs with the object of securing geographical points of vantage, all
with the aim of obtaining an ascendancy over Europe, and in so doing
interferes with our normal development and thus makes the liberation of
the European proletariat impossible.'

Being anti-Russian meant anything but being pro-English or pro-French or
even pro-Turkish. In France the most arbitrary despotism held sway, in
spite of, or rather because of, the universal suffrage which under the
Empire had become a gigantic instrument of popular betrayal. Freedom of
assembly was as good as abolished, the workers' right to combine was
taken away, the increase in the severity of the conditions of the
work-books made them the slaves of every minor police official, and the
whole country was given over a helpless prey to the rapacity of the
December bands, who did not hesitate to take advantage of their
opportunity. As for England, it pretended to be waging 'a war of
civilisation against barbarism,' but in defending Turkey it was really
defending the flanks of the route to India, where in Marx's words, 'the
real hypocrisy and the barbarism native to bourgeois civilisation
appears in all its nakedness.' England treated the Irish with even
greater inhumanity, if such a thing were possible, than that with which
the Russian proprietor treated his serfs; England was the country whose
fate was determined by its aristocracy and heartless middle-class alone,
who were roused to indignation at the maltreatment of Christians in
Turkey to-day, and at the suppression by the Russians of the noble
peoples of the Caucasus to-morrow, but had no objection to
eleven-year-old children slaving for ten or eleven hours a day in the
textile factories.

Europe was on the move again, but Marx was entirely cut off from any
possibility of direct political activity. After the dissolution of the
Communist League, which in any case would not have been a suitable
instrument for political action, no other organisation existed. The
German Press was closed to Marx. He started writing for an unimportant
paper in Breslau, but that was not till the beginning of 1855, and in
any case it was sheer hack-work and after a year the paper was
discontinued. Marx's connections in France were even more tenuous; an
occasional letter from a refugee in Paris, and that was all. In England
things were slightly better.

The Chartist Movement never succeeded in recovering from its defeat in
the spring of 1848. A few groups survived here and there, practically
without contact with one another. Many leaders had deserted it, and with
the end of the crisis the great English workers' movement seemed to be
at an end too. Of the two men whom Marx knew from earlier days, G.J.
Harney was undoubtedly as well-meaning and as devoted to the workers'
cause as anyone could be, but he was quite obviously incapable of
resurrecting the expiring movement. He was always full of enthusiasms,
for Kossuth and Mazzini, for Marx and for Willich. They were all such
excellent men, and he made heroes of them all. Marx and Engels had a
private name for him--'Citizen Hip-Hip-Hurrah!' They soon parted from
him.

The one Chartist leader with whom Marx remained in contact for long was
Ernest Jones. Jones, energetic, pertinacious, clever, if sometimes
over-clever, educated and an excellent speaker, well-tried in
struggle--he spent two years in prison because of his part in the stormy
demonstration of 1848--had all the qualities of a great agitator. His
fiery spirit breathed new life into the movement. In March, 1854, he
actually succeeded in causing an All English Workers' Parliament to meet
in Manchester. Marx, who was invited as an honorary delegate, sent an
address in which he defined the task of the parliament as 'organisation
of its united forces, organisation of the working class on a national
scale.' But the Chartists lacked the strength to overcome their defeat
and the movement increasingly disintegrated. Some of its old adherents
merged into petty-bourgeois reformist groups, others lost interest, and
Jones himself ended by joining John Bright's Radicals.

Marx found it exceedingly difficult to reconcile himself to the idea of
a powerful movement, which but a few years before had been the champion
of the European proletariat, ending in this way. He went on hoping that
it would flare up again, be rekindled by some spontaneous act. When two
hundred thousand workers, artisans and small tradesmen demonstrated
against the Sunday Trading Bill in Hyde Park in June, 1855, Marx
believed the affair to be no less than 'the beginning of the English
revolution.' He and other German exiles took an active part in it.
Liebknecht writes in his memoirs that Marx, who was liable to become
very excited on such occasions, was 'within a hair's breadth of being
seized by the collar by a policeman and hauled before a magistrate, had
not a warm appeal to the thirst of the brave guardian of the law
eventually met with success.' After a second demonstration the Bill was
withdrawn and the flickering flame extinguished.

The whole weakness of the Chartist Movement in the first half of the
fifties was demonstrated, among other things, by its newspapers.
Harney's paper, _The Red Republican_, which published the first English
translation of the Communist Manifesto, ceased to appear after a short
time and its successor, _The Friend of the People_, had no better fate.
From February, 1852, onwards Jones produced a weekly, _The People's
Paper_, but had the greatest difficulty in keeping the 'poor sheet' (as
Marx called it) alive. Marx helped to edit it for a time. From the
autumn onwards he occasionally wrote articles for Jones and allowed him
to reprint articles which had appeared elsewhere. But even the _People's
Paper_ had only a very limited circulation. It was several times on the
verge of bankruptcy and ended by passing into the hands of a bourgeois
radical group.

Apart from the Chartist Press, which was insignificant, the only papers
in England at Marx's disposal were the Urquhartite papers. When the
Oriental question cropped up once more in the spring of 1853 Marx at
first paid very little attention to it. In March he was still convinced
that 'in spite of all the dirty work and the ranting in the newspapers
it would never be the cause of a European war.' Six months later Russia
and Turkey were at war, and when France and England entered the fray a
local dispute flared up into a European war. Marx flung himself into the
_détestable question orientale_, and for a time even thought of learning
Arabic and Turkish. He read all the books on the Near East he could lay
his hands on, and found particular interest in the writings of David
Urquhart, to which Engels had drawn his attention. 'I am now reading
Urquhart, the crazy M.P., who declares that Palmerston is sold to
Russia. The explanation is simple; the fellow is a Highland Scot of
Lowland education, by nature a Romantic and by training a Free Trader.
The fellow went to Greece a philhellene and, after being at daggers
drawn with the Turks for three long years, he went to Turkey and became
an enthusiast for the very Turks he had just been quarrelling with. He
goes into raptures over Islam, and his motto is: if I were not a
Calvinist I should be a Mohammedan. In his opinion Turks, particularly
those of the Golden Age of the Osmanli Empire, are the most perfect
nation on earth, without any exception whatever. The Turkish language is
the most perfect and melodious in the world. The Turkish constitution in
its 'purity' is as fine as any there could be, and is almost superior to
the British. In short, only the Turk is a gentleman and freedom exists
only in Turkey.'

Urquhart went into raptures over Turkey because it was barbaric. He went
into raptures about the Middle Ages and the Catholic Church for the same
reason. He hated modern industry, the bourgeoisie, universal suffrage,
the Chartists and revolutionaries of every kind. He was profoundly
convinced that all these were nothing but the tools of Russian
diplomacy, which made use of them to cause unrest in the West and
deliver it a helpless prey to Russian plans of world-conquest. Marx soon
saw that Urquhart was a complete monomaniac, but his hatred of Russia
might make him a useful ally.

Marx frequently praised the writings of Urquhart in the articles on the
Oriental question he wrote for the _New York Tribune_ from the summer of
1853 onwards. Whatever else the Scot might be, he certainly knew the
Near East better than most of his contemporaries. The fact that there
was no infamy of which he did not think Russia capable only served to
make Marx more favourably inclined towards him. Moreover, there seemed
to be an element of truth in his exaggerations. In spite of Marx's
original scepticism, the more closely he studied the recent history of
Anglo-Russian relations the better-founded did Urquhart's imputations
against British statesmen, and Palmerston in particular, appear. Marx
made an exhaustive study of Hansard and subjected the diplomatic Blue
Books from 1807 to 1850 to an assiduous analysis. In November, 1853, he
communicated the result of his researches to Engels: 'Curious as it may
seem to you, as a result of closely following the footprints of the
noble Viscount for the past twenty years, I have come to the same
conclusion as the monomaniac Urquhart, namely that Palmerston has been
sold to Russia for several decades.'

The irresolute, vacillating manner in which England and France waged the
war and their complaints of the Tsar's intransigeance, which made the
compromise they desired so difficult to obtain, only served to intensify
Marx's conviction that Palmerston did not mean the war seriously and
that the war was a sham. Marx became a monomaniac like Urquhart. He
examined hundreds of diplomatic documents in the British Museum, and in
his opinion they revealed a secret connivance between the Cabinets of
London and St. Petersburg dating from the time of Peter the Great. Marx
now attacked Palmerston with great vehemence. He did not directly accuse
him of being corrupted by Russia, but demonstrated 'Palmerston's
connivance with the St. Petersburg Cabinet from his transactions with
Poland, Turkey, Circassia, etc.'

Urquhart was delighted at Marx's articles on Lord Palmerston, which were
published in the _New York Tribune_ and the _People's Paper_. E. Tucker,
a publisher and a friend of Urquhart's, printed fifteen thousand copies
of one of these articles in the form of a fly-sheet, and not long
afterwards he reproduced two more articles in the same form. In the
summer of 1854, the Urquhartites, this time with the support of the
Chartists, started a campaign against secret diplomacy. The campaign was
chiefly directed against Palmerston. Their organs, the _Free Press_ in
London and the _Sheffield Free Press_ reprinted many of Marx's articles.
Marx maintained his contact with them until the middle of the sixties.
Marx shrank at nothing when it came to striking a blow at Russian
Tsarism. Later he actually wrote anti-Russian articles for Conservative
papers.

Apart from the Chartist movement and the Urquhartite committees, some
unimportant weeklies, and two or three pamphlets, Marx's voice in
England was echoing in the void. For ten whole years Marx had only one
big newspaper through which to speak, though his voice did not reach the
English, French and German proletariat for whom his words were meant.
From the summer of 1852 onwards Marx was a regular correspondent of the
_New York Tribune_, which in the middle of the fifties had the largest
circulation in the world.

The _New York Tribune_ was founded in April, 1841, as an organ of the
advanced bourgeois intelligentsia, by Horace Greeley, a former
compositor who became a journalist. Greeley was a friend of Albert
Brisbane and the Rev. George Ripley, two zealous disciples of the
Socialist teaching of Fourier. In the spring of 1842 he put his paper at
the disposal of Fourierist propaganda. Fourierism had many followers
among the educated classes in America at the time. Its colony at Brook
Farm, near Boston, was visited and encouraged by Nathaniel Hawthorne,
Emerson, Charming and Margaret Fuller. It was destroyed by fire in 1846
and financial difficulties prevented its reconstruction. Many of the
colonists went to New York, where Charles A. Dana became city editor and
Ripley critic of the _New York Tribune_. It had a roll of contributors
unequalled by any other American paper, an uncommonly high literary and
political standard, and excellent European correspondents, but was only
moderately successful prior to 1848, when, as the best-informed paper in
America, its circulation increased as a consequence of the outbreak of
the revolution. Dana was sent to Europe as a special correspondent. He
was in Paris during the June rising, went to Berlin in the autumn and in
November went to Cologne. It may have been Brisbane, who was in Berlin
at the time and had met Marx in Paris, who drew Dana's attention to him.
Dana paid Marx a visit and spent a 'delightful' evening with him, as he
was fond of recalling in later years, and took away with him an abiding
impression that in Marx he had met the most acute and far-seeing of the
revolutionaries. In July, 1850, he wrote to Marx from New York that he
always kept himself informed of Marx's activities and whereabouts and
asked him whether he would not like to come to America. Marx's answer is
unknown. At the time Marx certainly had plans to emigrate to America, as
will be mentioned later.

After the collapse of the German revolution a great stream of emigrants
poured into the new, the free world. Half a million Germans landed in
New York in the years 1852 to 1854 alone. They took with them a lively
interest in the affairs of their native land. Even the native Americans,
who did not generally pay much attention to Europe, took much more
notice of it now than formerly. The _New York Tribune_, with its
excellent connections among the Democrats of the emigration, advanced in
circulation by leaps and bounds. At the beginning of August, 1851, Dana
invited Marx to contribute.

Between August, 1851, and September, 1852, eighteen articles on the
revolution and counter-revolution in Germany appeared in the _New York
Tribune_. They appeared over Marx's signature, though not one of them
was written by him. Marx was so fully occupied on the great economic
work which he was anxious to complete as quickly as possible that he
asked Engels to write them in his stead, and Engels wrote them, as he
later wrote many more articles for Marx, either entirely or in part. In
May, 1852, Dana asked Marx to send him articles on 'current events which
throw light on the brewing revolutionary crisis.' Marx submitted the
first article in August. As his English was not yet adequate, he wrote
in German, which Engels translated. From February, 1853, onwards Marx
wrote his English articles himself. From then onwards Marx worked very
hard for the _New York Tribune_. During the first year he sent no fewer
than sixty articles to New York.

The work Marx did for the _New York Tribune_ was not that of an ordinary
foreign correspondent. He contributed articles which were comprehensive
evaluations of recent events. Sometimes he wrote regular essays. They
were composed hurriedly, because the steamer sailed twice a week, and if
Marx missed the mail an article was lost and he was £2 the poorer. But
every line he wrote was based on careful study. Marx lacked both
inclination and ability for the work of a newspaper correspondent
proper. He had little contact with political circles, still less with
bourgeois circles, he avoided journalists and could not dance attendance
on the latest sensations. From ten in the morning till seven at night he
sat in the Reading Room of the British Museum. Before writing an article
on British rule in India he studied dozens of books on the subject, and
before his series on the Spanish revolution he went through the whole of
ancient and modern literature relevant to the subject. Engels
co-operated valiantly in his own departments, i.e. military matters and
geography. The _New York Tribune_ was more than pleased with the work of
its contributor. Sometimes Marx's contributions were printed as leading
articles, and Dana did not shrink from inserting sentences here and
there and altering the beginning and end to make it appear that the
articles had been written in the office. Engels's military articles on
the Turko-Russian War attracted so much attention that their author was
taken to be the prominent General Winfield Scott, who was friendly with
Greeley and stood as a candidate for the presidency.

The _New York Tribune_, which was not so anxious to let its readers see
how much of the work was not its own, started omitting Marx's name more
and more frequently. Marx eventually insisted that either all his
articles be signed or none, and from the spring of 1855 they all
appeared unsigned. At first other Germans had contributed to the _New
York Tribune_, including Freiligrath, Ruge and even Bruno Bauer, but
from the middle of the fifties Marx was its only diplomatic
correspondent in Europe.

The fees paid Marx for his articles were hardly in accordance with the
_New York Tribune's_ appreciation of him as 'its most highly--valued
contributor.' For the first article Marx was paid £1, and the fee was
then raised to £2. Marx was not paid for all the articles he submitted
but only for those that were printed. The greatest concession that Marx
ever obtained was in the spring of 1857, when the _Tribune_ agreed to
pay him for one dispatch a week, whether it were used or not. The
remainder were only to be paid for if they actually appeared. The number
of articles paid for rose and fell in accordance with American interest
in events in Europe, whether because they directly affected the United
States or whether such things as wars, risings or crises were
'sensational' enough for them. 'It is really disgusting,' Marx wrote to
Engels in January, 1857, 'to be condemned to take it as a favour that
such a rag admits you to its company. To pound and grind dry bones and
make soup of them, as paupers do in the workhouse, that is the sum total
of the political work to which one is generously condemned in such
society. Although I am only an ass, I am conscious of having given these
rascals, I will not say recently, but in former years, too much for
their money.'

Irregular and uncertain as Marx's income from the _New York Tribune_ was
for nearly ten years, it was all he earned. In spite of Engels's
unlimited sacrifices he would have been lost without it.

When Marx arrived in London he was not in the least worried about his
immediate monetary prospects. He was convinced that he would soon
succeed in putting the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ on its feet again in
the form of a review. But negotiations with the publishers dragged on
for month after month, and then Marx was taken ill. The contributions
were not ready in time and the first number appeared at the beginning of
March, 1850, instead of on January 1. The money Marx brought with
him--his wife had sold the furniture in Cologne and she had pawned the
silver in France--quickly vanished. Other exiles, poverty-stricken
themselves, were unable to help. Marx had to provide for his wife, four
young children (Guido, his second son, was born in October, 1849) and
Lenchen Demuth, the faithful housekeeper. The household was reduced to
an appalling state of destitution. At the end of March, 1850, they were
evicted. About this time Frau Marx wrote to Weydemeyer: 'I shall
describe one day of this life as it really was, and you will see that
perhaps few other refugees have had to suffer so much. Since the cost of
a wet-nurse is prohibitive here, I decided, in spite of continual and
terrible pains in the breasts and the back, to nurse the child myself.
But the poor little angel drank in so much sorrow with the milk that he
was continually fretting, and in violent pain day and night. He has not
slept a whole night through since he was born, but sleeps at most two or
three hours. Recently he has been subject to violent cramps, so that he
is continually hovering on the brink of life and death. When he was
suffering in this way he sucked so violently that my nipple became sore
and bled. Often the blood streamed into his little mouth. As I was
sitting like this one day our landlady suddenly appeared. In the course
of the winter we had paid her more than two hundred and fifty thalers,
and we had arranged with her that in future we were not to pay her but
the landlord, who had put in an execution. Now she denied this agreement
and demanded the £5 we still owed her. As we could not pay this sum at
once two brokers entered the house and took possession of all my
belongings; bedding, linen, clothes, everything, even the poor baby's
cradle and the better toys belonging to the girls, who stood by, weeping
bitterly. They threatened to take everything away in two hours' time,
when I should have had to lie on the bare floor with my freezing
children and my aching breast. Our friend Schramm hurried into the town
to seek help. He got into a cab, but the horses ran away. He jumped out
and was brought back bleeding to the house, where I was in despair with
my poor shivering children.

'We had to leave the house next day. It was cold and rainy and dreary.
My husband tried to find a lodging for us, but no one was willing to
have us when he mentioned the four children. At last a friend helped us
and we paid what was owing. I quickly sold all my beds in order to
settle with the chemist, the baker, the butcher and the milkman, who
were all filled with alarm when they heard the broker's men were in and
rushed to send in their bills. The beds I sold were taken to the street
door and loaded on to a hand-cart--and what do you think happened? By
this time it had grown late and it was long after sunset, after which
moving furniture in this way is illegal by English law. The landlord
appeared with a number of constables, and said that some of his property
might be on the cart, we might be escaping to a foreign country. In less
than five minutes a crowd of two or three hundred people had gathered
outside our front door--the whole Chelsea mob. The beds were brought in
again, and could not be sent to the purchaser until next morning. Now
that the sale of our goods and chattels had enabled us to pay our debts
to the last penny, I moved with my little darlings to two tiny rooms at
our present address, the German Hotel, 1, Leicester Street, Leicester
Square, where we found a human reception for £5 10s. a week.

'Do not imagine that these petty sufferings have bent me. I know only
too well that our struggle is no isolated one, that I belong to the
favoured and the fortunate, since my dear husband, the mainstay of my
life, is still at my side. The only thing that really crushes me and
makes my heart bleed is all the pettinesses that he has to suffer, the
fact that so few have come to his aid, and that he, who has so willingly
and gladly helped so many, should be helpless here. But you are not to
think, my dear Herr Weydemeyer, that we are making claims on anyone. The
only thing that my husband might have expected of those who have had so
many ideas, so much encouragement, so much support from him was that
they might have devoted more practical energy to his _Review_, might
have taken a greater interest in it. I am proud and bold enough to
suggest this. That little I think they owed him. But my husband thinks
otherwise. Never, even at the most terrible times, has he lost his
confidence in the future, or even his cheerful humour."

In the middle of May Marx and his family moved to Soho, the quarter
where the most poverty-stricken refugees lived. He rented two small
rooms in Dean Street, and there he lived for six years, in a noisy,
dirty street, in a neighbourhood where epidemic after epidemic raged. In
1854 the cholera was worse in Soho than anywhere else. Three of his
children died there. Those were unspeakably dreadful years.

The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung-Revue_ brought Marx in less than thirty
thalers in all, and it was impossible to go on with it. Marx sold his
library, which he had left in Cologne, got into debt, pawned everything
that was not nailed fast. After the miscarriage of their literary plans
Engels could no longer remain in London. He returned to 'fiendish
commerce' in the autumn of 1853 and went to Manchester, to his father's
cotton-mill, where he worked at a moderate salary as an ordinary
employee. Engels's conviction that the revolution would soon free him
from his 'Egyptian bondage' enabled him to tolerate a life he hated. But
his chief aim was to help Marx. Marx, the brains of the revolutionary
party, the genius, in comparison with whom he felt his own gifts to be
merely talents, must not be allowed to perish in poverty-stricken
refugeedom. For twenty long years Engels worked at a job he hated,
abandoning his own scientific work in order to make possible the work of
his friend. He wrote newspaper articles for him and gave him as much
money as he could. During the early years this was not a great deal.
Engels's salary increased only gradually, and he had considerable social
responsibilities of his own. He had to maintain a 'respectable'
household, and another in which he lived with an Irish daughter of the
people named Mary Burns, and he kept Mary's relatives as well, but every
pound he could possibly spare was sent to Marx, whose position became
more and more desperate every month. In the autumn of 1850 Marx
seriously considered the idea of emigrating to America, where he hoped
to be able to found a German paper. Rothacker, who had taken part in the
rising in Baden, was asked to prepare the ground among friends and
acquaintances in New York. He wrote to Marx in November, saying that the
prospects were as bad as they could possibly be. The immediate prospects
in London, whatever they were, were better than they were in New York.
Little Guido died, 'a sacrifice to bourgeois misery,' as Marx said to
Engels. A daughter, Franziska, was born in March, 1851. When she died,
barely one year old, Marx was forced to borrow money from a French
_émigré_ to pay for the coffin.

Marx wished to continue the review as a quarterly, but the publisher
refused. Marx devoted all his energy to his book on economics. He and
his friends in Germany spent months negotiating with every conceivable
publisher, but not one of them was willing to have anything to do with
him. Marx's name alone was sufficient to put them into a panic. Hermann
Becker tried to get Marx's _Collected Essays_ published in Cologne. One
volume appeared and that was all. Marx offered the publishers a pamphlet
on Proudhon, then a translation of _Misère de la Philosophie_; he
offered to contribute to periodicals and was willing to write
'completely innocuous' articles. But all his suggestions were declined.
Had friends--notably the excellent Daniels--not helped him, he would
have starved in 1851. 'You can well imagine that the situation is very
gloomy,' Marx wrote to Weydemeyer. 'It will be the end of my wife if it
goes on much longer. The never-ending worries of the petty, paltry,
bourgeois struggle are a terrible strain on her. To add to it there are
all the infamies of my opponents, who never dared attack me but avenge
themselves for their impotence by spreading the most unspeakable
infamies about me and making me socially suspect. I should, of course,
only laugh at the filth. I do not let them disturb me for one moment in
my work. But you will understand that my wife, who is ailing, and has to
endure the most dismal poverty from morning till night, and whose
nervous system is upset, is none the better for having to listen to
stupid go-betweens who daily report to her the outpourings of the
democratic cesspools. The tactlessness of some of these people is often
amazing.'

Naturally Marx did not receive a single penny for his _18th Brumaire_.
That was work for the Party. His battle for the defendants at the
Cologne trial and his unmasking of the police in his _Revelations_ was
Party work too. During the second half of 1852 these activities occupied
all his time. All this work was carried out under the most unspeakable
difficulties. In February he reached the 'pleasant point' when he could
not go out because his coat was in pawn and he could no longer eat meat
because he could not get any more credit. His wife, little Jenny and
Lenchen Demuth were taken ill. 'I could not and cannot fetch the
doctor,' Marx wrote to Engels, 'because I have no money for medicine.
For the last eight to ten days I have fed my family on bread and
potatoes, and to-day it is still doubtful whether I shall be able to
obtain even these.' Towards the end of the year the situation at last
began to improve. Engels was able to send more money and the first
payments arrived from the _New York Tribune_. But up to 1858 there were
always times, even in the 'good' years, when Marx scarcely had a penny
in his pocket. The children learned to resist the siege of
creditors--the butcher, the milkman, and the baker--by saying: 'Mr. Marx
ain't upstairs.' Once Marx was forced to fly to Manchester because of a
doctor who threatened to sue him for a £26 debt, and the gas and water
were going to be cut off. The following description of Marx's household,
written by a Prussian spy who managed to ingratiate his way into it, is
not without malice and is not to be credited word for word, but gives a
pretty good idea of the general atmosphere of the life Marx led in 1853.

'The chief leader of this party, (i.e. the Communists) is Karl Marx; the
minor leaders are Friedrich Engels in Manchester, Freiligrath and Wolff
(called "Lupus") in London, Heine in Paris, Weydemeyer and Cluss in
America. Bürgers and Daniels were the leaders in Cologne and Weerth in
Hamburg. All the rest are simple members. The moving and active spirit,
the real soul of the Party, is Marx, for which reason I propose to give
you a personal description of the man.

'Marx is of medium stature, and is thirty-four years of age. Although he
is still in the prime of life, his hair is turning grey. His frame is
powerful, his features bring Szemere (a Hungarian revolutionary) to mind
very strongly, but his complexion is darker and his hair and beard quite
black. Lately he does not shave at all. His big, piercing, fiery eyes
have something demoniacally sinister about them. The first impression
one receives is that of a man of genius and energy; his intellectual
superiority exercises an irresistible power on his surroundings.

'In private life he is an extremely untidy and cynical human being. He
is a bad host and leads a regular Bohemian existence. Washing and
combing himself and changing his linen are rarities with him, and he
likes getting drunk. He often idles away for days on end, but when he
has a great deal to do he works day and night with tireless endurance.
He has no fixed times for going to bed or for getting up. He often stays
up for whole nights, then lies down fully clothed on the couch at midday
and sleeps till evening, untroubled by people coming in or going out,
for everyone has a free _entrée_ to his house.

'His wife is the sister of von Westphalen, the Prussian Minister, and is
a cultured and charming woman, who has accustomed herself to this
Bohemian existence out of love for her husband, and she now feels quite
at home in poverty. She has two daughters and a son, and all three
children are really handsome and have their father's intelligent eyes.

'As husband and father, Marx, in spite of his restless and wild
character, is the gentlest and mildest of men. He lives in one of the
worst, therefore one of the cheapest neighbourhoods in London. He
occupies two rooms. The room looking out on the street is the parlour,
and the bedroom is at the back. There is not one clean or decent piece
of furniture in either room, but everything is broken, tattered and
torn, with thick dust over everything and the greatest untidiness
everywhere. In the middle of the parlour there is a large old-fashioned
table, covered with oil-cloth. On it there lie manuscripts, books and
newspapers, besides the children's toys, bits and pieces from his wife's
sewing basket, and cups with broken rims, dirty spoons, knives, forks,
lamps, an ink-pot, tumblers, some Dutch clay-pipes, tobacco ash--all in
a pile on the same table.

'On entering Marx's room smoke and tobacco fumes make your eyes water to
such an extent that for the first moment you seem to be groping about in
a cavern, until you get used to it and manage to pick out certain
objects in the haze. Everything is dirty, and covered with dust, and
sitting down is quite a dangerous business. Here is a chair with only
three legs, there another, which happens to be whole, on which the
children are playing at cooking. That is the one that is offered to the
visitor, but the children's cooking is not removed and if you sit down
you risk a pair of trousers. But all these things do not in the least
embarrass either Marx or his wife. You are received in the most friendly
way and are cordially offered pipes, tobacco and whatever else there may
happen to be. Eventually a clever and interesting conversation arises to
make amends for all the domestic deficiencies, and this makes the
discomfort bearable. You actually get used to the company, and find it
interesting and original. That is a faithful picture of the family life
of Marx, the Communist chief.'

However bad things were with Marx, he always kept up the outward
appearance of an orderly bourgeois life. He was unwilling to allow the
'asses of Democrats' a cheap triumph and his pride brooked no sympathy.
Only his most intimate friends knew of his distressed condition. He did
not bow under the burden of want, but reacted to it only with anger at
its compelling him to put aside the work which alone meant anything to
him and which, as he well knew, he alone could do, and forcing him to
postpone it again and a in for the revolting slavery of working for his
daily bread. Unshakable belief in his mission kept up Jenny's courage as
well as his own. Even in their most difficult years Jenny and Marx
remained happy people. Unfortunately there are very few documents that
throw light on this period. There are Wilhelm Liebknecht's memoirs, a
few pages from a diary of a friend of Jenny's youth, and a few letters
written by other exiles. The following passage from Liebknecht's memoirs
is characteristic of Marx and his friends:

'Our outings to Hampstead Heath! If I live to be a thousand I shall
never forget them. A Sunday spent on Hampstead Heath was our greatest
treat. The children would talk of nothing else during the whole week and
even we grown-ups looked forward to it, old and young alike. Even the
journey there was a treat. The girls were excellent walkers, as nimble
and tireless as cats. When we got there the first thing we would do was
to find a place to pitch our tent, so that the tea and beer arrangements
might be thoroughly looked after. After a meal, the company would search
for a comfortable place to sit or lie down, and when this had been done
everybody would pull a Sunday paper, bought on the way, from his pocket,
and--assuming a snooze was not preferred--would start reading or talking
politics, while the children, who would quickly find playmates, would
play hide-and-seek in the bushes.

'But this placidity sometimes demanded a change, and we would run races,
to say nothing of indulging in wrestling, stone-throwing and similar
forms of sport. The greatest treat was a general donkey-ride. What
laughter and jubilation a general donkey-ride caused! And what comic
scenes! And how Marx enjoyed himself and amused us too. He amused us
doubly; in the first place by his more than primitive horsemanship and
secondly by the fanaticism with which he asserted his virtuosity in the
art. The virtuosity was based on the fact that he once took riding
lessons during his student years, but Engels maintained that he never
had more than three lessons, and that when he visited him in Manchester
once in a blue moon he would go for one ride on a venerable Rosinante.
On the way home we would usually sing. We seldom sang political songs,
but mostly popular songs, especially sentimental ballads and "patriotic"
songs from the "Fatherland," especially _O Strassburg, O Strassburg, du
wunderschöne Stadt_, which enjoyed universal popularity. Or the children
would sing nigger songs and dance to them. On the way there and back
politics or the plight of the refugees were banned as subjects of
conversation. But to make up for it we would talk a lot about literature
and art, and Marx had the opportunity of displaying his astonishing
memory. He would declaim long passages from the _Divina Commedia_ and
scenes from Shakespeare, in which his wife, who was also an excellent
Shakespearian scholar, often relieved him.'

Among the Marxes Shakespeare was a regular family cult. Frau Marx once
wrote to Frau Liebknecht, telling her with great satisfaction that her
youngest daughter had made a Shakespeare museum of her little room. When
Marx wanted to perfect his English, at a time when he could read but not
speak it, he sought out and listed all Shakespeare's own expressions. In
later years the whole Marx family would often walk all the way from
Haverstock Hill to the Sadlers Wells Theatre, to see Phelps, the
Shakespearian actor. They used to stand, for they could not afford
seats. The children knew whole scenes of Shakespeare by heart before
they could read properly.

In January, 1855, Frau Marx, who was then forty-one years old, had a
daughter. 'The "bona fide traveller" is, I regret to say, of the sex
_par excellence_,' Marx wrote to Engels. He had wanted a son to replace
the dead Guido, who had been called 'Foxie,' after the popular Fawkes of
the Gunpowder Plot. Everyone was given a nickname in Marx's house. Marx
himself was called 'the Moor,' as he had been called ever since his
student days on account of his dark complexion and black hair, and his
wife and children and all his acquaintances called him that too. The
children varied 'Moor' mostly with 'Devil' or 'Old Nick.' Frau Marx was
never called anything but 'Möhme.' The eldest daughter, Jenny, was
called 'Qui-qui,' 'Di' and even the 'Emperor of China.' The next
daughter, Laura, was called 'Hottentot' and 'Kakadu,' the son, Edgar,
was called 'Musch' or, more respectfully, 'Colonel Musch,' and the
youngest daughter, who was named Eleanor, was at first called 'Quo-quo'
then 'Dwarf Alberich' and finally 'Tussy.' Tussy described some of the
incidents of her childhood in _Loose Leaves_, which she wrote in 1895.
She remembered how Marx carried her on his shoulders, and put anemones
in her hair. 'Moor was certainly a magnificent horse. I was told that my
elder sisters and brother used to, harness Moor to an armchair, seat
themselves in it and make him pull it. Indeed he wrote several chapters
of _The 18th Brumaire_ in his rôle as "gee-up neddy" to his three
children, who sat behind him on chairs and whipped him.'

Everyone intimate with Marx--Liebknecht, Lessner, Lafargue, and even
only occasional visitors to his house--spoke of Marx's unbounded love
for his children. Marx often remarked that what he liked best about
Jesus was his love of children, and his daughter had heard him say that
he could forgive Christianity a great deal for teaching the love of
children. A year before his death Marx wrote to his daughter, Laura,
that he was coming to Paris to find peace there. 'By peace I mean family
life, children's voices, the whole of that "microscopic little world"
which is so much more interesting than the "macroscopic" world.'

The voice of his favourite child was extinguished on April 6, 1855, when
little Musch died. Marx generally hid his feelings, even from his
closest friends. He was by nature so shy that he, a German, behaved with
English reserve when it came to expressing his feelings. But in the
letters he wrote during the days that followed the child's death his
grief broke through the barriers. The beginning of a letter to Engels
written on March 30 is quite matter-of-fact. He said that he had put off
sending a daily health-bulletin, because the course of the illness was
so up-and-down that one's opinion changed almost hourly. Finally the
illness had turned into abdominal tuberculosis, and even the doctor had
seemed to give up hope. For the last week his wife had been suffering
from a nervous breakdown more severe than she had ever had before.
Marx's next words were: 'As for me, my heart bleeds and my head burns,
though of course I have to keep control of myself.' The next sentence
sounds as if Marx were making an apology. That a father should so far
forget himself as to talk of his heart bleeding over the death of his
favourite child seems to him to demand an explanation. 'During his
illness the child did not for a moment act out of harmony with his
original, kind and independent character.' On April 6 he wrote: 'Poor
Musch is no more. He fell asleep (literally) in my arms between five and
six o'clock to-day. I shall never forget how your friendship helped us
through this terrible time. You understand my grief for the child.' A
week later he wrote: 'The house is naturally utterly desolate and
forlorn since the death of the dear child who was its living soul. It is
impossible to describe how we miss him at every turn. I have suffered
every kind of misfortune, but I have only just learned what real
unhappiness is. ... In the midst of all the suffering which I have gone
through in these days, the thought of you and your friendship, and the
hope that we may still have something reasonable to do in this world
together, has kept me upright.' At the end of July Marx answered a
letter of condolence as follows: 'Bacon says that really important
people have so many contacts with nature and the world, have so much to
interest them, that they easily get over any loss. I am not one of those
important people. My child's death has affected me so greatly that I
feel the loss as keenly as on the first day. My wife is also completely
broken down.' The wound never completely healed. Even after ten years
and more Jenny Marx had not overcome her grief. 'The longer I live
without the child, the more I think of him and with the greater grief,'
she wrote to a friend.

In the summer of 1856 Frau Marx went to Trier with her daughter to visit
her mother. She found her dying. An uncle of hers had died not long
before, but he was an old man of eighty-seven whom she barely knew, and
his death, as Marx put it, 'was a very happy event.' The bequest from
the two relatives made it possible for them to pay their old debts. In
the autumn of 1856 they were at last able to change their two-room
dwelling in Soho for a comfortable little house on the outskirts of the
city at 9, Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill. But the
improvement did not last for long. The _New York Tribune_ accepted fewer
and fewer of Marx's articles. They needed practically all their space
for American politics and articles on the presidential elections, which
had to be given preference to events in Europe, and then the approaching
crisis began to cast its shadows before.

Marx and Engels had expected the crisis even sooner. As early as
January, 1855, England, in Marx's opinion, was in the midst of a great
trade crisis. Yet the _dies irae_, which, Engels hoped, would 'ruin the
whole of European industry, glut all the markets, involve all the
possessing classes, and cause the complete bankruptcy of the
bourgeoisie,' did not arrive until the autumn of 1857, and then not
nearly so dramatically as Engels expected, though assuredly it was
terrible enough.

The first great crisis of the capitalist world started in America and
embraced the leading countries of Europe; England as well as Germany and
France. Marx and Engels thought their time had come. Marx wrote to his
friend that, in spite of his own 'financial distress,' since 1849 he had
never felt so 'cosy' as after this outbreak, and Engels himself felt
'enormously cheered.' The time had come to finish his economic work. On
December 8, 1857, he wrote to Engels that he was working 'like mad'
right through the night summing up his economic studies, in order to
have at least the outlines in his head before the deluge.

In the winter of 1850-1 Marx had resumed work on the economic study he
had started in Brussels and had had neither the time nor the inclination
to complete during the years of revolution. In his thorough way he
collected all the available material, made his way once more through the
works of the great economists and in April, 1851, believed that after
the five more weeks he intended to devote to the 'whole economic
drudgery (_ça commence a m'ennuyer_)' he would be able to sit down and
start to write his book. Two months later he set himself a new date. The
material, he remarked to Weydemeyer, had so many damned ramifications
that in spite of all his exertions he would not be ready for another six
or eight weeks. All the same, in spite of all outward disturbances, the
thing was hurrying to a conclusion. 'The Democrat simpletons, to whom
enlightenment comes from above, naturally do not need to make such
exertions. Why should they, born as they are under a lucky star, trouble
themselves with economic and historical material? The whole thing is so
simple, as the valiant Willich used to tell me.' But even this respite
expired. First more political work intervened, and from 1853 to 1856 his
theoretical economic labours languished altogether. Though Marx gave a
great deal of attention to economic events, his own economic work had to
give way to the task of trying to earn a living. Occasionally Marx
looked through his old notebooks and read fragments here and there, but
it was the crisis that first compelled him to take up the work at the
point at which he had broken off more than six years before.

The crisis affected Marx personally very severely. In October the _New
York Tribune_ informed him that it had dismissed all its European
correspondents except B. Taylor and himself, and that in future he was
only to send one article a week. Distress once more entered the
household from which it had only just been banished. Marx's wife was ill
and the first signs of the serious liver trouble which was to attack
Marx repeatedly in years to come made their appearance in the summer.
Marx's financial distress increased rapidly during the winter, and at
the beginning of 1858 he had reached a pitch when he wished himself a
hundred fathoms deep under the earth rather than go on living in the
same way. He wrote to Engels that he himself was able to escape from the
wretchedness by concentrating hard on all sorts of general questions,
but his wife did not have these resources. A few weeks later he wrote
that it was fortunate so many cheering things were happening in the
outside world, because personally he was leading 'the most troubled life
that can be imagined.' There could be nothing more stupid for people of
universal aspirations than to marry and give themselves up to the
_petites misères de la vie domestique et privée_, he said. But even if
the house tumbled about his head he was determined to finish his book.
Marx worked so hard that in April, 1858, he collapsed. He complained to
Engels that if he so much as sat down and wrote for a few hours it meant
that he had to lie down and do nothing for a few days. In the summer the
situation had become 'absolutely intolerable.' On July 15, 1858, he
wrote to Engels that as a direct result of the position he was in he was
completely incapable of work, partly because he lost the best part of
his time vainly running about trying to raise money, partly because his
powers of concentration could no longer hold out against his domestic
troubles, 'perhaps in consequence of physical deterioration. ... The
inevitable final catastrophe cannot be averted much longer.' A loan of
£40 which Freiligrath arranged for him and on which Marx had to pay
twenty per cent interest, helped him over the worst for a few weeks.

Marx's manuscript was finished at the end of January, 1859. It was not
_Das Kapital_, the great work that Marx had planned. The first volume,
an edition of a thousand copies of which now appeared in Berlin--it had
been very difficult to find a publisher--was called _Critique of
Political Economy_ and consisted of only two chapters, on goods and
money. It had appeared, as Marx hoped it would, 'before the deluge,' but
that was because the deluge did not occur. In 1859 the crisis had
passed, the old world had not collapsed, the revolution had not come.
The effects of the crisis continued.

New political life awoke in Germany, though very faintheartedly. In
Italy the movement for national liberation flared up anew. France's
industry had been hard hit by the crisis, the state finances were
disorganised, the price of corn fell, the peasants, who constituted
Bonaparte's strongest support, were grumbling, opposition reared its
head among the petty-bourgeoisie, the workers were gradually shaking off
the paralysis which had held them in its grip since June, 1848. In this
threatening situation the Emperor took the way out that lay nearest to
his hand and went to war--not a general European war, the consequences
of which could not be foreseen, but a localised war in which he had the
maximum chances of victory. A victory over Austria and the expulsion of
the Austrians from Italy was bound to strengthen his position, bind the
army to him once more and confirm the false Napoleon as the legitimate
successor of the true.

Marx's attitude to the Franco-Austrian War of 1859 was determined, like
his attitude to the Crimean War, by the interests of the revolution
only. The revolutionary party, weak as it might be, must do everything
in its power to prevent Bonaparte's victory. The Austrian hangman's yoke
in Italy must certainly be broken, but he who assumed the task of
delivering the people of Italy was the enslaver of the people of France,
and victory would only confirm his power. The defeat of Austria, which
since the middle of the eighteenth century had opposed the advance of
Russia in Eastern Europe, though its opposition was 'helpless,
inconsequent, cowardly but stubborn,' could only be advantageous to
Russian Tsarism. The enemy was Napoleon III and Russia. Even if victory
should liberate the Italians--as in fact it did not--the interests of
the European revolution came before those of Italian national
liberation.

In their attitude on this occasion Marx and Engels were practically
along in the revolutionary camp. To the German radicals the Russian
danger seemed remote, but reactionary Austria was close at hand. It was
difficult to be anti-Austrian without being Bonapartist. Lassalle
achieved a masterpiece. Some of the German Democratic _émigrés_ were
noticeably edging towards Badinguet (which was what Marx called
Napoleon. He either called him Badinguet or Boustrapa or Barnum, or at
most Louis Bonaparte, but Napoleon never). The German _émigrés_ had
political reasons for their attitude. But there were also those who
proclaimed the Emperor's European and more specifically German mission
in a torrent of tyrannicidal words because they were paid to do so.
Among them was Karl Vogt, a former Left leader in the Frankfurt
Parliament, and now a professor in Switzerland and the ideal of the
'enlightened' philistines.

A small German newspaper in London which was more or less on good terms
with Marx accused Vogt of being a bought agent of Napoleon. The
accusations were reproduced in a leading reactionary paper in Germany.
Vogt well knew that his patron would not betray him and brought an
action against the newspaper. When it came into court the people in
London who had hitherto acted as if they had the clearest proofs of
Vogt's venality suddenly assumed the attitude of knowing nothing
whatever about it, and Vogt, though his case was dismissed on technical
grounds, left the court in the triumphant rôle of injured innocent. He
published the report of the trial, at the same time attacking Marx as
the ringleader of those who had slandered him, in spite of the fact that
Marx had nothing whatever to do with the whole affair. Vogt alleged that
Marx was the leader of a gang of _émigrés_ who made a good living by
blackmailing revolutionaries, threatening to denounce them to the
police, and by forging banknotes.

Vogt's allegations were woven into such a highly ingenious web of lies,
with truth and known fact so skilfully blended with half-truths and
impudent fabrications, that some of the insinuations were bound to stick
in the minds of those not fully acquainted with the facts of 'emigrant'
history. Marx tried in vain to bring an action against Vogt and his
friends. It was impossible to allow the slander to go unchallenged.
Distasteful though it was for him to reply, and hating as he did the
necessity himself, which, as he said with truth, he generally
scrupulously avoided, he decided that the measure of success likely to
be obtained by Vogt's tissue of lies compelled him to speak. His
polemical _Herr Vogt_, a book of one hundred and ninety pages, appeared
at the end of November. Marx transferred the accusation of lying to its
author, and his analysis of Vogt's writings made practically a certainty
of the suspicion that he was in the pay of Napoleon. Papers published'
by the Republican Government in 1871 supplied the documentary proof. In
August, 1859, forty thousand francs had been paid Vogt out of the
Emperor's private fund.

Marx's fight against the attempt to secure his political annihilation by
means of these denunciations occupied more than a year of his life. He
was not able to resume his economic work until the middle of 1861. The
years 1860 to 1863 were among the gloomiest of Marx's life. At the end
of November, 1861, his wife went down with small-pox. She had barely
recovered when Marx was taken ill himself. For years he suffered from
carbuncles and boils, which were apt to break out again as soon as they
had healed, and often made him unable to work for weeks. He was 'plagued
like Job, though not so God-fearing,' as he wrote to Engels. The doctors
gave him excellent advice. 'Everything the gentlemen say boils down to
the fact that one ought to be a prosperous _rentier_ and not a poor
devil like me, as poor as a church mouse.' When Marx said that in 1868
he was much better off than he was at the beginning of the sixties. In
January, 1860, the _New York Tribune_ asked him to send nothing for six
weeks. After this interval his work was only accepted intermittently. A
connection with the Vienna _Presse_ seemed to offer a substitute, but
after three months' hard work Marx only received six pounds in all. His
connection with the _New York Tribune_ finally ended in April, 1862. He
was told that all its space was needed for American affairs, and
therefore his correspondence must cease. This dried up Marx's only
source of income. Engels, whose position in the firm of Ermen and Engels
had gone on improving, sent Marx what he could and preserved the
numerous family from the worst.

Once more everything that could be spared, and many things that could
not be spared, including the children's shoes and clothes, resumed the
trail to the pawnshop. In the spring of 1861 Marx went to Holland to see
his uncle, Lion Philips, who gave him an advance of £160 on his share of
his mother's estate. Most of this sum went to repay old debts, and in
November Marx was once more forced to write to Engels, telling him that
his wife was suffering from such a serious nervous breakdown that he was
afraid that if the struggle went on much longer, there would be a
disaster. 'Take all in all,' he wrote in February, 1862, 'a lousy life
like this is not worth living.' In the summer of 1862 Marx tried once
more to persuade his mother to help him, but she would not give him a
penny. 'My wife says she wishes she were with her children in her
grave,' he wrote to Engels at the time, 'and I really cannot blame her,
for the humiliations, sufferings and horrors which we have had to go
through are really indescribable.'

Marx was determined to pursue his aim through thick and thin. In 1859 he
wrote to a friend that he would not allow bourgeois society to turn him
into a 'money-making machine.' But he had now reached such a pitch of
distress that he wanted to become a money-making machine. In 1862 he
applied for a job in a railway office, but his application was rejected
on account of his bad handwriting. Jenny, the eldest daughter, unknown
to her parents, wanted to go on the stage, not because she had any
special inclination towards it, but for the sake of earning some money.
Marx considered whether he should not break up his home, find posts as
governesses for his two elder daughters and move with his wife and
youngest child into a lodging house in the poorest district in London.
Engels sent a five-pound note, and then another and another, and nearly
lost his temper when Marx apologised for 'pressing' him.

In January, 1863, their friendship survived the first and only strain to
which it was submitted. Engels lost his wife. 'I simply cannot tell you
how I feel,' he wrote to Marx in a short note telling him the news. 'The
poor girl loved me with all her heart.' Marx wrote back: 'The news of
Mary's death has both astonished and dismayed me. She was extremely
good-natured, witty and very attached to you.' He then went straight on
to describe his own desperate attempts to raise money. His letter ended
with: 'It is revoltingly egoistical of me to retail all these horrors to
you at such a moment. But the thing is homoeopathic. One evil cancels
out another. At the end of my tether as I am, what am I to do? There is
not a single human being in all London to whom I can speak freely, and
at home I play the silent stoic, to counterpoise the outbreaks from the
other side. Work under such circumstances is absolutely impossible.
Instead of Mary should it not have been my mother, who is full of bodily
infirmities and has lived her life? You see what strange notions we
"civilised" people get under the stress of certain circumstances.'
Engels was deeply hurt. He wrote to Marx that all his friends had shown
him more sympathy and friendship than he could have expected on this
occasion, which affected him deeply, and 'to you it seemed a suitable
moment for the display of the superiority of your frigid way of
thinking. So be it!'

Marx allowed some time to elapse before replying. 'It was very wrong of
me to write that letter, and I regretted it as soon as it was sent,' he
wrote. 'It was not prompted by heartlessness. My wife and children will
confirm me when I say that your letter, which arrived early in the
morning, affected me as much as the death of one of my own nearest and
dearest. When I wrote to you the same evening it was under the stress of
very desperate circumstances. The brokers had been put in by the
landlord; I had a summons from the butcher; there was neither coal nor
food in the house and little Jenny was ill in bed. The only way out of
such circumstances that I know is, generally speaking, cynicism.' Engels
thanked his friend for his frankness. 'You will understand the
impression your first letter made on me. I could not get it out of my
head for a whole week. I could not forget it. Never mind, your last
letter has made up for it, and I am glad that in losing Mary I have not
at the same time lost my oldest and best friend.'

During the course of the year Engels gave Marx £350, which was a great
deal considering how bad his business was as a consequence of the cotton
crisis. Marx's mother died at the end of November, and the legacy was
not a large one. It mitigated at least the worst of Marx's distress. In
May, 1864, the faithful Wilhelm Wolff died in Manchester and left Marx
£800. From September Engels, who had become a partner in his firm, was
able to give him greater financial aid. From 1864 onwards Marx's
financial position was tolerable and his freedom from petty cares
enabled him to devote himself to his work. But his anxieties only really
ended in 1869, when Engels sold his share in the cotton mill and was
able to make Marx a definite, if moderate, yearly allowance.

_Das Kapital_ was born in the years of illness and poverty, when Marx
was sometimes reduced to the point of starvation. He wrote it while
harassed with cares, agonised by his children's distress, tormented by
thoughts of the next day. But nothing could completely overwhelm him.
'From time to time Engels urged him to finish the work at last. He knew
Marx's over-conscientiousness. But Marx went on pruning and filing, and
keeping up-to-date with the latest literature on the subject. 'I cannot
bring myself to send anything off until I have the whole before me,' he
wrote to Engels. 'My writings, whatever shortcomings they may have, have
one characteristic: they form an artistic whole. In my opinion that is
only obtainable by never letting anything be printed before I see the
whole before my eyes.'

The fair copy of the first volume was completed in March, 1867. Marx, as
he wrote to Becker, 'could throw it at the head of the bourgeoisie' at
last. Marx read the final proofs on August 16. At two o'clock in the
morning he wrote to Engels as follows: 'So this volume is finished.
Thanks are due to no one but you for making it possible. Without your
self-sacrifice for me it would be impossible to carry out the three
volumes of this tremendous work. I embrace you, full of thanks. I greet
you, my dear and faithful friend!'

An edition of one thousand copies of _Das Kapital_ appeared in Hamburg
at the beginning of September.

In 1867 Marx wrote to Siegfried Meyer: 'You must think very badly of me,
the more so when I tell you that your letters not only gave me great
pleasure but were also a real comfort to me during the painful period
during which they came. Why did I not answer you? Because I was
perpetually hovering at the brink of the grave. I therefore had to use
every available moment to work, in order to finish my book, to which I
sacrificed health, happiness and family. I hope this explanation will be
sufficient. I laugh at the so-called "practical" men and their wisdom.
If one wants to be an ox, one can easily turn one's back on human
suffering and look after one's own skin. But I should have regarded
myself as really impractical had I died without finishing my book, at
least in manuscript.' Paul Lafargue says that Marx's favourite motto was
'_Travailler pour l'humanité_,' to work for humanity.

The twelve years from 1852 to 1864, from the dissolution of the
Communist League to the foundation of the International, were filled
with journalistic hack-work performed to keep body and soul together,
and with poverty endured for the sake of his life-work.

Apart from his contacts with Chartists and Urquhartites, which were so
slight that they hardly counted, Marx, who had been at the very centre
of the furious political _mêlée_ of the year of revolution, kept
entirely aloof from political activity. His interests were devoted to
foreign politics, the war, the Indian Mutiny, the Anglo-French campaign
in China, the trade crisis, the internal state of France, the
anti-slavery movement in America--events which he could only observe. In
the articles Marx wrote and the correspondence he conducted with Engels
there is little reference to Germany, the land to which the Communists
had paid chief attention in 1847 and in which the Communist League had
worked under Marx's leadership. Marx certainly did not ignore
developments in Germany, but he followed them only incidentally. The
revival of the German workers' movement was not his work. It happened
without him. It happened against him, through Ferdinand Lassalle.

Lassalle was born in Breslau in 1825. He was the son of a Jewish
business man. He studied Hegelian philosophy in Berlin and adhered to it
in its orthodox, idealistic form throughout his life. His political
position after the middle of the forties was at the extreme Left wing of
democratic radicalism. He made friends with Marx and became a Communist
during his few weeks of freedom in 1848--he was in prison until the
middle of August and was re-arrested at the end of October for inciting
to arms against the Crown. When he came out of prison the _Neue
Rheinische Zeitung_ was on its last legs. Marx and Lassalle did not meet
again until the spring of 1861.

They wrote to each other in the meantime. Lassalle was the more
industrious correspondent of the two. He kept Marx informed of his
literary labours--he wrote a portly philosophical tome as well as a
play--consulted him on political questions, offered and gladly gave Marx
financial help. It was thanks to his mediation that the _Critique_ was
able to appear. He was the only man in Germany who was loyal to Marx.
Marx had a high opinion of the younger man's energy and talents, though
from the first he was repelled by his consuming ambition and his
unbounded vanity. If no line remained of all Lassalle's writings except
a letter of his dating from September, 1845, it would suffice to explain
the human gulf that parted him from Marx. At the age of twenty Lassalle
wrote: 'So far as I have power over human nature, I will use it
unsparingly. ... I am the servant and master of ideas, priest of the god
who is myself. I would be a player, a plastic artist, my whole being is
the presence of my will, the expression of the meaning I put into it.
The vibrant tone of my voice and the flashing light of my eye, every
line of my face must reflect the imprint which I put upon it.' Lassalle
loved theatrical attitudinising, which Marx detested from the bottom of
his heart. He naïvely placed personalities as far before causes as Marx
did the reverse, and was utterly careless about what means he chose to
achieve his ends. He was a man who was ready to sacrifice everything for
immediate success. From the first Marx did not completely trust him. The
Cologne Communists refused to admit Lassalle to the League. But Marx
regarded Lassalle as a front-rank politician and agitator even after
personal contact with him in 1861 and 1862 had enabled him to form a
better Opinion of the negative sides of his character than was possible
from letters.

Marx visited Lassalle in Berlin in the spring of 1861. The Prince Regent
of Prussia, the subsequent Emperor William I, issued an amnesty which
made it possible for exiles to return on certain conditions. Marx, who
did not believe he would be able to hold out much longer in London was
thinking of returning to Germany. Lassalle proposed that Marx should
collaborate with him in publishing a paper. Marx said to Engels that
Lassalle might be very useful under strict supervision as a member of an
editorial staff; otherwise he could only be harmful. The plan, however,
came to nothing. Marx's attempt to re-acquire Prussian nationality, an
essential preliminary to assure his being able to remain in Prussia,
came to nothing too. The police suspected him of Republican or at any
rate of non-Royalist views.

After the passing of the economic crisis in Germany a period of
prosperity set in. The consequence in the political field was a revival
of Liberalism. The Progressive Party in the Chamber opposed the
Government more or less violently, and outside it tried to win over the
'fourth estate' (the tactical resources of the bourgeois revolution are
very limited and always repeat themselves). Workers' educational
associations, founded by Democratic intellectuals, sprang up on every
side. Life revived in the workers' movement. Lassalle went to London in
the summer of 1862 and proposed to Marx that the two of them together
place themselves at the head of the new movement.

Marx refused, both on personal and political grounds. He could not
interrupt his work on economics. His personal distaste for Lassalle had
developed into a violent aversion. 'Lassalle is now set up not only as
the greatest scholar, the most profound thinker, the most brilliant of
investigators, etc., but also as a Don Juan and a revolutionary Cardinal
Richelieu, with his everlasting chatter, unnatural falsetto voice, his
unbeautiful demonstrative gestures and his didactic tone on top of it
all.' That was how Marx wrote to Engels while Lassalle was in London,
and it was one of the mildest of his utterances. The political and
economic theoretical foundations that Lassalle proposed for the new
workers' party were completely unacceptable to Marx. Lassalle's party
was to start by demanding that the state should put capital at the
disposal of the workers to found co-operative societies. Lassalle knew
very well that even if these co-operative societies materialised, which
was more than doubtful, they would at best create a few enclaves within
capitalist economy. Concentrating on the co-operative movement meant
weakening at the outset the proletarian struggle which had only just
begun. Marx foresaw that Lassalle, 'like every man who believes he has a
panacea for the sufferings of the masses in his pocket, will give his
agitation the character of a religious sect.' Lassalle put the Chartist
demand for universal suffrage on his programme side by side with the
demand for state aid. 'He overlooked the fact that conditions in Germany
and England were entirely different,' Marx later wrote. 'He overlooked
the lessons of the _bas empire_ concerning universal suffrage.' In
London Lassalle did not mention the over-cunning tactics he had prepared
for leading the workers' movement and started to apply as soon as he
returned to Germany.

Lassalle conducted his propaganda in speech and writing from 1862 until
his early death in the late summer of 1864. His speeches were brilliant,
his pamphlets magnificently written. He did in fact create a German
workers' party. The General Union of German Workers was founded in May,
1863. But before it started its existence Lassalle had started to
negotiate with Bismarck.

The conflict between the Prime Minister of Prussia and the Progressive
majority in the Chamber was becoming more and more acute. Anything or
anybody likely to damage them was welcome to Bismarck, even a Socialist
and Jewish agitator like Lassalle, for whom the Prussian Junker would
otherwise not have had much use. Most of the workers who were at all
politically awake adhered to the Progressives. Lassalle's first task was
necessarily to part them from the bourgeoisie. That the Liberal
opposition would be temporarily weakened as a result was not of great
importance. For once the workers' party was formed it would have to
fight not only the Liberal bourgeoisie but the incomparably more
resolute militaristic monarchists. Bismarck was aware of this. In making
a compact with Lassalle he acted like a power coming to terms with a
party which might be a power in the future, but for the time being was
only a pawn on the chess-board next to other and more powerful pieces.
Bismarck did not betray his class, but Lassalle nearly betrayed the
workers' movement to Bismarck. How far Lassalle went with Bismarck Marx
never knew as long as Lassalle lived, and even after his death he never
learned the whole truth. It did not come to light until an old cupboard
in the room of the Prime Minister of Prussia was opened in 1927. It
contained the letters exchanged between Bismarck and Lassalle. The
Workers' Union was so organised that its president, who of course was
Lassalle himself, ruled over it like a dictator. Lassalle was justified
in calling it his 'kingdom.' He was able to show Bismarck how gladly the
workers subjected themselves to a dictatorship when they saw that it was
working in their interests, and even how ready they would be to honour
the king as the Socialist dictator. Lassalle believed in _Realpolitik_,
which meant, in Marx's words, that he only admitted as real what was
immediately in front of his nose. In this case what was in front of his
nose was the good-will of the Government in its fight with the
Progressives about the independent workers' party. The workers were to
start establishing their independence by renouncing it to the party of
Reaction. Lassalle was on the point of turning the General Union of
German Workers into a small auxiliary corps of feudal reaction against
the bourgeoisie. Even his state-aid slogan prompted him to seek
Bismarck's friendship. Lassalle told the workers that if only the State
helped, the co-operative societies could be formed at once. That State
was the existing State, the Prussian monarchy. Lassalle, by limiting the
proletarian struggle to one small aim, was bound to compromise with the
rulers of Prussia, for it was they and not some power in the dim and
distant future who were to help.

It was impossible for Marx in London to know how deeply Lassalle was
involved with Bismarck. Lassalle believed he could outmanœuvre Bismarck,
but was in fact outmanœvered by him. Lassalle sought Bismarck's
help--only temporarily, of course, for as long as he should need it
against the Progressives, after which, when it was no more needed, he
would free himself from his powerful patron. But in fact this strange
alliance only resulted in his increasingly becoming Bismarck's tool.
Marx could not possibly know the full extent of Lassalle's deviation.
Nevertheless he followed Lassalle's agitation with the most extreme
suspicion. It became clear that he would have to oppose the fatal
tendencies of the new movement. Marx broke off personal relations with
Lassalle in 1862. Lassalle still sent Marx his pamphlets, but without a
line of greeting. Marx found nothing in them but unskilful plagiarism of
the Communist Manifesto and his later works, which Lassalle knew very
well. Marx never replied.

In spite of all his deficiencies and mistakes, his compromises and his
manœuvres, in spite of his dictatorial attitude, which was fundamentally
inimical to the workers' movement, in spite of the limitations of his
economic insight, Lassalle has the immortal merit of having revived the
workers' movement in Germany. The creed of Lassalle remained that of a
sect. After some vacillations and hesitations the German proletariat
followed another route to that which Lassalle showed them.

On August 30, 1864, Lassalle was killed in a non-political duel. Four
weeks later the International Working Men's Association was founded in
London.

## Chapter 17: The International Working Men's Association

In the long years of exile Marx had so consistently declined to
associate himself with any sort of political organisation that he felt
that the change of attitude indicated by the appearance of his name on
the list of founders of a new international workers' organisation in the
autumn of 1864 required an explanation to his friends and sympathisers.
On November 29, 1864, he wrote to his old friend Weydemeyer that he had
consented 'because it is an affair in which it is possible to do
important work.' The initiative for the formation of the new
organisation had come from men who were leaders of really active
mass-organisations. That was the factor that distinguished it from its
predecessors, and it was the decisive factor in causing Marx to abandon
his customary aloofness. He saw its negative sides plainly enough. He
was only too well aware of its heterogeneous nature and the wavering and
unclear political views of many of those who were at the back of it.
Nevertheless he joined it. 'I knew that this time real "forces" were at
work both on the London and the Paris sides,' he explained to Engels on
November 4, 'and that was the reason why I decided to depart from my
otherwise inflexible rule to decline any such invitations.' Engels
approved of both Marx's decision and Marx's reasons. It was necessary,
he said, to be guided by the 'real circumstances.' To accept contact
with the active leaders of a real movement was their duty. 'It is good
that we should once more be coming into contact with people who at least
represent their class. After all, that is the main thing in the end,' he
wrote.

It was indeed the main thing. The immediate future demonstrated what a
huge sphere of activity the new organisation opened up for Marx. The new
organisation was the 'International Working Men's Association,' which
was so soon destined to become famous and is known to-day as the First
International. A new epoch in the history of the workers' movement and
in Marx's life began with its foundation. The 'sleepless night of exile'
was over, and with it the loneliness and isolation from active,
practical life. Marx became once more, for the second time in his life,
the organiser of the political struggle of the working class.

At the beginning of the sixties there was an upsurge of the workers'
movement not only in Germany, as has already been mentioned, but 'also
in England and in France, the two countries which took the chief part in
the formation of the International Working Men's Association. After a
decade of apathy and paralysis, in which the active struggle of the
proletariat was practically at a standstill, the workers once more took
up the weapon of the strike and showed a new tendency to organise. The
workers in France had different traditions and fought under different
conditions from those of the workers in England, and "their principles
and practice necessarily differed, but on both sides of the Channel they
sooner or later realised that without independent organisations of their
own they must necessarily remain impotent. Even if theoretical clarity
were sometimes wanting, experience in the end compelled it.

French and English very soon saw that it would be necessary to get
together. There were two outstanding reasons for this. The strike
movement, which assumed particularly large dimensions in England,
demanded a close _entente cordiale_ with the workers of the other
country, from which the employers attempted to import strike-breakers.
In addition there arose at this time a whole series of international
questions in which French and English workers must make common cause.

The first contacts between English and French workers were made in 1862.
The great World Exhibition took place in London in that year. It was
visited by a delegation of French workers. The idea of this visit arose
in Bonapartist circles which nourished a 'Caesarian Socialism' of their
own and aimed at propitiating the workers with the Empire. They had the
support of the Emperor's cousin, Prince Napoleon, the so-called
'Plon-Plon,' who saw to it that the workers were allowed to form their
own organisations in the factories to elect their delegates and raise
funds to finance the journey. Such a 'legal opportunity' had of course
to be exploited. Among those who took part in the electoral campaign and
were elected to the delegation were men who had inaugurated an
independent workers' movement in France. Many other delegates were
inevitably Bonapartists to a greater or less degree, but the
representatives of the most active English workers' associations were
not represented on the London committee formed to welcome the French
delegation either. The London committee owed its formation to moderate
Liberal Members of Parliament and equally moderate men of the
co-operative movement--people who represented the extreme Right wing of
the workers' movement and took their stand on the principle of class
peace, with which the speeches made at the meeting of welcome on August
5, 1862, were in entire conformity. The English speakers declared that
'good understanding between our employers and ourselves is the only way
to smooth the difficulties by which we are at present surrounded.'

The meeting was really tame, with unctuous speeches and love, friendship
and fraternal kisses. Festival of harmony though it was, with it the
history of the 'Red International' begins. Apart from the beautiful
ceremonies, the independent French delegates met the young English trade
union leaders, entirely unfêted, and sowed the first seeds of the
Anglo-French workers' alliance, the fruits of which manifested
themselves in the following year.

The old sympathy for Poland and the old hatred of Russian absolutism
were still alive in England and France. Both drew fresh strength from
the Polish rising of 1863. The workers in both countries demanded
intervention on Poland's behalf. Petitions to Napoleon bore hundreds of
signatures, and a huge workers' meeting in England sent a deputation to
the Prime Minister. The French Emperor declined to receive the workers,
but Prince Napoleon gave them to understand that France would like to
intervene, in fact it would prefer to do so to-day rather than
to-morrow, but unfortunately action was hampered by English sabotage. On
the English side Palmerston deplored the impossibility of stepping in on
Poland's behalf, however much he would have liked to have done so,
because France, unfortunately, insisted on standing aside. Then there
arose a plan for a joint Anglo-French pro-Polish demonstration. It took
place in London on July 22, 1863. A special delegation came from Paris,
and this time it consisted exclusively of adherents of the independent
workers' movement. The demonstration failed in its purpose, if for no
other reason than that by this time the Polish rising was on the verge
of collapse. But before the French delegates left England a decision had
been made which was destined to be of great historical importance. They
and the representatives of the English workers 'agreed in principle to
the foundation of an international association of workers and elected a
committee to do the work preparatory to an inaugural meeting. The
preliminaries dragged on for more than a year, 'addresses' were
exchanged about the duties of the future association, manifestoes were
drafted, and finally the inaugural meeting took place in St. Martin's
Hall, Long Acre, on September 28, 1864.

Marx took no part in the preliminary work. He read about the meeting of
July 22, 1863, in the newspapers, followed the course of the Polish
rising with passionate interest, became indignant at the attitude of
British diplomacy, and was considering writing a pamphlet on the Polish
question. The Anglo-French workers' demonstration could not possibly
have escaped his notice. But he had no direct contact with the
organisers of the meeting and knew nothing of the preparatory work that
was quietly going on. He only heard of the organisers' plans a week
before the inaugural meeting. A young French exile, Le Lubez, a
Republican, was the contact man between the French workers and the
English trade unionists, and he told Marx who were at the back of the
movement and what their intentions were and invited him to take part in
the meeting as the representative of the German workers. Marx recognised
that this was a serious undertaking and accepted the invitation. Marx
suggested his friend Eccarius, an old member of the Communist League, as
spokesman for the Germans and he himself 'assisted as a silent figure on
the platform.'

The meeting was a complete success. The big hall was filled to the point
of suffocation. Speeches were made by Frenchmen, Englishmen, Italians
and Irish. An unanimous resolution was passed to found an International
Working Men's Association, with headquarters in London, and a committee
was elected to draft the programme and statutes. Marx was elected a
member of this committee.

The committee was far too big. It had fifty-five members, of whom
twenty-seven were English. These were mainly trade union leaders. Of the
rest the French and Germans had nine representatives each, and the
Italians, the Swiss and the Poles two each. The majority of the
non-English members were _émigrés_. Politically the committee was
heterogeneous, including as it did old Chartists and Owenites,
Blanquists and followers of Proudhon, Polish Democrats and adherents of
Mazzini. Its social composition, however, was far more uniform. Workers
formed the preponderating majority.

In these circumstances it was not very easy to agree on the fundamental
aims of the association, its programme and its statutes. Marx was unable
to take part in the committee meetings during the first few weeks,
partly because he was ill, partly for the simple reason that the
invitations never reached him. In the meantime the committee asked
Weston, an old Owenite, to draw up a draft programme, a task to which he
devoted himself with the most righteous zeal, pondering over each
sentence for weeks at a time. The task of translating the statutes of
the Italian workers' association, which it was intended to make the
basis of the associations' own statutes, devolved upon Major Wolff,
Mazzini's secretary. When the two finally laid the fruit of their
labours before the committee, its inadequacy was patent even to the
least exacting. Weston's exposition, in Marx's opinion and everybody
else's too, was 'full of the most extreme confusion and unspeakably
verbose.' His suggested statutes were more impossible still. Mazzini
repudiated the class-struggle and believed in solving the problems of
modern industrial society with sentimental phrases of the kind that had
been the fashion in the thirties. The old Carbonaro, who had been the
leader of the movement for national liberation in Italy for generations,
placed the national question above all else and could conceive of no
method of organisation other than that of the Carbonari. The Italian
workers' organisations which adhered to him were nothing but benefit
societies founded to help in the national struggle. Apart from its other
shortcomings, the Italian draft was rendered impossible by the fact
that, in Marx's words, 'it aimed at something quite impossible, a kind
of central government of the European working class (of course with
Mazzini in the background).' The committee gave both drafts to Le Lubez
to revise. The result was, if possible, worse than ever. Le Lubez
presented his text at a committee meeting on October 18, the first that
Marx attended. Marx, as he wrote to Engels, 'was really shocked as he
listened to good Le Lubez's frightfully phrased, badly written and
entirely ill-considered preamble, pretending to be a declaration of
principles, with Mazzini peeping out through every word, and encrusted
as it was with vague scraps of French Socialism.' Marx made 'gentle'
opposition and succeeded in having Le Lubez's draft passed to a
sub-committee to be revised again.

Marx now got to work himself. He summed up the sub-committee's duties in
his own characteristic way. It was decided 'if possible not to leave a
single line of the thing standing.' The sub-committee left him a free
hand. In place of the declaration of principles Marx wrote an 'Address
to the Working Classes.' The only thing it had in common with the draft
was the title of 'statutes.' 'It is very difficult,' he wrote to Engels,
'to manage the thing in such a way as to make our views appear in a form
which make them acceptable to the workers' movement at its present
standpoint. Time is required to give the re-awakened movement its old
boldness of speech. _Fortiter in re, suaviter in modo_ is what is
required.'

The sub-committee accepted Marx's proposals, and only added a few
moralising phrases. These were so placed 'that they could not do any
harm.' The 'inaugural address' was unanimously and enthusiastically
accepted at a meeting of the general committee. The 'International' had
its constitution, and now it started its work.

The fundamental idea of the inaugural address and of the statutes was
expressed in the phrase: 'The emancipation of the working class must be
the work of the working class itself.' The International served this aim
by founding proletarian mass-organisations and uniting them in joint
activity. Point I of the statutes said: 'This association was founded in
order to create a central means of unity and co-operation between the
associations of workers which already exist in the various countries and
aim at the same goal, namely, the protection, the rise and the complete
emancipation of the working class.' The International left complete
freedom to its various national sections as to the form their
organisation might take, and refrained from prescribing any definite
methods of conducting the struggle. Only one thing did it rigorously
insist on. That was the absolute independence of the
member-organisations. The inaugural address also demonstrated from the
experience of the English workers that the 'capture of political power
has become the great duty of the working class.'

The inaugural address and the statutes are typical of the work Marx did
for the International in the five following years. Marx saw it to be his
duty to educate the masses, and gradually and carefully, but firmly and
surely lead them towards a definite goal. The groundwork of all his
labour was a profound belief in the sound instinct of the proletarian
mass-movement. Bitter experience in the years of revolution and still
more in the years of exile had convinced him that it was necessary to
keep aloof from all intermediary groups, especially organisations of
exiles. He had also become convinced that great workers' organisations,
able to develop freely within their own country, associated with the
class movement as a whole, would find the right way in the end, however
much they might vacillate and go astray. The inaugural address and the
statutes and Marx's work in the International were founded on the sound
instinct of the proletarian movement. The task that Marx set before his
eyes was to help it, bring it to awareness and theoretical comprehension
of that which it must do and of the experiences through which it must
pass.

As Marx said, his old ultra-Left opponents in the forties had made the
same error as Proudhon, the error into which Lassalle also fell. They
did not seek, in Marx's words, 'the right basis for agitation in real
conditions, but wanted to prescribe the course of the latter by certain
doctrinal recipes.' Marx sought its basis in the forms of the movement
which life itself created. He avoided giving prescriptions. That does
not of course mean that he let things take their own course. What he did
rather was to help every movement to get clear about itself, to come to
an understanding of the connections between its particular interests and
the whole, of how its special aims could only be realised by the
realisation of the demands of the whole class, by the complete
emancipation of the proletariat. An excellent example of Marx's tactics
in the International was the way the inaugural address dealt with the
co-operative societies. The co-operative movement was important at the
time, and its influence was not always to the advantage of the workers'
movement as a whole. The idea of independent co-operation was not seldom
substituted for the idea of the class-struggle. Protection of the
workers, the trade-union struggle, and even the downfall of capitalist
society seemed superfluous, if 'not actually noxious to many, who
believed the co-operative movement capable of emancipating the working
class. Marx did not attack the co-operative societies outright. By so
doing he would have alienated from the International the groups of
workers who adhered to the co-operative ideal. He said that the value of
the great social experiment represented by the co-operative movement
could not be over-estimated. The co-operatives, particularly the
co-operative factories, had demonstrated that large-scale production,
production in harmony with modern scientific developments, was possible
without the existence of a class of entrepreneurs employing a class of
'hands.' The co-operative societies represented a victory of the
political economy of the working class over the political economy of
ownership. But experience had also demonstrated that, in spite of the
excellence of their principles and their usefulness in practice, the
co-operative societies were confronted with limits which they could not
overstep. The co-operative movement, to save the working masses, must be
developed on a national scale and consequently be promoted by national
measures. Thus the adherent of the co-operative ideal was forced to the
conclusion that he who wanted co-operative enterprise must necessarily
desire the capture of political power by the working class.

The fundamental idea of the inaugural address and of the whole of Marx's
activity in the International was that the workers, acting on the basis
of 'real conditions,' which of course differed in every single country,
must create independent parties, take part in the political and social
life of their country and so make the proletariat ripe for the capture
of political power.

In the General Council, as the committee elected at the inaugural
meeting soon came to be called, Marx was the acknowledged leader. The
work to be done was more than ample. The magnitude of the need that the
International fulfilled and the timeliness of its foundation were proved
by its extraordinarily rapid growth. On February 23, 1865, Marx wrote to
Kugelmann that the success of the International in London, Paris,
Belgium, Switzerland and Italy had exceeded all expectations. On April
15--six months after the meeting in St. Martin's Hall--he wrote to one
of the leaders of the Belgian section that there were more than 'twelve
thousand members in England. Inquiries, suggestions, requests showered
in upon the General Council from all sides. News of new sections being
formed poured in. All sorts of questions concerning matters of
organisation, inevitable in the case of any big new body, continually
cropped up. 'The French, particularly the Paris workers, regard the
London Council as a regular workers' government for foreign affairs,'
Marx wrote to Engels at the beginning of March, 1865. The General
Council, and in most cases that meant Marx, had to give instructions and
advice and answer inquiries and incessantly take up positions towards
political and economic events. Marx complained to Engels in the middle
of March, 1865, that the International took up an enormous amount of his
time, because he was in effect the head of the whole affair. He gave an
example of how he had recently been occupied. On February 28 he had had
a meeting with the Frenchmen, Tolain and Fribourg, who had come from
Paris. The meeting, which lasted till twelve o'clock at night, was in
conjunction with an evening meeting, at which he had to sign two hundred
membership cards. On March 1 there was a Polish meeting. On March 4 a
meeting of the sub-committee dealing with the French question lasted
till one o'clock in the morning; on March 6 another meeting also lasted
till one o'clock in the morning; on March 7 a meeting of the General
Council lasted till midnight. 'Well, _mon cher, que faire_?' Marx wrote.
'If you have said "A" it follows that you go on and say "B."' Marx often
grumbled, but never missed a meeting of the General Council. If at first
it had seemed that the pressure of work was only going to be so great at
the beginning, the belief soon turned out to be illusory. It very soon
became clear that the demands the International made on Marx were going
to increase with every month. One question gave rise to two others. It
was inevitable and right that it should be so. The International
developed, not according to a system, but according to the inner logic
of the movement, according to the 'real conditions.'

In the case of internal questions within the organisation Marx declined
to exercise pressure, and he insisted that the General Council adopt a
strictly above-party attitude in all disputes between the various
groups. 'Whom they have for a leader is their business and not mine,' he
said on the occasion of an internal German dispute in 1868. At the
beginning of 1865, when violent disputes arose between a group of
workers, led by Tolain and Fribourg, who took their stand by Proudhon,
and another, led by Lefort and Le Lubez, who were Republicans and
Socialists, Marx made every effort to compose the dispute and keep both
parties in the International.

The International had no programme if by 'programme' is meant a single,
concrete, detailed system. Marx had intentionally made the statutes so
wide as to make it possible for all Socialist groups to join. An
announcement in the spring of 1870 declared that it was not the duty of
the General Council to express a theoretical opinion on the programme of
individual sections. Its only duty was to see that they contained
nothing inconsistent with the letter and the spirit of the statutes.
Marx, in his pamphlet on the apparent rifts in the International written
in 1872, again emphasised that the International admitted to its organs
and its congresses all of Socialist views without any exceptions
whatever.

It must not be concluded that Marx's toleration of all the political
lines of thought represented in the International meant that he
abandoned his own critical attitude. His letters, especially those to
Engels, contain the severest judgments on the confused mentalities with
whom he had to deal. The illness from which he suffered during the first
few years that followed the foundation of the International did nothing
to make his mood milder; and in fact a good many of the things the
sections did were more than a little trying. What is remarkable is not
that Marx grumbled to his friends about the Proudhonists and the rest
but the consistency and pertinacity with which he maintained his
attitude and the restraint with which he tolerated all the conflicts
that were bound to arise in the young movement. It was not infrequent
for him actually to defend a group on some internal matter whose
programme, if what they stood for can be dignified with such an
expression, he contemptuously dismissed in private letters.

Tolerant as Marx was towards the various under-currents within the
workers' movement, he resolutely fought all attempts to anchor the
International to the programme of any single group or take away its
character as a class movement. It was on the latter question that the
first conflict arose. Mazzini's followers demanded the deletion from the
inaugural address and the statutes of certain passages which emphasised
the class-character of the International. The General Council
emphatically refused. The Italian Workers' Union in London, which had
been founded and set going by followers of Mazzini,' broke with its
'fathers.' This was the first victory of the 'Internationalists' in
their long struggle with Mazzini. An echo of it is the judgment of Marx
made by Mazzini years later. 'Marx,' he said, 'a German, a man of
penetrating but corrupting intelligence, imperious, jealous of the
influence of others, lacking strong philosophic or religious
convictions, has I fear, more hatred, if righteous hatred, in his heart
than love.'

The struggle with the followers of Mazzini was but a small prelude to
the far more important struggle between Proudhonists and Collectivists
which filled the whole first period of the International up to 1869.

During the first years of the International its main support came from
English and French workers' organisations. There was a fundamental
difference in the nature and political outlook of the two.

England was economically the most advanced country in the world. Big
industry had developed more rapidly in England than anywhere else, and
for this reason class-contradictions were pronounced and the workers'
movement on a relatively high level. The workers were able users of the
weapon of the strike. Just at the time when the International arose one
wave of strikes after another swept across the country. At the beginning
of the sixties flourishing trade unions developed from the benefit
societies they had hitherto mainly been into fighting organisations
raising their own strike funds. They constituted the most important
group within the International. The number of organisations formally
associated with the International was not large. Even the London Trades
Council, one of the most resolute bodies in the trade union movement,
did not accept the International's invitation to join. But some trade
unions did join the International and were on its membership list. From
the beginning British trade union leaders had an important voice on the
General Council. Interested in immediate, practical results, they were
utterly indifferent to theoretical questions and the ultimate aims of
the International as Marx conceived them. They understood very well the
importance of working-class legislation, upon which, under Marx's
influence, the International laid great stress. But they preferred
conducting the struggle for it, like the struggle for electoral reform,
through the channel of Liberal and Radical Members of Parliament rather
than as an independent party. Among them there were always a few who
insisted that the movement must not assume an explicit class-character.
But so far as the day-to-day struggle of the proletariat was concerned
the young English trade union leaders had incomparably more experience
than all the workers' leaders of the Continent combined. The main thing
that interested them in the International was the possibility of using
it for gaining victories in strikes. They were attracted by the
possibility of making the International use its connections with
countries abroad to prevent the introduction of foreign strike-breakers,
which was a favourite expedient of the employers at the time. Fribourg,
one of the founders of the International, said that the English regarded
the International purely as an organisation from which the strike
movement could receive great assistance.

France was far behind England in the industrial respect. In France the
handicraftsman was still supreme, particularly in Paris, with its art
and luxury trades. It was natural enough that many of the leaders of the
movement in France should be followers of Proudhon, whose teaching
expressed the interests of the small independent artisan or trader, the
small business man and the peasant. The 'mutualists,' as the followers
of Proudhon described themselves at the time, demanded cheap credit,
assured markets, co-operative societies and the same measures that
hard-pressed master-craftsmen have always demanded everywhere. To most
of them the slogan of the collectivisation of the means of production
sounded absurd, unjust and evil. Hence also they were in favour of
peaceful, gradual development, and they flatly repudiated revolutionary
methods. From his point of view Fribourg regarded the International as
an instrument 'for aiding the proletariat in legally, pacifically and
morally gaining the place in the sun of civilisation to which it is
entitled.' They had very little trust in legislation or state measures
for the working classes, and they regarded strikes as extremely
dangerous, though sometimes inevitable; in any case as always
undesirable. Varlin, one of the leaders of the International in Paris,
who fell in the bloody week of May, 1871, declared as late as 1868 that
the International repudiated strikes as an anti-economic weapon. The
mutualists wanted an International which should occupy itself with
investigating the position of the workers, cause alterations in the
labour market and thrash out these problems theoretically.

Marx saw the weaknesses of the mutualists and of the English trade
unions alike. He did not have a particularly high opinion of the trade
union leaders. He said later that he regarded some of them with
suspicion from the first, as careerists in whose devotion to the
working-class cause he found it difficult to believe. But in relation to
the immediate tasks of the International, the tactics of the day-to-day
struggle, he stood far nearer the Englishmen than the Proudhonists. 'The
gentlemen in Paris,' he wrote to Kugelmann in 1866, 'had their heads
full of Proudhon's emptiest phrases. They chatter of science, knowing
nothing of it. They scorn all revolutionary action, i.e. which springs
from the class-struggle itself, all concentrated social movement, that
is to say movement realisable by political means (for example, the legal
shortening of the working day).'

In spite of all his dislike of Proudhonist phraseology, Marx stuck to
his tactics. In drafting the agenda for the first Congress of the
International in 1866 he took pains to avoid anything that might have
given rise to general theoretical discussions, and he confined the
programme 'to points which permitted of immediate accord and immediate
concerted action of the workers, corresponded directly to the needs of
the class-struggle and the class organisation of the workers, and at the
same time spurred the workers on.' The strike question was certainly a
question of the moment, but Marx did not put it upon the agenda as such
but in the form of 'international assistance for the struggle of Labour
with Capital.' He wished to avoid alienating the Proudhonists. He
instructed the London delegates not to discuss the usefulness or the
reverse of strikes but to put in the foreground the struggle with the
strike-breakers, which the Proudhonists could not repudiate.

It was not Marx and his followers but the Proudhonists who opened the
fray. The Proudhonists wanted to anchor the International to their own
system. The most important thing to them was not those things on which
all were agreed but their own particular hobby--horse, their
'mutualism.' The first Congresses took place in Latin Switzerland, for
which reason the majority of the delegates came from western Switzerland
and adjacent France, i.e. from the areas where the Proudhonists
predominated. At the Lausanne Congress of 1867 they were fairly
successful. The representatives of the General Council were not
sufficiently prepared--Marx was busy at the time with the publication of
_Das Kapital_ and was not present. But their success was their own
downfall. At a time when the strike movement was constantly extending
and affecting even France and western Switzerland, the rejection of the
strike-weapon was going too far even for many of the Proudhonists. There
was a rift, which soon spread to other questions too.

The Proudhonists were the first to bring up for discussion of the
fundamental question of the socialisation of the means of production. At
the Congress of 1867 they raised the question of the socialisation of
the means of transport. At the time the railways were using their
monopoly to favour big industry at the expense of the small producer. So
the principal opponents of collectivisation decided that an exception
must be made in the case of the railways, which must be collectivised.
Very well, their opponents replied, why stop at collectivisation of the
means of transport? To their horror and alarm the Proudhonists saw
opponents rising within their own ranks. Young heretics, led by César de
Paepe, a Belgian, arose among the orthodox and tried hard to reconcile
their mutualist doctrines with the ideal of collectivisation. This
breakdown on the part of the Proudhonists assured the success of the
collectivist idea in the International. The Young Proudhonists became
more enthusiastic about collectivisation than anyone, and it was thanks
to them that the International came out for collectivism in its official
resolutions. In 1868 Marx was still opposed to declarations of principle
on such critical questions. 'It is better not to make any general
resolutions,' he wrote to his closest colleagues, Eccarius and Lessner,
who represented the General Council at the Congress of 1868. It was only
in the last stages of the debates on collectivisation that Marx
intervened. He drafted the resolutions on the nationalisation of the
soil which were accepted by the Bâle Congress of 1869.

Marx, who in other respects demonstrated the most extreme tolerance,
only abandoned his restraint when the problem of political struggle
arose acutely within the International and he began to feel that,
unknown to it, something had formed behind the scenes, something that
aimed quite systematically at forcing the International in a direction
which was completely unacceptable to him and, after the experiences he
had had, he was convinced would be injurious to the workers' movement.

Everybody in the International had been agreed from the start that the
workers must take an active part in the political struggle. The English
trade unionists naturally supported the movement for the extension of
the franchise in every way they could. Those Proudhonists who had
co-operated in the foundation of the International were all in favour of
taking part in the political struggle, and would have regarded any
discussion of the advisability of doing so as a sheer waste of time.
Their leading Paris group had originated out of an attempt to set up an
independent workers' candidate in 1864, and Proudhon himself had given
his enthusiastic consent to this step in his work, written shortly
before his death, _De la Capacité Politique des Classes Ouvrières_. The
German workers' movement--though it had played no great rôle in the
inner life of the International it had a notable influence upon the
development of its ideas--fought, as Lassalle had taught it, for
universal suffrage. Even the Swiss 'Internationalists' took part in the
elections as a matter of course. The Lausanne Congress of 1867 passed a
resolution--the minority was only two--to the effect that the conquest
of political power was an absolute necessity for the working class. This
was the Congress at which the Proudhonists were in a majority, and among
those who voted for the resolution were many who were later among the
most resolute opponents of any political activity whatever.

The situation altered pretty quickly. In 1867 and 1868 the International
made extraordinary progress. The economic crisis which was setting in
intensified social antagonisms, and one strike after another broke out
in the countries of Western Europe. The International very soon proved a
useful instrument in the direct economic struggle of the proletariat. It
succeeded in many cases in preventing the introduction of
strike-breakers from abroad, and, in cases where foreign workers did
strike-breaking work without knowing it, succeeded in causing them to
practise solidarity. In other cases it organised the raising of funds
for the relief of strikers. This not only gave the latter moral support
but caused real panic among the employers, who no longer had to deal
with 'their own' workers alone but with a new and sinister power, an
international organisation which apparently had resources at its
disposal with which the individual employer could not compete. Often the
mere rumour that the International was going to intervene in a strike
was sufficient to cause the employers to grant all the workers' demands.
In its panic the reactionary Press exaggerated the power of the
International beyond all bounds, but this only resulted in enhancing the
respect in which it was held by the working class. Every strike, whether
it succeeded or not, resulted in all the strikers joining the
International, the Conservative, E. Villetard, wrote in 1872 in his
history of the International. In those years it often happened that the
whole of the workers at a factory would join the International together.
No government repressive measures, arrests or trials succeeded in
stemming the movement's advance; they merely served to drive the workers
into the revolutionary camp and strengthen the International thereby.
Its sections seemed to spring up like mushrooms. At the 1866 Congress
only four countries were represented--England, France, Germany and
Switzerland --but at the Congress of 1869 there were nine, America,
Austria, Belgium, Spain and Italy being the newcomers. Individual
sections had arisen in Hungary, Holland, Algiers, South America and
elsewhere. Because of big fluctuations and the weak development on the
organisational side it is difficult to establish how many members the
International really had. Eight hundred thousand workers were formally
associated with the International in' any case. At the International
trial in Paris the public prosecutor, who had access to the papers of
the French section, stated that there were four hundred and forty-three
thousand members in France alone. At the Bâle Congress of 1869 the
English claimed two hundred and thirty sections with ninety-five
thousand members. In Belgium in the summer of that year there were more
than two hundred sections with sixty-four thousand members. The
membership of the workers' organisations which declared their solidarity
with the International was greater by far. The International was
acknowledged in 1869 by the English Trades Union Congress, in 1869 by
the Nurnberg Congress of German Workers' Educational Unions, in 1868 by
the Association of German Workers' Unions in Austria, in the same year
by the Neuchâtel Congress of German Workers' Educational Unions in
Switzerland, in 1869 by the American Labour Union, etc. Testut, who
wrote his history of the International on the basis of police reports,
estimated its number of members as five millions, and the newspapers of
the International actually put the figure as high as seven millions.
These figures are, of course, utterly fantastic. But the _élite_ of the
European proletariat adhered to the International. In the last third of
the sixties it had become a power to be reckoned with.

At the same time political questions developed from theoretical
propositions to be discussed at Congresses into practical questions
requiring a practical answer. The two groups within the German workers'
movement, the followers of Lassalle and the 'Eisenacher,' were the first
to take part, in 1867, in the North German Parliamentary elections. In
1867 and 1868, after the extension of the suffrage to workers having a
house of their own, the English labour movement prepared to enter the
electoral fray. In 1869 the French workers set up their own candidates
in many places. The International now had to decide what attitude to
take up to other parties, and to elections. The weak organisation of the
sections and the political inexperience of their leaders made mistakes
and differences of opinion inevitable as soon as the question of voting
became an actual one, and this lead to a reaction. A section arose who
opposed participating in elections and 'politics' as a whole.

In Latin Switzerland the Internationalists made particularly grave
mistakes. The pioneer of the International there was Dr. P. Coullery, an
old Democrat who had long been interested in social problems. He was an
official of the Radical party, had a high reputation, and represented it
as deputy to the cantonal legislative council. Dr. Coullery founded the
first section of the International in Latin Switzerland in 1865, and
worked for the extension of the International in the western cantons,
and in 1867 his paper, _La Voix de l'Avenir_, became the chief organ of
the section of that area. His activity on behalf of the International
led to a rupture with the radicals. When he became a candidate for the
office of _juge de paix_ in La Chaux des Fonds the radicals opposed him.
That induced the Conservatives to vote for Coullery, and it was due to
their aid that he was elected. By the election of 1868 Coullery's
rapprochement to the Conservatives had proceeded so far that he actually
made a regular pact with them. The local Press called it '_la coalition
aristo-socialiste_.' The list of candidates went under the name of the
International, but on it the names of members of the International were
next to those of extreme Conservatives. Other sections of the
International in western Switzerland protested violently against this
policy, particularly the section at Locle. Its founder and leader was a
young schoolmaster, James Guillaume, who was later a very prominent
member of the anti-Marxist group in the International. He was a former
member of the Radical party, and he and his group, which had started as
the 'Jeunesse Radicale,' continued to support the Radicals in local
questions. The slogan in the fight against Coullery was: 'The
International keeps out of political strife'; which in this case was
equivalent to support of the Radicals. Gradually the Locle group
generalised their views and ended by absolutely repudiating the policy
of participating in elections. Coullery, it maintained, was bound to
err, to compromise the International, as was anybody who participated in
elections. Coullery's tactics had, of course, nothing whatever in common
with the tactical line of Marx. Marx always vigorously opposed any
coalition of the revolutionary proletariat with the reactionaries
against the bourgeois Democrats. When Lassalle's followers started
openly practising this policy, which Lassalle himself initiated, Marx
publicly and ruthlessly broke with them. What Marx demanded of the
workers' parties was that they should criticise the Government and the
reactionaries no less severely than they did the bourgeois Democrats.

The Locle group of 'Internationalists' formed the kernel of the later
anti-authoritative faction, whose struggle against the General Council
led to the split and the downfall of the International. Its leader was
Michael Alexandrovich Bakunin.

## Chapter 18: Michael Bakunin

Bakunin was born in 1814 in the Government of Tver. He was the son of a
prosperous and noble landed proprietor. He became an officer but soon
left the Army and in 1840, being an enthusiastic Hegelian, went to
Germany to study philosophy at Berlin University. His teachers were
partly the same as Marx's. Bakunin entered the Left Hegelian group and
it was not long before he was in the thick of the revolutionary
movement. His bold and open opposition to Russian absolutism attracted
universal attention, and Europe heard the voice of a Russian
revolutionary for the first time. In 1848 Bakunin was a close associate
of Herwegh's and he shared the poet's visionary dream of a European
revolutionary army which should set forth against the realm of the
Tsars. During the years of revolution he went from place to place in
Germany, always on the look-out for an opportunity of carrying the
agitation into Russia and the other Slavonic countries. He was in
contact with the leaders of the German Democratic movement, founded a
Russian-Polish revolutionary committee, and prepared a rising in
Bohemia. But not one of his numerous plans bore fruit. He participated
in the rising in Dresden in May, 1849, more in a mood of desperation
than of faith in victory. He was arrested and sentenced to death by a
Saxon court. The Austrians, to whom he was handed over, sentenced him to
death a second time, and he spent months in chains in the condemned
cell. Then the Austrian hangmen handed him over to the gaolers of
Russia, who kept him for five years in solitary confinement, first in
the fortress of Petropavlovsk, then in the Schlüsselburg. His treatment
was unspeakably dreadful. He contracted scurvy, lost all his teeth, and
was only amnestied and banished to Siberia after writing a humiliating
petition to the Tsar. At last, after five years, there came an
opportunity to escape, and he returned to Western Europe by way of Japan
and America.

His first meeting with Marx was at an international Democratic banquet
in Paris in March, 1844, but the two had heard of each other before.
They had a good deal in common. Both had become revolutionaries by way
of Hegelian philosophy and both had trodden the path from theory to
revolutionary practice. But they differed entirely in their idea of
revolutionary practice; in fact in their whole conception of the
revolution they were as the poles asunder. In Marx's eyes the revolution
was the midwife of the new society which had formed in the womb of the
old. The new society would be the outcome of the old, and a new and
higher culture would be the heir of the old culture, preserving and
developing all the past attainments of humanity. For Bakunin the
revolution meant a radical annihilation of existing society. What were
all its so-called attainments but a chain by which free humanity was
held in bondage? For him the revolution, if it did not mean making a
clean sweep of the whole of this accursed civilisation, meant nothing at
all. Not one stone of it should remain upon another. Bakunin dreamed of
a 'gigantic bonfire of London, Paris and Berlin.' His was the same
hatred as that which drove insurrectionary peasants to burn down castles
and cities--not just the hated prison and tax office but everything
without exception, including schools and libraries and museums. Mankind
must return, not just to the Middle Ages, but to the very beginning, and
from there the history of man must start again. Weitling and Willich,
with whom Bakunin was acquainted, had similar ideas, but compared to the
master of complete and absolute negation they were but pitiful and
harmless pupils.

It was evident that in these circumstances it was impossible for Marx
and Bakunin to come very close to one another. Bakunin appreciated
Marx's clear and penetrating intellect, but flatly repudiated his
political activity. At the beginning of 1848, when he met Marx in
Brussels, he said to a friend that Marx was spoiling the workers by
turning them into _raisonneurs_. Marx was giving his lectures on
wage-labour and capital at the time, summarising the results of his
investigations into the structure of capitalist society. Bakunin was
convinced that this could have but one consequence; theorising was bound
to paralyse the workers' revolutionary will, their 'spirit of
destruction,' which for him was the only 'creative spirit.' Marx never
had the slightest sympathy for such incendiary fantasies. He had a
fundamental mistrust for preaching such as his, and it was impossible
for him not to mistrust Bakunin personally. Marx printed a letter in the
_Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ which accused Bakunin of being in the pay of
the Russian Government. The letter had been sent him by Polish
Democrats, and when the groundlessness of the accusation was
demonstrated Marx apologised and explained that he had necessarily
believed that the Poles must be well-informed about Russian affairs.' At
that time the whole of revolutionary Europe looked at Russia through
Polish spectacles, and in this Marx differed in no way from everybody
else. He admitted having been hasty and did what he could to make good
the wrong to Bakunin. Marx publicly defended Bakunin when a similar
rumour was spread about him during his imprisonment in Russia. But
Bakunin could not forgive Marx the mistake of 1848, which went on
rankling for a long time. To make matters worse Bakunin was persuaded by
evil-tongued go-betweens, who did not mention Marx's defence of him
during his compulsory silence, that Marx actually repeated the old
slander.

Bakunin visited Marx in London at the end of October, 1864, when he was
writing the inaugural address for the International. The meeting passed
off in an entirely amicable manner. Marx wrote to Engels that Bakunin
was one of the very few people who after sixteen years had not receded
but had gone on developing. What Bakunin said to cause Marx to pass this
favourable judgment on him is not known. In his long years of
imprisonment Bakunin had suffered greatly and thought much. He had
altered, and no longer wanted to make giant bonfires of capital cities.
In Siberia he had almost got to the point of repudiating his
revolutionary way of thinking altogether, and when he was free once more
he spent a considerable time hesitating whether to adhere to the
bourgeois radicals or to the Socialists. He then started returning step
by step to his original negative anarchism. In his conversation with
Marx he asserted that henceforward he would devote himself to the
Socialist movement alone, and said that in Italy, where he was just
going, he proposed working for the International.

Marx did not know Bakunin well enough to realise how little these words
were to be credited. There was a streak of naïve slyness in Bakunin's
character, and he was skilful at adapting his speech to his company.
Bakunin would by no means say all he thought; indeed, he would quite
often say the reverse. A story of how he tried to make a revolutionary
of the Bishop Polykarp, an adherent of the Old Faith, provides a pretty
instance of Bakunin's way of tackling people he wanted to win over.
According to the story Bakunin entered the Bishop's room singing a
sacred song and requested an explanation of the difference between the
persecuted Old Faith and the prevalent orthodoxy. He said he was willing
to become an Old Believer himself if the Bishop could convince him.
After listening humbly to the Bishop he drew a magnificent picture of
the revolution, by which the true Old Faith would be allowed to triumph
over the Orthodox Church and cause the Tsar himself to be converted, and
much more of the same kind. This story need not be credited entirely,
but it illustrates in all essentials how far Bakunin could occasionally
go.

Bakunin had no intention of keeping his promise to work for the
International in Italy. Even before starting on his journey he set about
the formation of his own secret society, which had nothing whatever to
do with the International, either in programme or organisation. In
respect of organisation Bakunin was a revolutionary of the old school.
He belonged entirely to the epoch of the Illuminati and the Carbonari.
In his opinion the one thing necessary to prepare the way for the
revolution and consolidate it after victory was a highly conspiratorial
band of determined men, a band of professional revolutionaries and
plotters, who lived for nothing but the revolution. 'In the midst of the
popular anarchy that will create the very life and energy of the
revolution, the unity of revolutionary thought and revolutionary action
must find an organ. That organ must be a secret and universal
association of revolutionary brothers.' That is Bakunin's own summary of
his revolutionary creed. Bakunin was continually engaged in founding
organisations of one kind or another, and sometimes he was engaged on
several at the same time. They all had secret statutes and programmes
that varied with the degree of initiation of the members, and ceremonial
oaths, if possible sworn on a dagger or some similar theatrical
requisite, were usual. Bakunin formed a secret society of this kind in
1865--the 'Fraternité Internationale.' It never entered his head for a
moment to do anything for the International, and he barely answered the
letters that Marx wrote him.

In the autumn of 1867 Bakunin travelled from Italy to take part in the
first Congress of the League of Peace and Freedom. This organisation
represented the last attempt of the Democratic celebrities of 1848 and
1849, who for two decades had been the 'great men of the emigration,' to
venture once more into the realm of high politics. The reawakening of
political life throughout Europe seemed to proffer this organisation
some prospect of success, and there were some famous names upon its list
of founders: Victor Hugo, Louis Blanc, John Stuart Mill, Giuseppe
Garibaldi. The League's programme was a nebulous mixture of democracy,
anti-clericalism and pacifism, intended to mean as much to as many
people as possible. In practice it did nothing for anybody.

The League, having practically no solid popular backing of it \[sic\]
own, was very anxious to be on good terms with the International. An
attempt was made to have it incorporated as a kind of subsidiary
organisation within the International, to enable it to propagate its own
special aims among the proletariat. Marx was necessarily opposed to any
such plan. The development of the young workers' movement could only be
hampered by connection with these generals without an army, for the
important men had only lent their names to the League at its inception
and in reality the movement was in the hands of Democratic leaders of
the second and third rank. To involve the International with the League
would mean burdening it with a swarm of ambitious, wrangling and
clique-forming political intriguers.

Marx was not able to convince the International of all this until 1868.
The Brussels Congress of that year unanimously carried a resolution
embodying Marx's attitude to the League. A year before not a few members
of the International had sympathised with the idea of the League and had
been only too pleased to take part in its Congress. The League had
counted on this and held its inaugural Congress at the same time and
place as the second Congress of the International, and a number of
delegates remained and took part in the League Congress after the
International had concluded its deliberations. At the League Congress
they made the acquaintance of Bakunin.

His appearance was an event of first-rate importance for the League.
Many of the older generation knew him from earlier years, from his life
of wandering before the revolution or from the exciting days of Paris,
Berlin, Dresden or Prague. Everyone had heard of the man who had been
dragged through the prisons of Europe and had been' twice sentenced to
death, and his escape from the grim horror of Siberia had already become
legendary. 'I well remember his impressive bearing at the first session
of the Congress,' a Russian journalist wrote in his memoirs. 'As he
walked up the steps that led to the platform, with his heavy, peasant
gait--he was, as usual, negligently dressed in his grey blouse, out of
which there peeped not a shirt but a flannel vest--a great cry of
"Bakunin!" arose. Garibaldi, who was in the chair, rose and went forward
to embrace him. Many opponents of Bakunin's were present, but the whole
hall rose to its feet and the applause was interminable. Bakunin was no
speaker if by that word is meant a man who can satisfy a literary or
educated public, who is a master of language and whose speeches have a
beginning, a middle and an end, as Aristotle teaches. But he was a
superb popular orator, and he knew how to talk to the masses, and the
most remarkable feature of his oratory was that it was multilingual. His
huge form, the power of his gesticulations, the sincerity and conviction
in his voice, his short, hatchet-like phrases all contributed to making
a profound impression.'

To quote another Russian writer who heard Bakunin at another meeting:

'I no longer remember what Bakunin said, and in any case it would
scarcely be possible to reproduce it. His speech had neither logical
sequence nor richness in ideas, but consisted of thrilling phrases and
rousing appeals. His speech was something elemental and incandescent--a
raging storm with lightning flashes and thunderclaps, and a roaring as
of lions. The man was a born speaker, made for the revolution. The
revolution was his natural being. His speech made a tremendous
impression. If he had asked his hearers to cut each other's throats,
they would have cheerfully obeyed.' That was how Bakunin's speech echoed
sixty years later in the ears of a man who was no revolutionary at the
time and was certainly no revolutionary when he wrote his memoirs. His
name was Baron Wrangel, and he was the father of the well-known General
Wrangel, who fought against the Bolsheviks in South Russia in 1919 and
1920.

Bakunin's forceful personality gained him devoted followers in the
League and among the members of the International. As was his invariable
habit he hastened to confirm his first success by enrolling new
initiates into one of his secret societies. The 'Fraternité
Internationale' appears to have been somewhat reorganised on this
occasion, and it may well have received a new name. (The history of
Bakunin's secret societies is still in many respects uncertain. They
were so often reorganised than even Bakunin himself could not remember
all their ramifications and vicissitudes.) At any rate the 'Fraternité'
was transplanted from Italy to Central Europe.

At the same time Bakunin became a member of the League central
committee. He did all he could to make the League accept a revolutionary
programme and bring it into line with the International. His undoubted
aim was to bring the two organisations together and, by means of his
secret organisation, become the unseen leader of both. In this he
failed. The majority of the League's members were by no means
revolutionary-minded, and all Bakunin's proposals were voted down. He
became increasingly convinced of the impossibility of converting the
League into a suitable instrument for his revolutionary work, and he
awoke to the fact that there was far greater scope for his activity in
the International. He met many of its members and became acquainted with
the development of its ideas. He had hitherto refrained from joining it
himself, but in July, 1868, he joined the Geneva branch. In the autumn,
after the International had definitely broken with the League, he broke
with it himself. At the second League Congress, held at the end of
September, 1868, he proposed that it make a public avowal of Socialism.
His resolution was obviously unacceptable, and when the League turned it
down he and his followers left the Congress and resigned from
membership.

He promptly summoned his followers, most of whom were adherents of the
'Fraternité Internationale,' and proposed that they join the
International in a body. This was intended to keep his followers
together. Joining the International in this way would intensify rather
than weaken their corporate sense. His followers approved his plan, with
a few unimportant alterations. An open association, 'L'Alliance
Internationale de la Démocratie Sociale,' was founded to exist side by
side with the secret society. The Alliance was intended to include
members outside the secret society, and thus act as a screen for the
secret society. It was to have its own programme and statutes, its own
leaders, its own sections in various countries, its own international
Congresses to be held at the same time and place as those of the
International. The plan was to form a state within a state within the
International. Officially the object of the Alliance was the
unpretentious one of 'investigating social and philosophical questions.'
Its real purpose was to gain control of the International and lead it
whither Bakunin wanted, for behind it there would be his secret
organisation. There was to be a three-story pyramid, with the
International as the base, the Alliance on top of it and on top of the
Alliance the secret society, with Bakunin the 'invisible dictator' at
the pinnacle.

The plan was too clever and consequently too clumsy to succeed. It
failed to get farther than the initial stages. The Alliance was
successfully founded and quite a number of respectable and deserving
members of the Swiss sections of the International joined it. The
statutes were duly drawn up and signed and dispatched for confirmation
by the General Council. Bakunin's name was among the signatures, tucked
in inconspicuously among the rest.

Marx had no means of divining the details of Bakunin's plan, but
promptly discerned Bakunin's object. This was no new turn of the
working-class movement, no new organisation of workers demanding
admission to the ranks of the united international proletariat. This was
an organisation created by a plotter of the old school who aimed at
gaining control of the great new movement represented by the
International, which under Marx's leadership was striving to guide the
struggle of the proletariat in the only way it ought to be guided, in
all openness, as an open mass-organisation. Marx had not spent twenty
years fighting the methods of the Carbonari, and all the
poison-and-dagger nonsense, to let it creep into the International by
the back-door now.

When statutes of the Alliance came up for consideration by the General
Council, its members, of course with Marx's concurrence, expressed a
wish that the International should publicly repudiate it. Marx wrote to
Engels late that night after the meeting. The thing of which he had
heard previously and had regarded as still-born, he said, and had wanted
to let quietly die had turned out to be more serious than he had
expected. 'Herr Bakunin--who is at the back of this affair--is kind
enough to want to take the workers' movement under _Russian_ control.'
Marx was particularly incensed at such a thing having been perpetrated
by a Russian, citizen of a country that had no workers' movement of its
own and was therefore less fit than anybody to grapple with the
difficulties confronting the European movement. Engels pacified Marx a
little. He said it was as clear as daylight that the International would
not allow itself to be taken in by a swindle such as this state within a
state, this organisation which had nothing whatever behind it. 'I, like
you, consider it to be a still-born, purely local, Geneva affair. Its
only chance of survival would be for you to attack it violently and give
it importance thereby. In my opinion it would be best firmly but quietly
to dismiss these people with their pretensions to insinuate themselves
into the International.' Marx agreed with Engels, and the General
Council declined to confirm the statutes of the Alliance as an
organisation within the International. After protracted negotiations the
Alliance as such was eventually dissolved. Individual groups of its
members were permitted to enter the International under the usual
conditions and to form local sections. No mention of the secret society
was made throughout, and the General Council did not know of its
existence. The secret society disintegrated once more and was once more
reconstructed. Bakunin quarrelled with the majority of the _directoire
centrale_ of the Fraternité Internationale, resigned from the Fraternité
and dissolved it, only to found it anew promptly afterwards with his own
most devoted followers. His first _rapprochement_ with Nechaiev, of whom
more will be said later, occurred during these months.

Bakunin had not answered Marx from Italy, and he gave no sign of life
from Switzerland. Marx sent him a copy of _Das Kapital_, but Bakunin
remained silent and did not even write a line of thanks. But a few days
after the Alliance had submitted its statutes to the General Council
Bakunin wrote. It was a long letter, overflowing with friendliness. 'My
country is now the International, of which you are one of the principal
founders. You see, therefore, my dear friend, that I am your disciple,
and I am proud of it [^23].'

This sounded genuine, upright and sincere, but it was anything but what
it seemed. The letter was a calculated part of the web of intrigue that
Bakunin was spinning round Marx. Bakunin certainly had a high opinion of
Marx and considered _Das Kapital_ to be a scientific achievement of
supreme importance. He even wanted to translate it into Russian. But
that did not affect Bakunin's conviction that Marx was his arch-enemy,
whose main purpose was to lay snares and traps for him; and he believed
himself to be thoroughly justified in fighting Marx. Some three months
after this declaration of love Bakunin wrote to his old friend, Gustav
Vogt, one of the founders of the League, of the 'distrust or even
ill-will of a certain coterie the centre of which you no doubt have
guessed as well as I.' That coterie was the General Council of the
International which had been against amalgamation with the League of
Peace and Freedom, and its centre was Marx, Bakunin's _cher ami_.

In a letter he wrote Alexander Herzen on October 28, 1869, Bakunin
explained in all clarity the methods he proposed to use in his campaign
against Marx. Herzen had remonstrated with Bakunin for daring to attack
some of Marx's followers in the Press without daring to attack Marx
himself. Bakunin replied that he had two reasons for refraining from
attacking Marx. The first was the real service that Marx had done by
laying the foundations of scientific socialism. 'The second reason is
policy and tactics. ... I praised and honoured Marx for tactical reasons
and on grounds of personal policy. Don't you see what all these
gentlemen are? Our enemies form a phalanx, and to be able to defeat it
the more easily it is necessary to divide it and break it up. You are
more learned than I, and therefore know better than I who first said:
_Divide et impera_. If I started an open war against Marx now,
three-quarters of the International would turn against me, and I should
find myself slipping down an inclined plane, and I should lose the only
ground on which I wish to stand.' To weaken the Marxian phalanx Bakunin
chose to attack Marx's little-known followers, and in the meantime he
stressed his friendship for Marx.

Marx was not for a moment deceived as to what his expression of
friendship was really worth. He did not answer Bakunin's love letter.
Marx had not a few defects. He was not always easy and pleasant to get
on with, but he was incapable of simulating friendship for a person
while he was busy laying a trap for him.

Bakunin worked very hard to build up and extend his secret society, and
it was important to be on good terms with the group of young
'Internationalists' at Locle, who have already been mentioned. Bakunin
made the acquaintance of Guillaume, their leader, in January, 1869.
Guillaume invited him to Locle. He accepted the invitation and was
received like a hero. Guillaume's account of the events of that day
deserve to be repeated, for he paints such a characteristic picture of
Bakunin, illustrating not only Bakunin as seen through his followers'
eyes, but how Bakunin presented himself to them.

'The news of the arrival of the celebrated Russian revolutionary had put
Locle into a state of high excitement. He was the sole subject of
conversation in workshops, clubs and drawing-rooms. ... Everyone said
that the presence in the ranks of the International of a man as
energetic as he could not fail to be a source of great strength [^24].'
Locle was an obscure provincial township, and for a celebrity to visit
it was an epoch-making event; and now a rare and exotic celebrity was
actually on the spot. The big watchmaking village could scarcely contain
itself with excitement. 'I went to meet him at the station with Father
Meuron, and we took him to the International Club, where we spent the
rest of the afternoon talking with some friends who had gathered
there [^25].' The local branch, the _Cercle International_, was just
celebrating the sixty-fifth birthday of 'Father' Neuron, a French
_émigré_, who had been a Carbonaro in the days of the July Monarchy and
perhaps in the days of the Restoration too. The Internationalists of
Locle, all hungry for experience, surrounded Bakunin. 'If Bakunin's
imposing stature struck the imagination, the familiarity of his greeting
gained men's hearts. He promptly made a conquest of everybody [^26].'
Bakunin showed himself a blithe and sociable human being, a good
raconteur, homely and simple. 'In conversation Bakunin willingly related
anecdotes, gave reminiscences of his youth, told us things he had said
or heard. He had a whole repertoire of anecdotes, proverbs and favourite
sayings that he liked to repeat [^27].' Guillaume particularly
remembered one story which Bakunin told. 'Once, at the end of a dinner
in Germany, he had proposed a toast, he told us laughing, saying: "I
drink to the destruction of public order and the unleashing of evil
passions [^28]."' Bakunin described the seven stages of happiness as
follows: 'In the first place, the supreme happiness was to die fighting
for liberty; in the second place, love and friendship; in the third
place, science and art; in the fourth place, smoking; in the fifth
place, drinking; in the sixth place, eating; and in the seventh place,
sleeping [^29].'

Twenty years before Bakunin had defined the seven stages of happiness in
the same way, and he had spoken of the unleashing of the passions then
too. Only in the meantime the sentiments had grown somewhat faded.
Richard Wagner had heard Bakunin say all these things in 1849, only in
Wagner's memoirs they sound like extracts from some dim northern saga.
But retailed by Guillaume they remind one of a provincial schoolmaster
describing the bounty of some brilliant talker to an admiring audience.

Bakunin accepted Guillaume into his secret society. Bakunin no longer
attached importance to swearing oaths upon a dagger. He explained the
object of the society as 'a free association of men who united for
collective action, without formality, without solemnity, without
mysterious rites, simply because they felt confidence in one another and
deemed unity preferable to isolated action [^30].' Guillaume is no
objective witness, but he must have been pretty faithful to the facts in
this. However much Bakunin wanted to assimilate his organisation to the
International, it remained a secret society within the International,
keeping its existence secret from it and aiming at gaining control of
it. Guillaume bears witness to this, for he describes how Meuron, the
old Carbonaro, who joined the secret society at the same time, rejoiced.
'He rejoiced at the thought that the International would be doubled by a
secret organisation which should preserve it from the dangers to which
the intriguing and ambitious might subject it [^31].'

The contrast between the ideas of the old Illuminati, Carbonari and the
rest and those whose aim was to use the International to lead the
workers into forming great mass-organisations could not have been better
expressed than it was by _père_ Meuron. He had spent his whole life as a
member of one or other small band of conspirators, and he could not
conceive that a mass-organisation in which there was such a thing as an
open struggle of ideas could be anything but a cockpit for the
intriguing and ambitious. It seemed obvious to him that the unrestricted
life of a large, public organisation, open to all the world, must be
supervised by groups of the type familiar to him. These groups, set up
behind the back of the mass-organisation, must obviously refrain from
openly proclaiming their programmes, and even their existence must not
be known of. It was these groups that must be the real controllers of
the movement. Meuron and those who thought like him regarded all this as
entirely open and above-board. So far from regarding it as partaking of
the nature of intrigue, they actually regarded it as a sure defence and
shield against the ambitious and intriguing.

Bakunin managed to extend his secret society pretty quickly, in spite of
obstacles. He and his friends had great hopes of the next International
Congress, to be held at Bâle in September, 1869. They made every effort
to be as well represented at it as possible. The secret Alliance sent
instructions to its adherents in every corner of Europe, directing them
whom to choose as delegates and to whom to give a mandate if they could
not send one of their own men. In many areas members were very surprised
indeed to find that for the first time in the history of the
International the selection of delegates was not being carried out in a
straightforward, open, matter-of-fact way, and letters reached the
General Council asking what was in the wind.

Bakunin and his followers had not worked badly, and they were
represented at the Congress in quite respectable numbers. Nevertheless
their expectations were not entirely fulfilled, though they had one or
two successes. The most important was in the debate on the inheritance
question. The Congress rejected the resolution of the General Council,
which was drafted by Marx, and accepted Bakunin's resolution instead.
But they did not succeed in their principal aim, which was to have the
headquarters of the General Council transferred from London to Geneva,
where Bakunin would have been its lord and master.

The Bâle Congress marks an important stage in the struggle between
'Marxists' and 'Bakuninists.' The fundamental differences were not
mentioned, the root-problem was not debated, and the real dispute was
only hinted at. But anyone who followed the progress of the Congress
attentively and had a certain experience of the history of the movement
could plainly detect the call to battle. Moses Hess, the 'Communist
rabbi,' had a practised ear. He had been present at Marx's struggle with
Weitling and had known the cause of dissension between Marx and
Gottschalk and had followed Marx's struggle with Willich and his
followers in the Communist League. He attended the Congress and heard
the unspoken words: 'The Collectivists of the International believe that
the political revolution must precede the social and democratic
revolution.' Bakunin and his followers made the political revolution
coincide with the social revolution. They made no concealment of their
opinion. The organ of Bakunin's followers in Switzerland wrote as answer
to Hess's utterance, 'We shall persist in refusing to associate
ourselves with any political movement _the immediate and direct aim of
which is not the immediate and direct emancipation of the workers_.' The
qualifying relative clause is emphasised in the original. The
Bakuninists did not reject political struggle of any kind, as was later
supposed. If its object was the direct realisation of their ultimate
aim, 'the revolution and social democracy,' they were ready to
participate. They were even capable of making quite big concessions and
deviating widely from their usual tactics. But they insisted that any
political movement in which they took part must lead directly to the
social revolution. That was the condition from which they would not
depart. The emphasis was on the definition of _direct and immediate_.

About this time, at the end of 1869, the Bakuninists started proclaiming
the principle of not taking part in elections for any kind of
Parliament, and with this their struggle with the Marxists in
Switzerland began. Taking part in the Swiss elections, i.e. in the
political movement, meant embarking on a long period of patient work of
enlightenment among the workers, and only those who believed that the
political and social revolution could not be one could undertake it. On
the other hand, in lands where the revolution was ripening quickly, the
Bakuninists by no means declined to participate in elections, granted
that the elections were the first step to the social revolution. But the
elections had to be the first step. The second step must be the social
revolution itself. Those were the tactics of Bakunin's followers in
Paris, the leader of whom was Varlin, the best-known representative of
the Paris section of the International at the time. He proclaimed
himself, in the Press and in court, an adherent of 'anti-authoritarian
Communism,' which was the name by which the Bakuninists started calling
themselves.

Varlin had joined Bakunin's secret society at the Bâle Congress, and was
Bakunin's closest confidant in Paris. Nevertheless at the end of 1869 he
joined the staff of the _Marseillaise_, which was edited by Rochefort
and was the most influential radical paper in Paris. It was actually the
organ of the General Council of the International and of Marx personally
and it stood for participation in the elections. Its policy was that the
electoral movement and Parliament must be used for the revolution.
Varlin explained his motives in a letter to his Swiss associates. He
said that the existing situation in France did not permit the Socialist
party to remain aloof from politics. At the moment the question of the
imminent fall of the Empire took precedence of everything else, and it
was necessary for the Socialists to be at the head of the movement,
under pain of abdication. If they held aloof from politics, they would
be nothing in France to-day, while as it was they were on the eve of
being everything. Neither the Swiss nor Bakunin himself had any
objection to this policy, which in their eyes was justified if it led to
the revolution and was the most direct way to the social revolution.

Whatever criticism may be made of Bakunin, he was not a man to be
satisfied with empty formulas. He acted in accordance with the demands
of his ideas, and he acted very energetically. Immediately after the
conclusion of the Bâle Congress, at which he strengthened and extended
his secret society, he set about preparing for a revolutionary rising.
What his plains were, the exact details of what he was preparing for,
are not known, but it is known that in December, 1869, and January,
1870, he was conducting a lively correspondence with members of his
organisation in various French towns, for the revolution was to break
out first in France. His people worked devotedly and successfully.

A large number of the most active members of the International,
revolutionary-minded young men like Varlin and Pindy in Paris, Richard
in Lyon, Bastelica in Marseilles, entered Bakunin's organisation and
prepared for an insurrection. The situation seemed more favourable than
ever. The prestige of the Empire was severely shaken and everyone felt
that its days were numbered. The revolution, the downfall of Louis
Bonaparte, might perhaps be delayed a little longer, but it was
inevitable nevertheless. The policy of the General Council, led by Marx,
was based on the imminence of a revolution in France. But it differed
fundamentally, in general and in particular, down to even the most
insignificant details, from that of Bakunin. Bakunin's societies,
unknown to the working masses, with a programme that they carefully
concealed, worked outside society, worked deliberately outside society,
planning and plotting violence.

The General Council strove to lead the workers as a whole, as a
mass-movement, towards a political and economic struggle with the Empire
that should be above-board and patent to everybody, and they strove to
teach the workers the incompatibility in practice of their interests and
those of their rulers. In May, 1870, the French Imperial Government
started a hue-and-cry after the International, dissolving its sections
and arresting a number of its leaders. To Marx this declaration of war
was welcome. 'The French Government,' he wrote to Engels on May 18, 'has
at last done what we have so long wanted--turned the political question
of empire or republic into a question of life and death for the working
class.' The International, suppressed by Napoleon, must promptly
re-arise and openly defy the ban, exploiting in every one of its
utterances every opportunity, however meagre, of proclaiming to rulers
and workers alike its determination not to allow itself to be suppressed
and its resolution to continue with its mass-propaganda. 'Our French
members are demonstrating beneath the eyes of the French Government the
difference between a secret political society and a real workers'
movement,' Marx wrote in the same letter. 'Scarcely had the committee
members in Paris, Lyon, Rouen, Marseilles, etc., been locked up (some of
them succeeded in escaping to Switzerland) when twice the number of new
committees immediately proclaimed themselves their successors with the
most impudent and defiant announcements in the newspapers, even giving
their private addresses.'

The Bakuninists went on plotting in the dark. Marx heard of their
existence for the first time in the spring of 1871, and for some time
all he knew about them was the fact of their existence. When material
dealing with the Bakuninist organisations fell into the hands of the
Paris police as a result of the arrests in May, 1871, and the public
prosecutor announced in the Press that a secret society of conspirators
existed besides the official International, Marx believed it to be one
of the usual police discoveries. 'It's the old tomfoolery,' he wrote to
Engels. 'In the end the police won't even believe each other any more.
This is too good.'

Marx did not yet know how wide the ramifications of Bakunin's
organisation were. The abyss that separated his conception of programme,
tactics and method from that of Bakunin at the beginning of 1870 had
become so wide that it was unbridgeable. Marx had to engage once more in
the struggle in which he had been engaged for the greater part of his
life in constantly changing forms. Meanwhile war had become inevitable.
European events postponed it, complicated it, blurred the issues. That
it was bound to break out was clear to everyone in the winter of 1869.

## Chapter 19: The Franco-Prussian War

In the year of the foundation of the International Prussia and Austria
were at war with Denmark. Two years later there was war in Lombardy for
the unification of Italy and in Bohemia for the hegemony of Germany.
After 1866 war -- _revanche pour Sadowa_ -- had become inevitable
between the France of Louis Napoleon and Bismarck's Prussia. The
International, from the first day of its existence, had had to take a
stand towards war and foreign politics. The inaugural address had
proclaimed the necessity of the proletariat's having its own foreign
policy, based on the solidarity of the workers of all countries. The
workers' International must answer ruling-class policy with its own.
This principle was accepted as a matter of course by all groups within
the International, even those of the most divergent views. But as soon
as it came to putting principle into practice acute differences arose.

The Polish question was the first. Sympathy for the fate of the
unfortunate people of Poland was universal among revolutionaries and
mere radicals too, and this widespread feeling had contributed
substantially to the foundation of the International. The International
had helped to organise the meeting of July 22, 1863, summoned to
consider ways and means of assisting the Polish rising. Poland enjoyed
the sympathy of all. But there were not a few who shrank from the
inevitable political implications of a more or less sentimental mood.
Marx's phrases about Russia in the inaugural address had roused a good
deal of opposition, for he maintained, just as in 1848, that Russia was
still the mainstay of European reaction and that Russia must therefore
be vanquished first. Marx was pro-Polish because he was anti-Russian.
Poland's resuscitation would involve the break-up of the 'Holy
Alliance,' which was always re-arising from its ashes in spite of the
celebrations over its decease, and the end of the Russian nightmare
which lay oppressively over Europe, stifling every revolutionary
movement.

There were many in Germany and still more in England who thought as Marx
did. In the Latin countries it was otherwise. The Proudhonists were the
chief of those who repudiated Marx's 'Russophobia.' They did not deny
that it had been justified in the forties, but they claimed that it was
superfluous, actually harmful now. They held that however obnoxious
Russian despotism might be in principle, from the working-class point of
view it differed not at all from the governments of Napoleon III or
Bismarck or even of the Cabinet of Her Majesty Queen Victoria. All were
bourgeois governments alike. The Proudhonists declined to recognise the
alleged excessive influence of Russia on the destiny of Europe. They
rejected the notion of directing the whole weight of International
policy primarily against Russia, and at the Geneva Congress of 1866
declined to vote for a foreign policy resolution demanding the
'annihilation of Russia's despotic influence on Europe' on the ground
that the resolution should have been worded 'the annihilation of all
despotism.'

In the dispute between Marx and the Proudhonists concerning the attitude
to be adopted towards Russia and Poland the differences in their
estimates of the historical period through which Europe was passing and
the tasks that confronted the International in it emerged for the first
time. They were soon to assume a more manifest form.

During the revolutionary period of 1848 and 1849 in Central Europe the
demand for national unity had been intimately associated with the demand
for political freedom. It was an axiom at that time that the way to
national unity lay only through the overthrow of the princes. Only
freedom created unity and only in unity was there freedom. This article
of faith was adhered to even by the German bourgeois Democrats, though
their consciences were mightily plagued by their inherited
petty-bourgeois respect for every crowned head; and it remained part of
the creed of the Italian Democrats. But the wars of the sixties seemed
to confute it utterly. For Italy was not united by Mazzini but by
Cavour, a royal minister of state, and the German people were not united
by themselves, but by Bismarck, with blood and iron, under the spiked
Prussian helmet.

To the Proudhonists national movements were simply incomprehensible, and
nations themselves were 'obsolete prejudices.' They could not understand
how 'the social question' could be mixed up with antiquated
'superstitious ideas' about national unity and independence at a time
when 'the social question' overshadowed everything else, and was indeed
the only question that mattered at all. In their eyes anyone who
connected 'the national question' with 'the social question' was a
reactionary. That a man like Bismarck was able to assume the leadership
of a national movement only confirmed them in their entirely negative
judgment of what they regarded as belonging to long-obsolete historical
phases. In their eyes every single state, without any exception
whatever, was founded on 'centralism and despotism,' the contradictions
of which, as long as the world had not found its 'economic equilibrium,'
would continue to be fought out in wars. In these ever-recurring
conflicts they did not regard it as the business of the proletariat to
try and find out which side was objectively serving the cause of human
progress, and then to support that side. No, the proletariat had only
one duty. This, as de Paepe stated at the International Congress of
1868, consisted in the fundamental reconstruction of social and
political institutions; because that was the only way a permanent end
could be made of ever-recurring international disputes. The Proudhonists
stood for energetic anti-military propaganda, demanded the abolition of
standing armies and were the first to raise the question of the general
strike as the weapon of the proletariat against war.

For these radical-sounding phrases Marx had little use. Ever since 1848
he had been preaching war with Russia, for he believed such a war would
be a most powerful engine of the revolution. As in the past, he regarded
war as a factor in historical growth and in some circumstances a factor
of historical advance. Whether a particular war were really the latter
or not and what attitude the proletariat should adopt towards it were
questions to be decided on the merits of the particular case. In foreign
just as in domestic politics Marx rejected the idea of anything being in
itself 'reactionary.' Which of two warring nations gained the victory
could not possibly be a matter of complete indifference to the
proletarian movement, the attitude of which should not be one of rigid
adherence to a comfortable position of apparent extreme radicalism, but
should be supple and pliant, ready to change in accordance with the
changing situation.

In spite of Proudhonist criticism Marx remained convinced, as he had
been in 1848, that national movements had a progressive function, at any
rate among great peoples such as the Germans, the Italians, the Poles,
and the Hungarians. In a letter to Karl Kautsky written many years later
Engels neatly summarised the reasons for Marx's belief. 'It is
historically impossible for a great people to be in a position even to
discuss any internal question seriously as long as national independence
is lacking,' he wrote. 'An international movement of the proletariat is
only possible among independent nations, between equals.' In this
national nihilism of the Proudhonists Marx discerned not only a
remarkable form of French nationalism but the lurking assumption that
the French were the chosen nation.

After a meeting of the General Council in June, 1866, at which there was
a lengthy discussion of national questions, Marx described their
attitude in a letter to Engels as 'Proudhonised Stirnerianism. They want
to reduce everything to small "groups" or "communes," and then build up
a "union" but no state. And this "individualising," of humanity with its
accompanying "mutualism," is to be brought about while history in other
countries stands still and the whole world waits until the French are
ripe for the social revolution. They will then demonstrate the
experiment before our eyes and the rest of the world, overcome by their
example, will follow it. ... It is exactly what Fourier expected from
his _phalanstéres_.' At the meeting in question Marx remarked that the
French 'while denying all nationality appeared quite unconsciously to
reconcile it with their own absorption into the model nation which was
France.' True, Napoleon's hypocritical concern for the destinies of
nations that had not yet achieved unity drove his opponents to the
opposite extreme; and the petty-bourgeois Socialists' dislike of
national concentration, i.e. economic concentration, came out in their
dislike of the economic developments that led to it.

Just because he regarded the movement towards national unity as a
historical advance over the period of national subdivision into minor
and petty states, Marx regarded Bismarck's policy with the greatest
suspicion. For a long time he had mistrusted Bismarck's policy as an
exclusively Prussian one, and held Bismarck to be the tool now of
Napoleon, now of Russia. To Marx the idea that Germany could be united
by being Prussianised seemed absurd. He and Engels were certainly not
pro-Austrian during the Prusso-Austrian war, but still less were they
pro-Prussian. Engels hoped the Prussians would 'get a good hiding' and
Marx was convinced that they would 'pay for their boasting.' Marx
expected that the defeat of Prussia would lead to a revolution in
Berlin. 'Unless there is a revolution,' he wrote to Engels on April 6,
1866, 'the Hohenzollern and Habsburg dogs will throw our country fifty
or a hundred years back by civil (dynastic) wars.' Unless there were a
revolution, he repeated in a letter he wrote on the same day to his
friend Kugelmann in Hanover, Germany would be on the threshold of
another Thirty Years' War, and that would mean a divided Germany once
more.

To Marx Prussia's rapid and brilliant victory was entirely unexpected.
Prussian hegemony in Germany became a fact. The unpleasant prospect of
Germany being merged into Prussia became a possibility to be reckoned
with. That Bismarck's ambitions were not German ambitions but
'dynastic-Hohenzollern' ambitions was plain enough. But his blunt
refusal to entertain the French demand for 'compensation' for having
remained neutral in the Austrian war and the harshness with which he
asserted Prussian demands in the dispute about Luxemburg \[sic?\]
immediately afterwards finally destroyed the suspicion that he was only
a tool of Napoleon. The reactionary Junker Bismarck introduced universal
suffrage into the North German Reichstag, though for reasons that
differed profoundly from those for which Lassalle had agitated for it
only a few years previously. The irresistible progress of the
Prussianisation of Germany became clearer every day, and those in the
workers' movement could afford to ignore it less than anybody. It had to
adapt itself to the new situation, be as pliable and resilient as its
opponent, Bismarck. Universal suffrage created a vast new field of
action for it. The two Socialist parties were represented in the North
German Reichstag, the followers of Lassalle and the 'Eisenacher,' the
latter led by Liebknecht and young August Bebel.

In the Paris Chamber the Opposition parties, consisting of more or less
determined Republicans and Orleanists, were represented plentifully
enough. But there was not a single Socialist. Germany's greater social
maturity was demonstrated by that alone. German industry had already
surpassed the French. New, scientifically equipped factories were rising
in the Rhineland, in Saxony, in Silesia, every year, and genuine
proletarian centres were forming round them, and class differences were
making their appearance more rapidly and more acutely than in any other
country, including France.

The traditional idea of the leading rôle played by France in social
development grew less and less justified as the years went by. In the
forties Marx had held up France as a model to the Germans and measured
Germany's level by that of its neighbour. From the beginning of the
sixties Marx gradually began to doubt the old, familiar idea. Engels had
started doubting it even earlier; and as German economic developments
became more and more impressive and as the process of the unification of
the state, albeit in crooked, incomplete and half-feudal forms, became
more manifest, Marx gradually became convinced that it was to the German
workers' movement that the future belonged. In 1870, before the outbreak
of the Franco-Prussian war, he wrote to Engels: 'It is my firm
conviction that, though the first impulse will come from France, Germany
is far riper for a social movement and will outdistance France by far.
The French are guilty of great error and self-deception if they still
believe themselves to be the "chosen people."' In the middle of
February, 1870, he wrote to Kugelmann that he expected more for the
social movement from Germany than from France. The unification of
Germany was the preliminary to and the guarantee of a proletarian
movement in the heart of Europe.

In the summer of 1870, when the Franco-Prussian war broke out, Marx did
not hesitate for a moment. For the patriotic excesses of the German
upper class and petty-bourgeoisie he had nothing but contempt, reserving
particular scorn for the dithyrambic outbursts of those who had recently
been his comrades and even friends. After reading Freiligrath's war
poems he wrote to Engels that he would rather be a miaowing cat than a
ballad-monger of that kind. He was indignant at the leaders of the
Lassalle faction, who gave unconditional support to the Prussian
Government in making war on France, but approved of Bebel and
Liebknecht, who voted against war credits, though he did not agree with
their reasons. It seemed obvious to Marx that in the struggle with
Bismarck there could be no truce, even in war.

Germany's cause was not the Hohenzollerns' cause. Germany was attacked
and not Prussia, and Germany must defend herself. But a German victory
was essential above all in the interests of the workers' movement. Marx
held that there were two reasons why it would be fatal for Louis
Napoleon to win. In France the Bonapartist régime would be consolidated
for many years and Central Europe would be thrown back whole decades,
and the process of the unification of Germany would be interrupted. And
then, as Engels wrote on August 15, 1870, there could be no more talk of
an independent German workers' movement and everything would be absorbed
in the struggle for the re-establishment of the national existence. On
the other hand a German victory would mean the end of Bonapartism, and
whatever Government followed the French would have a freer field. 'If
the Prussians win,' Marx wrote to Engels immediately after the outbreak
of war, 'the centralisation of the state power will be useful for the
centralisation of the German working-class. Moreover, German
preponderance will cause the centre of gravity of the workers' movement
in Western Europe to be still more definitely shifted from France to
Germany, and it is only necessary to compare the movement in the two
countries from 1866 till now to see that the German working class is
superior both theoretically and in organisation to the French.'

On July 23, 1870, the General Council issued a manifesto on the war. It
was written by Marx. Addressed as it was to the workers of the whole
world, it was obviously impossible for it to contain all the arguments
that determined Marx's position. It stated that 'on the German side the
war was a war of defence,' which immediately raised the question of who
had placed Germany in the position of having to defend herself. In
Bismarck Marx no longer saw a servant but rather a pupil and imitator of
Napoleon. The manifesto, which was issued when the war had only just
begun, stressed the fact that the defence of Germany might degenerate
into a war upon the French people. But if the German working class
permitted that, victory or defeat would be equally evil. 'All the evils
that Germany had to suffer after the so-called Wars of Liberation would
be revived and redoubled,' the manifesto concluded. 'The alliance of the
workers of all countries will finally exterminate war.'

In a letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht Marx gave his German comrades still
more specific advice. This letter has not survived, but Engels's letter
to Marx, dated August 15, 1870, in which he laid down the tactical line
to be adopted in a manner with which Marx entirely agreed, has been
preserved. He wrote: 'In my view, what our people can do is (1)
associate themselves with the national movement as long as it is
confined to the defence of Germany (in some circumstances an offensive
persisting right up to conclusion of peace might not be inconsistent
with this); (2) at the same time emphasise the distinction between the
national interests of Germany and the dynastic interests of Prussia; (3)
oppose the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine--Bismarck's intention of
annexing Alsace-Lorraine to Bavaria and Baden has already transpired;
(4) as soon as a Republican, non-chauvinist Government is at the helm in
Paris, work for an honourable peace with it; (5) continually stress the
unity of interests of the workers of France and Germany, who did not
want the war and are not at war with each other; (6) Russia, as in the
International manifesto.' There had been only one sentence in the
manifesto about Russia, pointing out that its 'sinister form' was
'lurking in the background of this suicidal struggle.'

The manifesto commended the French workers for declaring themselves
against the war and against Napoleon. But that was all. Neither in the
manifesto nor in the correspondence between Marx and Engels is there a
word about the duties of the French proletariat during those pregnant
weeks. Marx, in all the years during which a stupefied world hailed
Napoleon III as a genuine heir of the Corsican, clung to his opinion
that he was but 'commonplace _canaille_,' and long before the rottenness
of the Bonaparte régime had become manifest to all beholders Marx held
that its fate was already sealed. 'Whatever the result of Louis
Napoleon's War with Prussia may be,' the manifesto stated, 'the death
knell of the Second Empire has already sounded in Paris.' From the first
day of hostilities Engels, as a student of war, was convinced that
Germany would win. His articles on the campaign in the _Pall Mall
Gazette_ attracted a great deal of attention, and the accuracy with
which he predicted the catastrophe of Sedan, even to the very date,
confirmed his reputation as the 'General,' which was the nickname by
which his friends henceforward invariably called him. Napoleon's defeat
was certain, and Napoleon's defeat would mean a revolution in France.
But in what a situation! 'If a revolution breaks out in Paris,' Marx
wrote to Engels on August 8, 'the question arises: have they the
resources and the leaders to put up serious opposition to the Prussians?
It is impossible to deny that the twenty-year-long Bonapartist farce has
caused enormous demoralisation. One is scarcely justified in counting on
revolutionary heroism.' In the middle of August Engels still believed
that the position of a revolutionary government, if it came soon, need
not be desperate; but it would have to abandon Paris to its fate and
continue the war from the south. It might still be possible to hold out
until fresh munitions had been procured and new armies organised with
which the enemy might gradually be forced back towards the frontier. But
five days later Engels believed that even that possibility had vanished.
'If a revolutionary government had been formed in Paris as late as last
week,' he wrote to Marx, 'something might still have been done. Now it
is too late, and a revolutionary government can only make itself
ridiculous, as a miserable parody of the Convention.'

The revolution was bound to come. That was certain. But Marx was just as
certain that its victory in Paris could only follow defeat at the front.
His certainty on this point explains the silence of the manifesto.

The French sections of the International did not allow themselves to be
carried away by the wave of patriotic enthusiasm that swept the country
upon the outbreak of war. Their hatred of Napoleon alone was sufficient
to preserve them from that. For them to have wanted the Emperor to win
the war and thus consolidate Bonapartism would have been inconceivable;
and they did not believe he would win, for the weaknesses of his system
were too familiar to them. The police, as usual unremitting in the
invention of falsehood, alleged that cheers for Prussia had been called
for at peace meetings just before the outbreak of war. Such meetings
were held in places, and it became necessary to forbid patriotic
demonstrations in the suburbs of Paris, because they occasionally
developed into demonstrations the very reverse of patriotic. It is quite
possible that some crank, conceiving himself to be a revolutionary, may
actually have called for a cheer for the Prussians, but it is certain
that the workers who adhered to the International had no love for
Bismarck, however much they despised Napoleon. Disunited as the French
Socialists were--the '_Internationaux de la dernière heure_,' as the
'Old' Internationalists remarked, only served to bring more differences
into the ranks--they certainly did not want a Prussian victory at the
expense of France. Enslaved, humiliated and oppressed as their country
might be at the hands of an iniquitous government, it nevertheless
remained the country of the revolution, the heart of Europe, now and for
the future. They did not believe in Napoleon, but they believed in
France and France's mission.

Bakunin, who at this time was held in high regard by the members of the
International in France, thought as they did. Nay more, he was an almost
ideal embodiment of French revolutionary patriotism. Like Marx, he
considered that indifference in international conflicts was
pseudo-radical and could only be harmful to the revolution. Like Marx,
he demanded the intervention of the proletariat to the full limit of its
strength. But, unlike Marx, he regarded Germany and not Russia as the
enemy and the chief bulwark of reaction; and Bakunin did not just mean
contemporary Germany; in his eyes Germany had been the hub and pattern
of despotism for centuries, ever since the Reformation and the
suppression of the peasant risings in the first third of the sixteenth
century. Though there were other despotic governments even more brutal
than the German, that fundamental truth was not affected in his eyes,
because 'Germany had made a system, a religious cult, of what in other
countries was only a fact.' It was a feature of the German national
character. Bakunin liked quoting the saying of Ludwig Börne that 'other
people are often slaves, but we Germans always lackeys.' He called the
servility of the Germans a natural characteristic which they had
elevated into a system, thus making of it an incurable disease. If the
Germans, condemned to slavery themselves and spreading the plague of
despotism wherever they went, were to conquer France, the cause of
Socialism would be lost and all hope of a revolution in Germany--a hope
that in any case could only be justified by a spirit of optimism that
ran counter to all experience--would have to be buried for at least half
a century, and France would be threatened with the fate of Poland.

Even before the war had properly begun he believed, as Marx did, that
Napoleon's defeat was inevitable; but he did not regard the defeat of
France as inevitable, that is, assuming she bethought herself and a
revolution broke out in time. A revolution and a revolution alone could
save France, Europe and Socialism. The French, above all the workers,
must rise, trample Bonapartism in the dust and hurl themselves at the
enemy of France and of civilisation with the all-compelling enthusiasm
of a revolutionary nation. In converting the imperialist war into a
revolutionary one lay their only hope.

Bakunin became intensely active as soon as war broke out. His new
activity was essentially a continuation of the old; it consisted of
organising militant groups and preparing armed risings. The war had put
immediate insurrection upon the order of the day. During the last days
of July and the first week of August Bakunin overwhelmed his friends in
France with letters, counselling them, encouraging them, urging them to
immediate action. On August 11 he mentions that he had written
twenty-three detailed letters to France that day. 'I have my plan
ready,' he said. The details of his plan are unknown, but what they were
it is not difficult to guess. On August 8, revolutionaries, led by
Bakuninists, seized the town hall of Marseilles, and a rising in Paris
was planned for August 9. The 'committee of action' there consisted
chiefly of Bakuninists, and its leader, Pindy, was a prominent member of
Bakunin's secret organisation. But the result was a fiasco, for on the
morning of the ninth Pindy and his fellow-conspirators were arrested.

Bakunin was not discouraged by these abortive attempts. What did not
succeed in one place must succeed in another-- _must_ succeed. For time
was racing by and the German army was relentlessly advancing into
France. 'If there is no popular rising in France within ten days, France
is lost,' he wrote to his friends, almost in desperation. 'Oh, if I were
young, I should not be writing letters but should be among you.'
Danton's words were constantly upon his lips. 'Before marching against
the enemy, it is necessary to destroy, to paralyse the enemy behind
one [^32].'

On August 14 Blanqui and some of his followers carried out an attack on
the police barracks in the Grande Rue de la Vilette. Their cry: '_Vive
la République! Mort aux Prussiens! Aux armes_!' was greeted with silence
by a gaping throng. The rising collapsed pitifully.

News of the disaster of Sedan reached Paris on September 4; one hundred
and twenty-five thousand men had been taken prisoner, six hundred guns
had been captured and the Emperor had surrendered to the Prussians. The
Empire collapsed without raising a finger in its own defence. A Republic
was proclaimed in Paris, and the provinces, in so far as they had not
anticipated Paris, followed suit.

Napoleon left the Republic a fearful heritage. The enemy was in the
land, the armies were in disorder, the exchequer was bare. Marx's
anxious query about the future was destined soon to have an answer.

On the night of September 5 Marx received a telegram from Longuet:
'Republic proclaimed.' The names of the members of the Provisional
Government followed, with the words: Influence your friends in Germany
immediately. He need not have added this injunction. The manifesto of
the Paris sections of the International, which Marx received next day,
was not calculated to make him hurry. On the contrary, it merely
repelled him as being 'ridiculously chauvinistic,' with its demand that
the Germans promptly withdraw across the Rhine--as if the Rhine could
possibly be the frontier. But it was not a question of criticising inept
phraseology or the style of a well or ill-written manifesto now. This
was no time for historical analyses. On September 6 Marx addressed the
General Council on the fundamental alteration in the European situation
brought about by the downfall of Napoleon in France. Thanks to the
tremendous authority he exercised on the General Council, he succeeded
in persuading it to acknowledge the young French Republic, in spite of
the hesitation and vacillation of some of its English members. It was
decided that the new situation merited the issue of a second manifesto.
This was also written by Marx, with the assistance of Engels in those
passages which dealt with military matters. It was published on
September 9.

The main theme of the manifesto, on which all the rest depended, was
this; after Sedan Germany was no longer waging a war of defence. 'The
war of defence ended with the surrender of Louis Napoleon, the
capitulation of Sedan and the proclamation of the Republic in Paris. But
long before these events occurred, at the very moment when the whole
rottenness of the Bonapartist armies was revealed, the Prussian military
camarilla set its heart on conquest.' To refute the alleged necessity of
the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine for the defence of Germany Marx used
arguments with which Engels supplied him. These were convincing, but
they were only calculated to make an impression on military experts. The
chief emphasis lay in the political argument, which made the General
Council's manifesto the most significant document of the time.

With the victory and the consequences that threatened to follow in its
wake Russia, from being a shadowy figure lurking in the background, came
to the fore in a fashion that grew ever plainer and ever more menacing.
Marx saw it, and did all that was in his power to make it visible to the
world. But in Germany he was talking to men who were dazzled and
blinded. Russia was far away, but Strasbourg was near, near enough to
seize, and they seized it. 'Did the Teuton patriots really believe,' the
manifesto said, 'that Germany's independence, freedom and peace would be
assured if they forced France into the arms of Russia? If the success of
German arms, the arrogance of victory and dynastic intrigues drive
Germany to rob France of French soil, only two ways remain open to
Germany. She must either become a conscious vassal of Russia's plans for
self-aggrandisement, with all the risks that that involves--a policy
that corresponds to Hohenzollern traditions--or, after a short rest, arm
for a new "defensive" war, not one of these new-fashioned "localized"
wars, but a war against the allied Slav and Latin races.' A week after
Sedan Marx clearly delineated the main lines that German foreign policy
was to follow up to the outbreak of the Great War; first the
'friendship' with Russia that Bismarck fostered, followed by
preparations for war against the Franco-Russian _entente_ that began as
soon as that friendship was dissolved. A few sentences Marx wrote to his
friend Sorge on September 1, 1870, bear brilliant witness to his
foresight. 'What the Prussian donkeys don't see,' he wrote, 'is that the
present war leads just as necessarily to war between Germany and Russia
as the war of 1866 led to war between Prussia and France. That is the
best result that I expect of it for Germany. "Prussianism" as such has
never existed and cannot exist other than in alliance and in
subservience to Russia. And this War No. 2 will act as the wet-nurse of
the inevitable revolution in Russia.' Forty-four years later Germany
went to war with Russia and France, in 1917 revolution, unleashed by the
war, broke out in Russia, and in 1918 the semi-feudal military might of
Prussia collapsed.

Marx was not deceived as to the weakness of the German workers' movement
and its inability to prevent the approaching catastrophe. 'If the French
workers were unable to check the aggressors in the midst of peace, have
the German workers a better prospect of checking the victor in the midst
of the clash of arms?' he wrote. Nevertheless, however difficult the
position of the German proletariat might be, he believed 'it would do
its duty.'

The fall of Louis Bonaparte opened up new and tremendous prospects to
the French working classes. The General Council sent its greetings to
the young Republic--to the Republic and not to the Provisional
Government of National Defence. The mistrust felt for the latter in
revolutionary circles was not misplaced. It consisted partly of avowed
Orleanists, partly of 'middle-class Republicans, on some of whom the
insurrection of June, 1848, had left an indelible mark.' Suspicion of
the Orleanists, who occupied all the most important positions and
regarded the Republic as but a bridge to the Restoration, was
well-founded. Nevertheless, or rather for that very reason, Marx decided
that the most pressing duty of the French workers was to support and
defend the young Republic in spite of all its defects. The situation was
full of dangers and full of temptations, requiring the most extreme
caution and the most courageous initiative, iron self-control and
all-daring heroism.

The struggle was no longer between Louis Napoleon, that 'commonplace
_canaille_,' and a Germany which was on the defensive; republican France
was now defending herself against rapacious German militarism. The
manifesto called on the workers of France to do their duty as citizens.
Their duty was to defend the French Republic against the invading
Germans. 'Any attempt to overthrow the new Government with the enemy at
the gates of Paris would be a desperate act of folly.' But at the same
time it was obvious that the French working class must not forget its
own class duties, and the General Council bade it exploit the favourable
opportunity of forwarding its own interest to the extreme. Eugène
Dupont, the representative of the French sections on the General
Council, wrote to the Internationalists at Lyons: 'The bourgeoisie still
have the power. In these circumstances the rôle of the workers, or
rather their duty, is to let the bourgeois vermin make peace with the
Prussians (for the shame of doing so will adhere to them always), not to
indulge in outbreaks which would only consolidate their power, but to
take advantage of the liberty which circumstances will provide to
organise all the forces of the working class. ... The duty of our
association is to activate and spread our organisation everywhere.' Six
weeks later he wrote once more to Chavret at Lyons: 'The rôle (of the
International) is to take advantage of every opportunity and every
occasion to spread the organisation of the working class.'

'Restraint on the part of the International in France until after the
conclusion of peace,' as Engels put it, was far from meaning that the
French workers were to go on quietly and calmly organising as if they
were living, say, in Belgium or in England or as if the date were still
1869. Their task was not only to participate actively in the struggle
against the invaders and to continue the building up of their
organisation. Marx highly praised what the members of the International
did at Lyons before Bakunin ruined everything there. On October 19,
1870, he wrote to Beesly, saying that under pressure of the local
section of the International a Republic had been set up before Paris
took that step, and a revolutionary government immediately established;
a commune, consisting partly of workers belonging to the International,
partly of middle-class Radical Republicans. The _octroi_ had been
immediately abolished, and rightly so. The Bonapartist and clerical
intriguers had been intimidated and energetic steps were taken to arm
the whole population. Activity of this kind was far more than mere work
of organisation; it meant that working-class organisations were actively
co-operating in introducing and consolidating the Republican régime; and
this was the only way the working-class movement could grow, by
co-operating in shaping the country's destiny. Independent action of the
working class must be postponed till later, until after the war was over
and the necessary work of preparatory organisation had been done. Engels
went so far as to stress the fact that the working class 'would need
time to organise' even after the conclusion of peace. Hence it was
impossible to decide in advance what form its future action might take.
'After the conclusion of peace,' Engels wrote in a letter to Marx on
September 12, 'the workers' prospects in every direction will be
brighter than ever before.' A remark in the same letter that 'not much
fear need be entertained of the army returning from internment from the
point of view of internal conflicts' indicates that he reckoned on the
possibility--not the probability and definitely not the
inevitability--of an armed struggle. In the same letter he warned the
workers against any action during the war. 'If one could do anything in
Paris,' Engels wrote, 'the thing to do would be to prevent the workers
from striking until after the peace. Should they succeed in establishing
themselves under the banner of national defence, they would take over
the inheritance of Bonaparte and the present wretched republic, and
would be vainly defeated by the German armies and thrown back again for
twenty years. ... But if they do not let themselves be carried away
under the pressure of foreign attacks but proclaim the social republic
on the eve of the storming of Paris? It would be dreadful if the German
army's last act of war were a battle with the Workers at the Paris
barricades. It would throw us back fifty years, put everyone and
everything into a false position, and, the national hatred and the
demagogy that would take hold of the French workers! In this war
France's active power of resistance is broken and with it goes the
prospect of expelling the invaders by a revolution.'

For France the war was lost. He who continued it would be beaten and
must humble himself before the victor. All other considerations must
recede before that one decisive fact. The military situation alone
forced the workers to hold back at least until the conclusion of peace.
The manifesto warned them 'not to let themselves be swayed by national
memories of 1792 as the French peasants had let themselves be deceived
by national memories of the first Empire. Theirs was not to repeat the
past but to build the future.' The argument sounded well, but if it had
any validity it was but a secondary one. In the middle of August Engels
had said that any government that tried to repeat the Convention would
be but a sorry parody of it. After the Battle of Sedan a revolutionary
war in the manner of 1792 seemed completely impossible. A letter of
Marx's to Kugelmann, written on February 14, 1871, makes it clear that
his attitude was determined by this estimate of the war situation. 'If
France holds out, uses the armistice to reorganise her army and gives
the war a real revolutionary character--and the crafty Bismarck is doing
his utmost to this end--the great new German Borussian empire may still
receive the baptism of a wholly unexpected thrashing.' To give the war a
revolutionary character would be to repeat the Convention. In September,
1870, it would have only have been a miserable parody of the Convention.
'To sacrifice the workers now,' Engels wrote to Marx on September 7,
'would be strategy _à la_ Bonaparte and MacMahon.'

While Marx did all he could to prevent the workers from attempting to
overthrow the Provisional Government while the war lasted, Bakunin and
the 'Jacobins' held the overthrow of the Provisional Government to be
their most pressing task. The 'Jacobins,' students, intellectuals, and
_déclassés_ of all sorts, seized on the traditions of the French
Revolution--not so much those of the Jacobin clubs, for many of them
considered Robespierre to be an irresolute weakling, as to those of the
Hébertists. Many of them had vague Socialist ideas, and all of them
every day went politically a step farther Left than the day before. They
were conspirators by tradition and inclination, completely unorganised
as a group or even as a party; but they were united by that mental kink
exhibited in its purest form by the Bohemians of the Left Bank, who were
in revolt against absolutely everything.

In the history of London's political exiles in the sixties the
'Jacobins' did not play a very honourable rôle. Such of them as had
formed a special 'French branch' of the International soon came into
Violent conflict with the General Council. Anyone who worked for the
International in France was immediately suspect in their eyes. Such a
person was bound to have inclinations towards Bonapartism, if he were
not actually an agent of Napoleon. Felix \[sic\] Pyat, Vésinier, and
others of their leaders outdid each other in radicalism. Tyrannicide was
their ideal. Pyat constantly drank toasts to 'the bullet that will slay
a tyrant,' and he opened a subscription to buy a 'revolver of honour'
for Beresovsky, the Pole who made an attempt on the life of Alexander II
in Paris in 1867, and indulged in many similar pranks. Though not
himself a member of the 'French branch,' he used it as his platform and
behaved as though he were the living embodiment of the International
itself. The behaviour of this irresponsible would-be politician, which
in other circumstances would have been nothing but a bad joke, became a
matter of occasionally serious embarrassment for the International. The
General Council had repeatedly to announce that Pyat and his friends had
nothing to do with them. It could not allow legal organisations on the
Continent to be jeopardised by Pyat's ranting. Marx had bitter contempt
for Pyat, the 'mountebank of 1848,' and 'these heroes of the
revolutionary phrase, who, from a safe distance of course, kill kings
and emperors and Louis Napoleon in particular.'

The news of the fall of the Empire turned these people's heads
completely. 'The whole French branch has set off for Paris to-day,' Marx
wrote to Engels on September 6, 1870, 'to commit imbecilities in the
name of the International. They wish to overthrow the Provisional
Government, proclaim the Paris Commune, appoint Pyat French ambassador
in London, etc.' As Marx considered this an extremely dangerous
enterprise he sent Serraillier to Paris after the Jacobins to warn
people of the danger of insurrectionary action.

Bakunin did not lag behind them in zeal. The seed he had sown so
carefully seemed to have ripened now. The moment had come to strike. All
the old powers had collapsed; and there was only one way to save France
now, Bakunin's way, anarchism. An uprising of popular passion would
achieve both victory over the external enemy and the complete
reorganisation of society. The two were inseparably united in his eyes.
Bakunin left Switzerland on September 14. The difficulty he had in
raising money for the fare cost him several valuable days, or so he
feared. With a Pole and a former Russian officer as his travelling
companions he went to Lyons, where his most devoted followers lived. At
first there were only a very few who were willing to follow him, but he
succeeded in winning over the hesitaters and the doubters. Two days
after his arrival he wrote to Ogarev: 'The real revolution has not yet
broken out here, but that will come. Everything is being done to prepare
it. I am playing for high stakes. I hope to see the triumph soon.' A
week later he was as good as certain of the victory of his cause:
'To-night we shall arrest our principal enemies; to-morrow there will be
the last battle and, we hope, victory.' On September 28 Bakunin and his
followers seized the town hall of Lyons and proclaimed a revolutionary
Commune. Paragraph I of the first decree stated: 'The administrative and
governmental machinery of the state, having become powerless, has been
abolished.' But with this the revolutionary energy of the Lyons
Bakuninists was exhausted. The venture collapsed pitifully after a few
hours, and Bakunin only just managed to escape. In other towns, as in
Marseilles, where Bakunin tried again, and in Brest, where his followers
went to work, things did not even get as far as that.

When Marx learnt of Bakunin's adventures in Lyons he was indignant.
'Those asses have ruined everything,' he wrote to Beesly. Belonging as
they did to the International, the Bakuninists, Marx stated,
unfortunately had sufficient influence to cause his followers to
deviate. Beesly would understand, Marx added, that the very fact that a
Russian--represented as an agent of Bismarck by the middle-class
newspapers--had the presumption to impose himself as the leader of a
French Committee of Public Safety was quite sufficient to sway the
balance of public opinion. It would have been difficult indeed to have
saved France by decreeing the abolition of the state at a moment when
she was engaged in a life and death struggle with a terrible enemy whose
demands were increasing from day to day.

The fair words spoken by the King of Prussia at the beginning of the
war--as usual, he had invoked God as his witness and declared that he
was fighting Napoleon but not the people of France--were now completely
forgotten. Anyone who dared remember them was denounced as a traitor.
When the 'Eisenacher' party committee issued a proclamation to the
workers protesting against the Prussian plans of conquest and demanding
an honourable peace with the French Republic, a general had them
arrested and led away in chains. The Government Press described the
demand that a King of Prussia should keep his promises as 'ingenuous.'

France defended herself desperately. All revolutionary elements
everywhere were on her side. Old Garibaldi hurried to the assistance of
the French Republic with a legion of volunteers. It was necessary to
help her from without.

Immediately after the proclamation of the Republic in Paris the General
Council set itself at the head of the movement that demanded that Great
Britain should recognise it. On September 10 a great workers' meeting in
St. James's Hall demanded recognition of the French Republic and the
conclusion of an honourable peace. The latter demand was closely
associated with and indeed followed from it. Demonstrations increased
during the winter months and at the turn of the year a large number of
bourgeois politicians joined the pro-French front. Not satisfied with
diplomatic intervention, they actually claimed that the time had come
for British military intervention as well. Marx, as a foreigner, could
not come forward publicly himself, so the campaign of meetings was led
by Odger, an English member of the General Council. But Marx seized
every opportunity of action that came his way. In January, 1871, he
learned of the difficulties of the German army in France from an
informed source, namely Johannes Miquel, a high Prussian official who
had been a member of the Communist League. Marx saw to it that the news
was transmitted to the Government of National Defence through Lafargue.
For, as Marx once more stated in an open letter to Bismarck in the
_Daily News_ of January 19, 1871, 'France was now fighting not only for
her own independence but for the liberty of Germany and of Europe.' The
General Council of the International was behind a mass demonstration in
Trafalgar Square on January 23, to which the workers marched carrying
the tricolour.

Engels energetically pleaded France's cause in articles in the _Pall
Mall Gazette_. He denounced the brutal retaliatory measures the
Prussians took against the _francs-tireurs_. There was an answer to
these methods, he said. 'Wherever a people allowed itself to be subdued
merely because its armies had become incapable of resistance it has been
held up to universal contempt as a nation of cowards,' he wrote, 'and
wherever a people did energetically carry out this irregular resistance,
the invaders very soon found it impossible to carry out the
old-fashioned code of blood and fire. The English in America, the French
under Napoleon in Spain, the Austrians in 1848 in Italy and Hungary,
were very soon compelled to treat popular resistance as perfectly
legitimate, from fear of reprisals on their own prisoners.' Engels tried
to convince the British that military intervention need only be on a
very small scale to succeed. 'If thirty thousand British soldiers landed
at Cherbourg or Brest and were attached to the army of the Loire, they
would give it a resolution unknown before.' He followed the heroic
resistance of the raw French armies with great sympathy, and with more
than sympathy.

Engels sent to Gambetta's secretary, through Lafargue, a memorandum
containing a carefully thought-out plan for raising the siege to Paris.
The original document has never been discovered and may have perished in
those agitated times. But Engel's executors, Bebel and Bernstein, found
the preliminary draft after his death and destroyed it, fearing the
possibility of its being used as evidence of 'treason' against the
German Social-Democrats. Bernstein refused to discuss the matter during
the whole of his lifetime, and that was the reason why that very
remarkable document has practically never been mentioned in print
before. However, hints in memoirs, taken in conjunction with Engels's
own statements in the articles he wrote on the war, enable one to form a
pretty accurate idea of what he proposed. His underlying idea must have
corresponded exactly with the plan that Bourbaki's army tried to carry
out in December, 1870. The coincidence may have been more than
accidental. Engels became so enthusiastic about his plans that he
actually wanted to go to France to offer his services to Gambetta. Marx,
however, was sceptical. 'Do not trust these bourgeois republicans,' he
said to him, according to Charles Longuet, 'whether you are responsible
or not, at the first hitch you will be shot as a spy.'

The General Council discussed the prospects of British intervention.
Short reports of meetings that appeared in a local London paper, the
_Eastern Post_, only give the barest outline of Marx's views. At the end
of September he seems to have regarded the prospects of British
intervention as very slight. Privateering, England's most powerful
weapon against the Prussians, had been forbidden by the Declaration of
Paris in 1856. But the situation changed on October 20, when Russia
denounced the Treaty of Paris as far as the Black Sea was concerned. The
transactions of the General Council on January 1, 1871, show how Marx
regarded the distribution of forces then. Engels said that if England
had declared war on Russia after October 20, Russia would have joined
forces with Prussia. Austria, Italy and Turkey would have adhered to the
side of England and France. Turkey would have been strong enough to
defend herself against Russia, and Europe would have expelled Prussia
from France. Such a European War would have meant the saving of France
and Europe and the downfall of absolutism. At a meeting on March 14 Marx
was still in favour of British intervention and a ruthless privateering
war. But by the middle of March the war was over. Four days later the
Commune was proclaimed in Paris.

On January 28 the Provisional Government had signed an armistice with
Prussia, in spite of Bismarck's monstrous demands. The population of
besieged Paris was on the point of starvation, all the French armies had
been defeated, and all prospect of the fortune of war changing seemed to
have vanished. Was there really no way of saving France from dishonour?
Had every possible thing been done? The Provisional Government had been
accused of indecision, cowardice and even treachery before--treachery
was the favourite accusation the Bakuninists and Jacobins directed at
'_cette vermine bourgeoise_'--and hundreds of thousands of Paris workers
and members of the petty-bourgeoisie now started wondering whether these
accusations, which they had scarcely listened to before, were not,
perhaps, justified after all. They started listening to them with an
attentive ear. Once more they turned over in their minds all their
dreadful experiences in those four-and-a-half months of siege, and found
much that was strange and difficult to understand, and much that had
never seemed very plausible to them, though they had accepted it at the
time as military necessity, not intelligible to them with their limited
view over but a sector of the front. But now they suddenly looked at
everything with different eyes. It is known to-day that after the Battle
of Sedan it was absolutely impossible for the French to have won the war
without external aid. The question whether a revolutionary war might or
might not have forced the Prussians to reduce their demands--Marx still
believed this possible as late as February--is scarcely one that can be
settled now. But one thing is known now. The Parisians were justified in
their suspicions. Paris was not defended as it might have been. The
military command was crippled not only by disbelief in the possibility
of success. There were large sections among the officers who were
bitterly opposed to putting arms into the hands of the 'rabble,'
particularly the workers, for fear that though they might fight against
the external enemy to-day, to-morrow they might turn their arms against
the enemy within. And the more violently the extremists agitated--the
possessing classes regarded as an extremist anyone who did not devotedly
accept everything that came from above--the more acute their fear of the
future became. The Prussians were their enemies to-day, but they might
be friends and allies in the revolution to-morrow. Towards the end of
the siege the most shameless of these people made no more secret of the
fact that they would prefer the Germans to march in to having a
revolution in Paris. Fear of the imminence of insurrection was not the
least of the factors that led the Provisional Government to conclude an
armistice. The Germans were perfectly well aware of this. Side by side
with the peace negotiations there took place negotiations concerning the
assistance that Bismarck might provide." He was prepared to release
immediately as many French prisoners as might be needed to refill the
ranks of the 'army of order,' and the Provisional Government pledged
itself to disarm the workers of Paris as soon as possible. Rumours of
this spread quickly and intensified suspicion. From this to conviction
of the Provisional Government's treachery to France was but a step. The
Bakuninists and their allies, the Jacobins, saw to it that the step was
taken.

This is not the place to write the history of the Paris Commune.
Spontaneous mass movements and the deliberate actions of organised
groups were so inextricably intermingled that in spite of all that has
been written about it and all the research that has been done, the
tangle has never been completely unravelled. But one thing is sure. The
theory that the March revolution in Paris was an entirely spontaneous
rising, entirely unorganised and unprepared, does not correspond to the
facts.

True, Bakunin, the arch-conspirator, took no part in it. His strength
was broken by the reverse he suffered at Lyons. While still there he
wrote to a friend in deep despair: 'Farewell liberty, farewell
Socialism, farewell justice for the people, and farewell the triumph of
humanity!' All his hopes of France had been in vain. 'I have no more
faith in the revolution in France,' he wrote at the end of October,
1870. 'The country is no longer revolutionary at all. The people has
become as doctrinaire and as bourgeois as the bourgeois. The social
revolution might have saved it, and the social revolution alone was
capable of saving it.' The people had shown itself incapable of
embracing its own salvation. 'Farewell all our dreams of imminent
emancipation. There will be a crushing and overwhelming reaction.'

Great as Bakunin's influence on his friends was, on this occasion they
did not follow him--his friends in Paris in particular. What bound them
to him was not a thought-out programme--to say nothing of a
comprehensive interpretation of society--but a will to action that
flinched at no obstacles, recognised no obstacles; they were united less
by community of conviction than by community of mood; and moods in
besieged Paris were necessarily different from what they were at Lyons.
Certainly Lyons had been a fiasco, and hard as it might be, they must be
better prepared next time. That was what they thought in Paris. They did
not rise but made their preparations first. They regarded the incident
at Lyons, which had been a terrible blow to Bakunin, as but a
preliminary skirmish. Their battle was still to come. They drew up their
ranks. Their leader was Varlin.

He was not a particularly gifted speaker, but he set no great store by
oratory. An able organiser, energetic and clear-sighted, he took up the
cause of his class with complete devotion and utterly without personal
ambition. General Cluseret called him 'the Christ of the working class,'
a phrase that sounded false only to those who did not know the details
of his life. The workers loved him as their best friend. His work on the
_Marseillaise_ had brought him into contact with the revolutionary
intelligentsia, particularly with the leading men among the Jacobins.
With some of them he was on terms of personal friendship and he was
exceptionally fitted to re-establish political liaison between them and
the Bakuninists, to whose ranks he himself belonged.

On September 4, 1870, Varlin was still in Brussels, to which he had been
compelled to flee to escape the attentions of the Bonapartist police. On
September 5 he made a speech to the workers of Paris. He very soon
resumed the prominent position he had previously occupied in the
Regional Council of the International, and there was more than enough
for him to do. The minutes of the Regional Council's meetings in
January, 1871, i.e. after a period of three months' intensive work, show
that a delegate complained that the sections had been broken up and
their members scattered--which gives an indication of the state the
Paris sections must have been in during the first few weeks of the
Republic. Another delegate was of the opinion that the International had
been wrecked by the events that followed the proclamation of the
Republic. In spite of exaggerations, due to reaction after perhaps
excessive hopes, in the main these statements were correct. The
International in Paris did not develop along the lines that Marx had
indicated for it. Difficult the task that confronted the leaders of the
Paris sections was--it was no light task, in the midst of the feverish
excitement of a besieged city, to attempt to persuade members of the
profoundly agitated and half-starving working-class masses to join an
organisation which was not concerned with their immediate and most
pressing interests. But exceptional as the obstacles were, some if not
all of them might have been overcome if Varlin and his comrades had not
set themselves aims which, though important, were less important than
the resuscitation of the sections. He who aimed at overthrowing the
Government of National Defence in the midst of war had no time to lose
with secondary things but had necessarily to go straight forward towards
his goal; and conferring with the Jacobins on preparations for an
insurrection was obviously more important than the troublesome effort of
trying to build up the still weak sections of the International.

The most important revolutionary organisation in Paris was the Central
Committee of the twenty _arrondissements_, which was intended from the
first not merely to be a popular check on the Government but to be a
definite substitute for it when the proper moment came. The Committee
was in the hands of the Bakuninists and their allies, the Jacobins, and
its paper was _Le Combat_, which was edited by Félix Pyat. There were
plenty of differences between the Bakuninists and the Jacobins, but they
faded into the background behind their common goal, the overthrow of the
Government and the setting up of the revolutionary Commune. Bakunin at
Lyons had associated himself with General Cluseret, though he had very
soon regretted the decision. But the Bakuninists in Paris remained
faithful to their alliance with the Jacobins almost to the last day of
the Commune. Little detailed information is extant concerning the
activities of the Central Committee. It had contacts with Lyons, and
General Cluseret went there on its behalf, though it did not identify
itself with Bakunin's attempted rising. But it did learn from it that
the time to strike had not yet come. A circular signed by Varlin and
Benoît Malon written at the end of 1870 stated: 'We are hurrying the
organisation of our Republican committees, the first elements of our
future revolutionary communes. We are not neglecting to take precautions
against the scattered but menacing forces of reaction. We are organising
our vigilance committees with this end in view and we are planting the
foundations of districts, which were so useful in '93. Our revolution
has not yet come, bu we shall make it, and, when we are rid of the
Prussians, we shall lay the foundations in a revolutionary fashion of
the egalitarian society of which we dream.'

The armistice got rid of the Prussian millstone for them, or so, at
least, they thought, and now the time for action had come. The first
task was to win over the National Guard, whose numbers had grown
enormously and whose composition had fundamentally altered during the
siege. Whereas previously it had been an instrument of the possessing
classes, scarcely yielding in loyalty to the Imperial Guard itself, its
ranks were now filled with workers and members of the petty-bourgeoisie.
After the armistice Paris had a garrison of twelve thousand regular
troops, but there were two hundred and fifty-six battalions of the
National Guard. If they came over to the side of revolution victory, at
any rate in Paris, was assured.

The National Guard had formed its own central committee. Within a short
time Varlin and his friends had succeeded in gaining influence upon the
battalions and the central committee. A meeting of the delegates of the
National Guard was held on March 10, 1871, and presided over by Pindy,
the Bakuninist who had attempted a rising on August 9 in the previous
year. One battalion after another declared itself for the revolution.
Varlin was full of confidence. P. L. Lavrov, the Russian philosopher and
revolutionary, who was living in Paris and knew Varlin, describes in a
letter a conversation he had with him a few days before March 18.
'Another week, Varlin said, 'and seventeen of the twenty
_arrondissements_ will be ours; the other three will not be for us, but
they will not do anything against us. Then we shall turn the prefecture
of police out of Paris, overthrow the Government and France will follow
us.'

Varlin had foreseen well. A Government attempt to take away the rifles
of the National Guard precipitated the outbreak of the revolution by a
few days. Nevertheless Varlin's calculation was correct. On March 18
fifteen of the twenty _arrondissements_ acknowledged the authority of
the Central Committee of the National Guard; two hundred and fifteen of
the two hundred and fifty-six battalions adhered to it. The Commune was
proclaimed in Paris.

'The International did not raise a finger to make the Commune,' Engels
later wrote to Sorge. Varlin was one of the two secretaries of the Paris
regional council; but his work for the Commune was not done as secretary
of the International. The minutes of the meetings of the regional
council during this period have been preserved, and the meagreness of
references to the movement that led to the Commune is astonishing. To
Lavrov, who was comparatively a slight acquaintance, Varlin made no
secret of what was going forward, while at the same time those delegates
of the Regional Council who were not his associates had no idea of what
the morrow might bring forth. On March 17, the day before the rising, a
delegate wrote in answer to Gambon, who wanted to know what the attitude
of the Regional Council was to the assembly at Versailles: 'In view of
the obscurity of the political situation, the Regional Council, like
you, is in perplexity. What is to be done? What do the people really
feel at heart?' All the same the organisers of the Commune were leading
Paris members of the International, though the General Council in London
did not 'raise a finger.' There is no reference in any documents or in
any letter of Marx or Engels, even in those of the most confidential
nature, that gives the slightest indication that the rising in Paris was
demanded, much less organised, by London.

But nevertheless, as Engels wrote in the same letter to Sorge, the
Commune was 'unquestionably the intellectual child of the
International'; not because Marx and Engels declared complete solidarity
with Varlin and his Bakuninist comrades or with the Blanquists or with
Pyat and his Jacobins--they knew practically nothing whatever about the
activities of these groups in February and the first half of March; not
because the Commune was 'staged' by the International, which it was not;
but because the Commune, with all the limitations of its time and place,
with all its illusions and all its mistakes, was the European
proletariat's first great battle against the bourgeoisie. Whether it was
a mistake at that juncture to resort to arms, whether the time was
misjudged, the leaders deluded, the means unsuitable, all such questions
receded before the fact that the proletariat in Paris was fighting for
its emancipation and the emancipation of the working class. The latter
was the battle-cry of the International. Marx's attitude to the Commune,
was determined by that fact.

Unfortunately only a few of Marx's utterances during those months have
survived, but all the indications available go to show that from the
first he regarded the Commune's prospects of success as very slight.
Oberwinder, an Austrian Socialist, who later became a police agent, says
in his memoirs that 'a few days after the outbreak of the March rising
in Paris Marx wrote to Vienna that the course it had taken precluded all
prospects of success.' The utmost that Marx hoped for was a compromise,
an honourable peace between Paris and Versailles.

Such an agreement, however, was only attainable if the Commune forced it
upon its enemy. But this it failed to do. 'If they succumb,' Marx wrote
to Kugelmann, 'only their kind-heartedness is to blame.' On April 6 he
wrote to Liebknecht: 'If the Parisians are beaten it looks as if it will
be by their own fault, but a fault really deriving from their excessive
decency.' The Central Committee and later the Commune, he said, gave the
mischievous wretch, Thiers, time to centralise the hostile forces (1) by
foolishly not wishing to start civil war, as though Thiers himself had
not started it by his attempted forcible disarming of Paris, and (2) by
wishing to avoid the appearance of usurping power, wasting valuable time
electing the Commune--its organisation, etc., wasted still more
time--instead of marching on Versailles immediately after the forces of
reaction had been suppressed in Paris. Marx believed the Government
would only consent to a compromise if the struggle against
Versailles--military, economic and moral--was conducted with extreme
vigour. Marx regarded as one of the Commune's greatest mistakes the fact
that it treated the Bank of France as a holy of holies off which it must
piously keep its hands. Had it taken possession of the Bank of France it
would have been able in case of need to threaten the country's whole
economic life in such a fashion as to force the Versailles Government
very quickly to give in. Once civil war had broken out it must be
continued according to the rules of war. But during the first few weeks
the Commune conducted it sluggishly, and worse, in the face of an
imminent attack it failed to consolidate the position of its weak but
important outposts outside Paris. Even the steps taken in the rest of
the country to weaken the enemy at the gates of Paris were only carried
out, if not altogether neglected. 'Alas! in the provinces the action
taken is only local and pacific,' Marx wrote on May 13 to Fränkel in
Paris. The action in the provinces which Marx considered so necessary
had, of course, nothing in common with some adventurous plans which were
being hatched in Switzerland. There the old insurrectionary leaders, P.
Becker and Rüstow, were planning an invasion of the South of France by
Swiss members of the International. They believed they would carry the
people with them and rescue Paris. In other words they planned a
repetition of Herwegh's expedition of 1848. The 'Legion of
Internationalists' would have benefited no one but the Commune's
enemies. Becker complained later that 'London' would have nothing to do
with the enterprise, and 'London' meant Marx. When the Commune was on
the point of collapse Marx advised the leaders with whom he was in
contact to transfer 'papers that would be compromising to the _canaille_
at Versailles' to a safe place. He believed that the threat of
publishing them might force them to moderation. All that Marx did, all
the advice that he gave, was directed to one end. 'With a small amount
of common sense,' he wrote ten years later to the Dutchman, Domela
Nieuwenhuis, 'the Commune could have attained all that was attainable at
that time, namely a compromise that would have been useful to the whole
mass of the people.'

Bakunin, however, hoped not for a compromise but for a heroic defeat. He
had as little faith as Marx in victory for the people of Paris. 'But
their deaths will not be in vain if they do their duty,' he wrote to his
friend Ozerov at the beginning of April. 'In perishing let them burn
down at least the half of Paris.' He could not contain himself with joy
at the thought of the day '_ou le diable s'éveillera_' and a bonfire
would be made of at least a part of the old world. At Locle, where he
was living at the time, he waited impatiently for 'heroic' deeds. One of
his followers describes how 'he foresaw the Commune's downfall, but what
he wanted above all else was that it should have a worthy end. He talked
about it in advance and said: 'My friends, is it not necessary that the
Tuileries be burned down?' And when the Tuileries were burned down, he
entered the group room with rapid strides--though he generally walked
very slowly--struck the table with his stick and cried: 'Well, my
friends, the Tuileries are in flames. I'll stand a punch all round!'
Bakunin had no contacts with Paris. What happened there happened without
him, without his advice or help.

Marx's opportunities of influencing the course of events in Paris were
not much better. The Paris Regional Council's messages to the General
Council were more than meagre. Towards the end of April Marx complained
that the General Council had not received a single letter from the Paris
section. True, he had had a special emissary, the shoemaker Auguste
Serraillier, in Paris since the end of March, but Serraillier could do
nothing in the face of the ranting of the Jacobins. Pyat and Vésinier
were particularly prominent in this direction, and the help which
Serraillier besought of the General Council did not avail him very much.
The otherwise excellent and enthusiastic Serraillier was not even
adequate as a reporter, and Marx learned practically nothing from him.
The difficulties of keeping up a regular correspondence between London
and blockaded Paris were, of course, very great. Marx managed
occasionally to smuggle information through to Paris by making use of a
German business man, and two or three letters even reached Varlin and
Fränkel, the leading Communards. But these only serve to demonstrate
what is also demonstrated by all the rest of the evidence; namely the
smallness of the extent to which Marx was able to influence the Commune.
But he could at least work for it.

From the very first day, to quote Marx's words in a letter to Kugelmann,
'the wolves and curs of the old society' descended in a pack upon the
Paris workers; they lied, cheated, slandered, no means were too filthy,
no sadistic fantasy too absurd to be employed. The Liberal Press yielded
in nothing to the openly reactionary Press, and Bismarck's newspapers
used the same phrases as did Thiers's papers and the great English
Press. And they were believed. Even those who otherwise looked with
favour upon the International wavered and wished to repudiate the Paris
'monsters.' Even some of the English members of the General Council
objected to the General Council's defence of the Commune, in spite of
the fact that in England there was still some possibility of
distinguishing the true from the false. Other countries were entirely
without information. The General Council was overwhelmed with inquiries
from everywhere. Marx informed Fränkel that he wrote several hundred
letters 'to all the corners of the earth where we have connections,' and
from time to time he managed to get an article into the Press. But that
was not sufficient by far. The General Council had to proclaim the
International's attitude to the Commune to the whole world.

Ten days after the rising Marx was instructed by the General Council to
write an address 'to the people of Paris.' But at a meeting on April 4
it was decided temporarily to postpone it, as on account of the blockade
it would not have reached those to whom it was addressed. It was also
intended to issue a manifesto to the workers of other countries, but
this too was postponed, and for two reasons. On April 25 Marx wrote to
Fränkel that the General Council was still waiting for news from day to
day, but the Paris sections remained silent; and the General Council
could wait no longer, for the English workers were waiting impatiently
for enlightenment. Marx was forced to toil through the English
newspapers--French newspapers only reached England very irregularly--to
find what he wanted. His notebooks during this period are full of
excerpts from the Press. Even the apparently least important details
were valuable to him; he kept them all and tried patiently to form a
picture of the great event that was happening from the chaotic jumble of
truth and half-truth and fiction that confronted him. On top of these
difficulties another one came to hamper him. At a time when every ounce
of his energy was demanded he became ill. During the first half of May
he was unable to attend the meetings of the General Council; he could
only report, through Engels, that he was working on the manifesto. On
May 30, when at last he was able to read his address, _The Civil War in
France_, to the members of the General Council, the Commune had already
been honourably defeated.

In that bloody week of May twenty thousand Communards had been killed on
the barricades, cut down in the streets by the bloodthirsty Versailles
troops, or massacred in the prison yards. Tens of thousands of prisoners
awaited death or banishment. This was not the moment for writing an
historical treatise, a cool and dispassionate analysis and critique of
the Commune. The manifesto was no lament for the dead, no funeral elegy,
but a rapturous hymn to the martyrs of the war of proletarian
emancipation, an aggressive defence of those who were slandered even in
death. Never had Marx, the passionate fighter, fought so passionately.
One recalls his scepticism at the beginning of the war. He had written
that after twenty years of the Bonapartist farce one was scarcely
justified in counting on revolutionary heroism. The Commune had taught
him he was wrong. He looked on, astonished and overwhelmed at 'the
elasticity, the historical initiative, the self-sacrificing spirit of
these Parisians.' In a letter to Kugelmann he wrote: 'After six months
of starvation and destruction, at the hands of internal treachery even
more than through the foreign enemy, they rose under the Prussian
bayonets as though the war between France and Germany had never existed
and the enemy were not outside the gates of Paris. History has no
comparable example of such greatness.' The address hailed Paris,
'working, thinking, fighting, bleeding Paris, almost forgetful, in its
incubation of a new society, of the cannibals at its gates--radiant in
the enthusiasm of its historic initiative.'

What had the Commune been accused of? Of acts of terrorism? The shooting
of General Thomas and Lecomte? The execution of the hostages? The death
of the two officers 'was a summary act of lynch justice performed
despite the instance of some delegate of the Central Committee. ... The
inveterate habits acquired by the soldiery under the training of the
enemies of the working class are, of course, not likely to change the
very moment these soldiers change sides.' But the hostages were shot.
Yes, that was true. 'When Thiers, as we have seen, from the very
beginning of the conflict, enforced the humane practice of shooting down
the Communal prisoners, the Commune, to protect their lives, was obliged
to resort to the Prussian practice of securing hostages. The lives of
the hostages had been forfeited over and over again by the continued
shooting of prisoners on the part of the Versailles. ... The real
murderer of Archbishop Darboy is Thiers.' A week after the massacre of
thousands of Communards criticism of the Terror was impossible. The
observations in Marx's notebooks show what he thought of the senseless
actions of the Jacobins. The address, without naming them, talked of
people who hampered the real action of the working classes, 'exactly as
men of that sort have hampered the full development of every previous
revolution. They are an unavoidable evil; with time they are shaken off;
but time was not allowed to the Commune.'

But although the Commune had no time to develop, although it only
remained 'a rough sketch of national organisation,' to those who refused
to allow their view to be obscured by secondary things, it revealed its
'true secret.' And that was that 'it was essentially a working-class
government, the produce of the struggle of the producing against the
appropriating class, the political form at last discovered under which
to work out the economical emancipation of Labour. The Commune,' it
continued, 'was the reabsorption of the State power by society as its
own living forces instead of as forces controlling and subduing it, by
the popular masses themselves, forming their own force instead of the
organised force of their suppression, the political form of their social
emancipation instead of the artificial force (appropriated by their
oppressors) of society wielded for their oppression by their enemies.
The form was simple like all great things.' The workers had no ideals to
realise, no ready-made Utopias to introduce by decree of the people, but
they had to set free the elements of a new society with which the old
collapsing bourgeois society was pregnant. 'They know that in order to
work out their own emancipation and along with it that higher form to
which present society is irresistibly tending by its own economical
agencies, they will have to pass through long struggles, through a
series of historic processes, transforming circumstances and men.' These
sentences recall, even at times in their very phrasing, those that Marx
addressed to Willich and his followers--the Jacobins of their
time--after the final collapse of the revolution of 1848 and 1849. He
warned his followers against illusions, but his warnings were not
shackles put upon them, hampering them, but gave power and strength and
the unshakable conviction of final victory. The address ended with these
stirring words: 'Working men's Paris, with its Commune, will be for ever
celebrated as the glorious harbinger of a new society. Its martyrs are
enshrined in the great heart of the working class. Its exterminators
history has already nailed to that external \[sic\] pillory from which
all the prayers of their priests will not avail to redeem them.' The
final words were like the sounding of the Last Trump. The Commune was
defeated, a battle was lost, but the working-Class struggle was
continued.

## Chapter 20: The Downfall of the International

Socialists in France in the sixties were either Proudhonists or
Blanquists, with here and there an isolated Saint-Simonist. But there
were no French Marxists. Not one in a hundred members of the
International in France knew that the leader of the General Council in
London was a German named Karl Marx. In the other Latin countries the
situation was the same. The name of Lassalle meant a great deal to the
German workers, even to those who were not his followers. They sang
songs about him and his picture hung upon the walls of their rooms. The
older generation in the Rhineland remembered Marx from 1848, but that
was nearly a quarter of a century ago, and in the meantime most people
had forgotten him. To only a minute proportion of the younger generation
did his name mean anything at all. Not till the middle of the sixties
did this situation slowly and gradually begin to alter, but even in 1870
his name was entirely unknown to the general public. In England Marx was
less known than anywhere else. Perhaps here and there some Urquhartite
or former Chartist could recollect his name, but that was all. Marx, who
had no wish for popularity, set no store on his name being associated
with the International, and his signature, when it appeared under any of
the pronouncements of the General Council, was always tucked in among
those of many others. He spoke at practically no public meetings, he
wrote no signed articles, and sufficed himself with the immediate task
before him, that of 'influencing the workers' movement behind the
scenes,' as he occasionally wrote to a friend.

The Commune made him 'the best calumniated and the most menaced man of
London,' as he described himself (the English phrase is his own) in a
letter he wrote Kugelmann in the middle of June, 1871. 'It really does
one good after being stuck in the mud for twenty years,' he added. He
was constantly pestered by 'newspaper fellows and others' who wanted to
see the 'monster' with their own eyes. For the man behind the
International, that gigantic conspiracy against the whole world, who
publicly declared his solidarity with its atrocious misdeeds in Paris,
must necessarily be a monster. The French Government was very well
informed about the International, and had had more to do with it than
any other government in Europe. It had staged great trials of its
members, set an army of spies after it and knew something of Marx's
overwhelming influence on the General Council. On the day after the
proclamation of the Commune it had an alleged letter of Marx's to the
French sections of the International printed in _Le Journal_, containing
the most violent criticism of their political acts. The letter reproved
them for intervening in politics instead of confining themselves to the
social tasks which should have been their only concern. This attempt to
represent Marx as the good spirit of the 'good' International while the
Communards were base renegades sadly missed its mark, for no one in
Paris took it seriously. So the Versailles Government tried something
else. On April 2 _Le Soir_ announced that it had been authoritatively
ascertained that Karl Marx, one of the most influential leaders of the
International, had been private secretary to Count Bismarck in 1857 and
had never severed his connection with his former patron. The Bonapartist
papers spread this revelation throughout France. So Marx was a hireling
of Prussia, and the real leader of the International was Bismarck, at
whose instigation the Commune had been set up. This story hardly tallied
with another, according to which the International was waging a war on
the whole of civilised humanity, which was the reason why the Versailles
Government requested and received Bismarck's help against the Commune.
As Marx wrote to P. Coenen at the end of March, word was spread to the
whole well-disposed Press of Europe 'to use falsehood as its greatest
weapon against the International. In the eyes of these honourable
champions of religion, order, the family and property there is nothing
in the least wrong in the sin of lying.'

It was necessary for the Versailles Government to disguise the warfare
it was waging upon the people of Paris. The International was
represented as the enemy of France and of the French. Its chief, Karl
Marx, was the enemy of the human race. A flick of the hand and
hey-presto! Bismarck's agent was converted into a kind of anti-Christ.
But this elevation of their political opponent, who after all really did
exist in human form, into the demoniacal sphere did not suit the German
philistines, who reduced him to more manageable proportions. Thus the
Berlin papers invented a fairy-tale of how Karl Marx, leader of the
International, enriched himself at the expense of the workers he misled.
This story was subsequently often repeated. Soon afterwards the
announcement of Marx's death in the Bonapartist _L'Avenir Libéral_
served for a few days to relieve the terrified population of their
nightmare. But their relief lasted a few days only. The hated chief of
the hated International lived on. His name re-echoed across Europe,
through which the spectre of Communism once more stalked abroad.

The Commune made a myth of the International. Aims were imputed to it
that it never pursued, resources were ascribed to it that it never
possessed, power was attributed to it of which it had never dared to
dream. In 1869 the report of the General Council to the Bâle Congress
had poured ridicule upon the alleged wealth with which the busy tongues
of the police and the wild imaginations of the possessing classes had
endowed it. 'Although these people are good Christians,' it stated, 'if
they had lived at the time of the origins of Christianity they would
have hurried to a Roman bank to forge an account for St. Paul.' The
panic of Europe's rulers elevated the International to the status of a
world power. 'The whole of Europe is encompassed by the widespread
freemasonry of this organisation,' said Jules Favre in a memorandum he
sent on June 6, 1871, to the representatives of France abroad, directing
them to urge the governments to which they were accredited to common
action against the common foe. England declined the invitation, but Lord
Bloomfield, the British ambassador at Vienna, illustrating British
concern, made diplomatic inquiries with regard to the extent of the
activities of the International in the Austrian Empire. In the course of
Bismarck's conversations with Count Beust, the Austrian Chancellor, at
Gastein, the subject of the struggle against the International was
discussed at length. Beust mentioned with satisfaction in his memorandum
that both Governments had spontaneously expressed a desire for defensive
measures and common action against it, after the 'sensational events
that characterised the fall of the Paris Commune, in view of its
expansion and the dangerous influence it is beginning to exert on the
working class and against the present foundations of the state and
society. The thought inevitably arises whether it might not be well to
counter this universal association of workers with a universal
association of employers, oppose the solidarity of possession to the
solidarity of non-possession, and set up a counter-International against
the International. The power of capital is still an assured and
well-buttressed factor in public life.'

The situation, however, was not nearly so threatening as some feared and
others hoped. If Bismarck behaved to some extent as though he were
preparing to bow before the storm of a Commune in Berlin, he was
actuated less by fear of an immediate outbreak than by his wish to
frighten the Liberal bourgeoisie from forming even the loosest of
alliances with the Socialist workers against the ruling Junkers. But in
spite of all exaggerations and over-estimates, whether entirely
fabricated or genuinely believed, one fact remained. Revolutionary
workers had remained in power in Paris for more than two months. Whether
the Commune had in every respect acted rightly might justifiably be
doubted, but the time for criticism was not yet. One fact dominated
everything else, and, in Marx's words, made the Commune 'a new point of
departure of world-historical significance.' Workers had seized the
power for the first time.

Hitherto the International had concerned itself primarily, though not
'of course exclusively, with economic matters such as the shortening of
the working day, the securing of higher wages, supporting strikes,
defence against strike-breaking, etc., and to the overwhelming majority
of its members it had appeared as an organisation aiming primarily at
the improvement of the economic position of the worker. But the
situation had undergone a fundamental alteration now. History itself had
placed the proletariat's struggle for the seizure of power upon the
order of the day. After the Commune it was impossible for the
International to continue to restrict itself to activities which were
political only by implication. It was necessary to convert its sections
from propagandist organisations and trade-union-like groups into
political parties. After the Communards had fought on the field of
battle it was impossible for the workers of the International to revert
to the narrow struggle for their immediate economic interests in the
factories and merely draw public attention to themselves from time to
time by issuing a political proclamation from the side-lines, which
might be read or not. They must enter the political field themselves,
welded into a firm organisation, with a party that openly proclaimed its
programme--the seizure of the state power by the working class as the
preliminary to its economic liberation. The conclusion the governments
of Europe drew from the Commune was that the International was a
political world-power, menacing to them all. The conclusion the
International drew from it was that it was the latter that, they must
become.

With the 'politicalising' of the International the function of the
General Council necessarily altered. In the past the General Council had
practically not interfered at all in the life of individual sections,
but now a thorough-going co-ordination of their activities, though
within definite limits, had become imperative. That did not involve the
assumption by the General Council of a kind of supreme command over the
various sections, dictating to them from London the exact details of
what they were to do. It did, however, involve a multiplication of the
tasks devolving upon it, and the adoption by it of an entirely different
position from that which it had adopted, and been compelled to adopt, in
the past. And therewith internal questions arose of which not even the
preliminaries had existed before.

Marx and Engels devoted the months that followed the collapse of the
Commune to the task of energetically reconstructing the International.
'The long-prepared blow,' to use Marx's phrase, was struck at a
conference held in London in the second half of September, 1874. In a
number of countries the sections of the International had not recovered
from the blows that had descended upon them as a result of the war and
its aftermath, and these countries were not represented at the
conference. That was the reason for the summoning of a conference
instead of a congress. On this occasion Marx presided over the
discussions of the International for the first time since 1865. He
drafted a resolution concerning the question of the political struggle,
which had become the central issue. The resolution observed that a
faulty translation of the statutes into French had resulted in a
mistaken conception of the International's position. The statutes
provisionally set up by the General Council in 1864 stated: 'The
economic emancipation of the workers is the great aim to which all
political action must be subordinated as a means.' (The statutes were
confirmed by the first Congress, held in 1866. In the French version of
the Congress report issued by the Geneva section the words 'as a means'
are missing. All the other versions have them. Neither in the surviving
minutes of the Congress nor in the contemporary Press is there any
mention of any alteration of the statutes. The fact that the last two
words are missing from the French version is undoubtedly an accident and
possibly merely a printer's error.) The conference reminded the members
of the International 'that in the militant state of the working class
its economic progress and political action are indissolubly united.'

Previous Congresses had only dealt incidentally with internal
International affairs. At this conference, indicating the altered
situation, they played the leading rôle. The conference adopted
resolutions concerning the organisation of sections in those countries
in which the International had been banned, as well as resolutions
concerning the split in Switzerland, the Bakuninist Alliance, and other
matters. The policy of the International Press was directed to be
conducted along certain definite lines--a thing quite unprecedented in
the past. All the conference's transactions were aimed at strengthening
the structure of the International for the approaching political fray.

Marx, and Engels like him, believed that as soon as the period of
reaction, which could not but be brief, was over the International was
destined for a rapid and immense advance. For this the London conference
was intended to prepare the way. But a year later the International was
dead.

Of the two countries which had been its main support, France's
withdrawal from the movement lasted not just for a few months or for a
year but for a full decade. The advance guard of the French proletariat
had fallen at the Paris barricades or was languishing in prison or
perishing in banishment in New Caledonia. The small groups that survived
were insignificant. Those that were not broken up by the police
dissolved gradually of their own accord.

In the other of the two countries which had been the International's
main support developments were unfavourable too. In England the workers'
movement had no need to be urged to take the political road. Even before
the reorganisation of the International it had taken that road itself,
and was now pursuing definite if narrowly circumscribed political aims;
but at the very moment when it should have been marshalling its ranks
for a general attack on the power of the possessing classes, it withdrew
from the struggle. So many of its demands had been granted that it
started feeling satisfied. Stormy meetings and uproarious demonstrations
had demanded universal suffrage, and universal suffrage had been
attained. England's economic strides relieved the situation to such an
extent that the Government no longer had cause to fear the consequences
of reform. It was able to repeal a whole series of legal enactments that
imposed oppressive restrictions on the trade unions, and this deprived
the trade union leaders of yet another impulse towards political action.
After the collapse of the Chartist movement only relatively small groups
had worked to revive an independent political movement among the
workers, and such a thing looked entirely superfluous now. Many
prominent trade unionists once more drew nearer to the Liberals, who
took advantage of the opportunity to make the trade union cause their
own; or at least acted as if they did, though a debt of gratitude was
certainly due to the energy of the Radical Liberals, men like Professor
Beesly and Frederic Harrison. In many constituencies Liberals supported
the candidature of trade union leaders. In these profoundly altered
circumstances not much attention was paid to the General Council's
admonition to create an independent political movement. Opposition to
the General Council, weak at first but definite nevertheless, reared its
head among the trade union leaders. Several other factors contributed to
this. Objection was taken to Marx's definitely pro-Irish attitude, and
the General Council's uncompromising partisanship of the Commune was
felt as inopportune and disturbing by Labour leaders who had started
associating themselves with the ruling system and, though the influence
of this may at first only have been slight, in some cases had become
members of royal commissions.

Opposition to the General Council first expressed itself in a demand for
the formation of a special regional council for England. This demand was
thoroughly justified according to the statutes. All the other countries
had their own councils, but up to 1871 the General Council served also
as regional council for England. This had come about quite
spontaneously. London was the headquarters of the International and no
one--least of all Marx--felt there was any necessity for a special
council for England apart from the General Council. He formulated his
reasons in a 'confidential communication' at the beginning of 1870.
Although the revolutionary initiative was probably destined to start
from France, he stated, England alone could provide the level for a
serious economic revolution. He added that the General Council being
placed in the happy position of having its hand on that great lever of
the proletarian revolution, what madness, they might almost say what a
crime it would be to let it fall into purely English hands! The English
had all the material necessary for the social revolution. What they
lacked was generalising spirit and revolutionary passion. The General
Council alone could supply the want and accelerate the genuine
revolutionary movement in that country and consequently everywhere. ...
If one made the General Council and the English regional council
distinct, what would be the immediate effects? Placed between the
General Council of the International and the General Council of the
Trades Unions, the regional council would have no authority and the
General Council would lose the handling of the great lever.

This argument was as valid in the autumn of 1871 as it had been in the
spring of 1870, but in the meantime the centrifugal forces in England
had grown so strong that it was necessary to make concessions if the
International as a whole were not to be jeopardised. The London
conference decided that a British regional council should be formed. The
immediate consequences appeared entirely favourable. The number of
British sections increased rapidly, and relations between the regional
council and the trades unions became closer and better. On the other
hand the General Council lost its influence in England, and within a
short time it became evident that there was a danger of the General
Council severing its connection with the International altogether.

Though there were some countries in which the strength of the
International had increased in 1870 and 1871, the result of the
withdrawal of France and the altered situation in England was that it
was extraordinarily weakened as a whole. For the advance of the German
workers' movement and the shifting of the centre of gravity across the
Rhine was an inadequate compensation.

These years saw the emergence in Germany of a workers' party which was
the archetype and pattern of Continental workers' parties up to the
Great War. It approximated closely to what Marx insisted should be the
form of the political movement of the proletariat, though it failed to
fulfil his demands in every way. Sharp, sometimes over-sharp criticism
appear in the letters Marx addressed to the leaders of the German party.
Nevertheless Marx on the whole approved of the path that the German
Socialists had struck out upon. He approved of their work of
organisation and propaganda, and of their attitude in Parliament and to
the other parties. The party visibly grew from year to year and it was
to be expected that within a short time it would play a leading rôle in
the International. It never did so, for two reasons. The first was the
severity of the German legal restrictions on the right of forming
associations; the Government were constantly on the watch for an
opportunity of suppressing the German workers' party, and its leaders
therefore assiduously avoided doing anything that might have given them
the opportunity of doing so under cover of legal forms. In the second
place the German party was completely absorbed with its work in Germany.
The German Socialists proclaimed their complete solidarity with the
International, but that was practically all. The German Party remained
practically without significance as far as the inner life of the
International was concerned.

Marx blamed Wilhelm Liebknecht for the 'lukewarmness' with which he
conducted the 'business of the International' in Germany. But it is
doubtful whether anyone could have done better than Liebknecht, who was
absolutely tireless and was completely devoted to Marx. After the London
conference Marx informed Liebknecht that the General Council wished him
to establish direct contact with the principal places in Germany. This
task Liebknecht had already begun. He actually succeeded in forming
sections in Berlin and other towns. These, however, led a very
precarious existence and were not of much use to the General Council. In
spite of all the sympathy with which the German Socialists regarded the
International, they were prevented from helping the General Council by
the fact that they embodied in a pronounced fashion the very thing
which, in the eyes of its opponents, made the General Council unworthy
of continuing to lead the International--namely 'authoritarian
Socialism.' For such acts of 'subservience to the State' as
participating in elections not only failed to impress but actually went
far to repel many members of the International in those countries in
which Bakunin's 'anti-authoritarian Socialism' was now triumphant.

The Commune had by no means corresponded to Bakunin's ideals. He had had
no great hopes of it himself, and his friends in Paris had had to
acquiesce in actions that conflicted sharply with what Bakunin demanded
of a revolution. This, however, did not prevent Bakunin from annexing
the Commune for his own 'anti-authoritarian Communism' and declaring
that Marx's ideas had been thoroughly confuted by it. The pitiful end of
the rising at Lyons had made him despair of the workers' capacity for
revolt, but the glow of the burning Tuileries once more illumined the
future in his eyes. So all strength and passion had not yet departed
from the world. The revolution was not postponed into the indefinite
future but was as imminent as it had been before Sedan. It was bound to
come, soon, quite soon, perhaps to-morrow. To confine oneself to petty,
philistine 'politicalising' as the German Social Democrats did was
equivalent in Bakunin's eyes to a renunciation of the revolution. He
resumed the work that he had interrupted for some months, and started
spinning his web of secret societies anew. The Commune had made good the
wrong done the world by the triumph of Prussia, and the workers' hatred
of the butchers of Versailles was a guarantee of ultimate victory. That
hatred must not be allowed to cool. Bakunin flung himself zealously into
his task.

The Latin countries, especially Spain and Italy, seemed to him to hold
out the most favourable prospects for the social revolution. Spain had
been the scene of a lively struggle between Republicans and
Constitutionalists since the expulsion of the Bourbons in 1868. The
Constitutionalists intended the vacant throne for some foreign prince.
The struggle broke out sporadically into civil war, and war to the death
was declared on the Catholic Church as the mainstay of reaction; and
everywhere the workers were stirring. Their new-won national unity
brought the people of Italy no peace. The struggle with the dispossessed
Pope kept the whole country on tenterhooks. Workers and peasants were as
near as ever to starvation in the new kingdom that had been united after
such suffering and sacrifice, and the intellectuals were deeply
disappointed by what they had so ardently longed for. Bakunin rested his
brightest hopes upon Italy and Spain. Sparks from the burning South
would leap across into France, Belgium and Latin Switzerland.

Of Germany Bakunin had no hopes whatever. His hopes of that country had
been weak before. Now, after the German victory, he felt compelled to
abandon them altogether. For were the German Socialists not manifestly
paying the state the same idolatry as the German bourgeoisie? Where were
they when they should have been attacking the brutal victor, Bismarck?
What had they done to save the Commune? That Bebel and Liebknecht had
voted against war credits, that their protest against the mad orgies of
unleashed militarism had caused them to be put on trial for high treason
was forgotten or did not count. In his struggle for domination of the
International Bakunin exploited with great skill the chauvinistic
anti-German under-currents that had been stimulated by, and had
survived, the war. Germany meant Bismarck, but it meant Liebknecht and
Bebel too. A German, citizen of a country inclined to despotism by its
very nature, was leader of the General Council, and he was the inventor
and advocate of 'state socialism,' a conception that corresponded
exactly with the German temperament. The International was in the hands
of a Pan-German, and the 'League of Latin and Slavonic Races' must
rescue it. In his private letters Bakunin placed no bridle upon his
hatred of the Germans, and fanned chauvinistic inclinations to the
utmost of his power, though in his public utterances he was noticeably
more cautious.

The situation in Europe was as favourable for Bakunin's renewed struggle
for the control of the International as it was unfavourable for his
conception of the social revolution. Everything conspired to help him;
the abstention of the Germans, the chauvinism of the Latin countries,
the backwardness of Italy and Spain, where revolutionary romanticism
flourished exuberantly because of the weakness of the young proletariat
and the strength of the old Carbonari traditions.

Bakunin quickly realised the most effective way of conducting his attack
on the General Council. The most heterogeneous elements could be united
in an attack on Marx if they could be given a single aim, namely the
revocation of the decisions of the London conference. The watchword of
Bakunin's campaign was: Down with the General Council, who aim at
forcing the sections of the International into the political struggle
and usurping power over them. Down with the 'dictatorship' of the
General Council!

The attack opened in Latin Switzerland, Bakunin's surest stronghold now
as in the past. In 1870 there had been a split between the
'anti-authoritarians' and the groups that adhered to the General
Council. The 'anti-authoritarians' had created their own regional
council and become a kind of international centre of the Bakuninist
movement. As soon as the decisions of the London conference were known
this regional council summoned a regional congress to protest against
them, and more particularly against 'the General Council's dictatorial
attitude towards the sections.' The Congress met at Sonvilliers on
November 12, 1871, and openly declared war on the General Council. It
addressed a circular to all the sections of the International, skated
cleverly over the fact that the Geneva Council had assigned the working
class the duty of the conquest of political power and expanded itself at
length on the latter's alleged attempt to dominate the sections. The
circular stated that it was a fact, proved by experience a thousand
times, that authority invariably corrupted those who exercised it. 'The
General Council could not escape from that inevitable law.' The General
Council wanted the principle of authority introduced into the
International. The resolutions carried by the London conference, which
had been irregularly and unconstitutionally summoned, 'are a grave
infringement of the General Statutes and tend to make of the
International, a free federation of autonomous sections, a hierarchical
and authoritarian organisation of disciplined sections, placed entirely
under the control of a General Council which may at its pleasure refuse
them membership or even suspend their activities.' Finally the circular
demanded the immediate summoning of a general Congress.

Bakunin's posing as the advocate of complete sectional autonomy was a
clever move. The difficulties and inevitable friction involved by the
reorganisation of the International and the transfer of the chief
emphasis to the political struggle created sympathy for Bakunin's
demands among groups that otherwise had not the least use for his
social-revolutionary programme. Bakunin's calculations now and
subsequently proved themselves to be entirely correct.

A private circumstance compelled Bakunin to open his attack on the
General Council soon after the London conference, when his preparations
were not so advanced as they ought to have been. He knew that the
Nechaiev affair had been raised at the conference. The conference had
authorised the General Council to 'publish immediately a formal
declaration indicating that the International Working Men's Association
had nothing whatever to do with the so-called conspiracy of Nechaiev,
who had treacherously usurped and exploited its name.' In addition Utin,
a Russian _émigré_ living in Switzerland, was authorised to prepare a
summarised report of the Nechaiev trial from the Russian Press and
publish it in the Geneva paper _L'Egalité_.

The Nechaiev affair plays such an important rôle in the history of the
International, or rather in the history of its decline, that it deserves
to be recounted at some length.

Nechaiev was the son of a servant in a small Russian provincial town. He
put to such good use the few free hours that his work as a messenger in
the office of a factory left him that he succeeded in passing his
examinations as an elementary school teacher. He starved and scraped
until he had saved enough money to go to St. Petersburg, where he had
himself entered as an external student at the university. In his first
winter term, in 1868, he entered the student movement, in which his
energy and the radical nature of his views soon earned him prominence.
But that was not enough for him. He wanted to be foremost, and in order
to enhance his reputation as a revolutionary he started inventing
stories of his adventurous past: first he said he had been a prisoner in
the Peter and Paul Fortress. Then he added an account of his daring
escape. The majority of his listeners accepted all this unquestioningly,
and were filled with indignation at the stories he told of his
treatment by the prison warders, and a students' meeting was actually
called and a delegation actually approached the university authorities.
Nevertheless there were some who doubted. Some of the details of
Nechaiev's prison experiences sounded improbable to the more experienced
among his colleagues, and the officials declared that Nechaiev had never
been under arrest.

Before this fact had been established, however, Nechaiev illegally went
abroad to make contact with the Russian _émigré_ leaders. He reached
Geneva in March, 1869, and made the acquaintance of Herzen and Ogarev,
the patriarchs of the 'emigration,' as well as of the representatives of
the younger generation of refugees. He made an extraordinary impression
upon them all. Herzen, who had grown old, tired and sceptical, said that
Nechaiev went to one's head like absinthe. But the young student was not
satisfied with praise and honour. He added details of his own. He said
that Russia was on the eve of a tremendous revolutionary outbreak, which
was being prepared by a widespread secret society. Of this society he
was a delegate. And he repeated the story of his imprisonment and
flight. In Geneva also there were a few people who refused to be taken
in so easily. A number of _émigrés_ had been prisoners in the Peter and
Paul Fortress themselves and knew how impossible it was to escape, and
letters came from St. Petersburg from people who ought to have known,
saying that the secret society did not exist, or at any rate gave not
the slightest sign of its existence. But those who regarded Nechaiev
with suspicion belonged to groups who were hostile to Bakunin. It was
these who not long afterwards formed a 'Russian section' of the
International and made Marx their representative on the General Council.
This, however, cannot have been the deciding factor in causing Bakunin
to ignore their warnings. He knew the Peter and Paul Fortress himself
and knew--could not possibly have helped knowing--that Nechaiev was a
liar. But what did it matter? Lies could be useful in revolutionising
the slothful, and after all this Nechaiev was a marvellous fellow.
Bakunin wrote a regular panegyric about him in a letter to Guillaume,
describing him as 'one of those young fanatics who hesitate at nothing
and fear nothing and recognise as a principle that many are bound to
perish at the hands of the Government but that one must not rest an
instant until the people has risen. They are admirable, these young
fanatics--believers without God and heroes without phrases! Bakunin and
Nechaiev became fast friends.

Bakunin did not apparently formally admit Nechaiev to his secret
society. The idea of his association with Nechaiev being surveyed by its
otherwise fully initiated members was an uncomfortable one to him. The
Bakunin-Nechaiev society was a quite intimate super-secret society, such
as the old conspirator loved. Its object was the revolutionising of
Russia.

In the spring and summer of 1869 Bakunin wrote as many as ten pamphlets
and proclamations, and Nechaiev had them printed. Among them was the
subsequently famous _Revolutionary Catechism_, which was intended to be
a reply to the question of what were the best ways and means of
hastening the outbreak of the revolution in Russia. The answer was to be
found by the consistent application of two principles. The first was
'the end justifies the means' and the second was 'the worse, the
better.' Everything--and by that Bakunin meant everything without any
exception whatever--that promoted the revolution was permissible and
everything that hindered it was a crime. The revolutionary must
concentrate on one aim, i.e. destruction. 'There is only one science for
the revolutionary, the science of destruction. Day and night he must
have but one thing before his eyes--destruction.' That was Bakunin's own
summary of the duties of a revolutionary. Within the revolutionary
organisation the strictest centralisation and the most rigorous
discipline must prevail, and the members must be completely subordinate
to their leaders. The object of this organisation was 'to use all the
means in its power to intensify and spread suffering and evil, which
must end by driving the people to revolt.' The _Catechism_ even defended
terrorism, which, however, it did not recommend against the worst
tyrants, because the longer such tyrants were allowed to rage the better
it would be for the revolutionising of the people.

Towards the end of the summer of 1869 Nechaiev travelled illegally to
Russia, taking with him a mandate from the 'Central Committee of the
European Revolutionary Alliance,' written and signed by Bakunin,
recommending him as a reliable delegate of that organisation. Bakunin
had actually had a special stamp prepared, with the words: 'Office of
the foreign agents of the Russian revolutionary society Narodnaia
Rasprava.'

Nechaiev remained in Russia for more than three months. He succeeded in
forming an organisation based on, or alleged to be based on, the
_Revolutionary Catechism_. Revolutionary-minded young men were not so
very difficult to find, and his letter of recommendation, signed by
Bakunin, whose name was universally honoured, earned him the greatest
respect. He chose Moscow as his centre and it was not long before he had
gathered a group about him. Had he assigned it practical aims and
objects, its fate would have been the usual fate of such organisations
in Russia. It would eventually have been discovered and dissolved by the
police, but two or three new groups would have arisen to take its place.
To Nechaiev, however, that would have appeared an idle pastime. He
wished his followers to believe that there was a secret revolutionary
committee which they must unconditionally obey, and, true to the
injunctions of the _Catechism_, he used every means that tended to serve
his aim. Once, for instance, he persuaded an officer he knew to pose as
a supervisory party official sent from the secret headquarters on
special duty. That ruse might pass at a pinch. But Nechaiev did not
shrink from even cruder mystifications, so crude that he ended by
perplexing some of his own followers. Finally a student named Ivanov
announced to other members of the group that he no longer believed in
the existence of any committee, that Nechaiev was lying to them and that
he wished to have nothing more to do with him. Nechaiev decided that the
'criminal' must die. He succeeded in persuading the rest of his
followers that Ivanov was a traitor and that only his death could save
them. On November 29, 1869, they lured Ivanov to a dark corner of a park
and murdered him. Ivanov defended himself desperately and bit Nechaiev's
hand to the bone as he was strangling him with a shawl. Nechaiev bore
the scar for the rest of his life. The murderers were soon discovered
and arrested, and only Nechaiev succeeded in escaping abroad.

Detailed reports of Ivanov's murder appeared in the papers, and the
crime was remembered for many years. It armed the Russian
revolutionaries against Nechaiev-like methods.

Bakunin knew the whole story in detail, but it only enhanced Nechaiev's
reputation in his eyes. On learning that Nechaiev had arrived in
Geneva--he was living at Locarno at the time--he leapt so high with joy
that he nearly broke his old skull against the ceiling, as he wrote to
Ogarev. He invited Nechaiev to Locarno, looked after him and was his
friend as before. 'This is the kind of organisation of which I have
dreamed and of which I go on dreaming,' he wrote to his friend Richard.
'It is the kind of organisation I wanted to see among you.' At this time
Bakunin had already started his struggle against the General Council of
the International on the ground of its 'dictatorial arrogance.'

To the same period there belongs the incident which, apart from the
other reasons, led directly to Bakunin's expulsion from the
International. His financial position had always been precarious, but in
the autumn of 1869 he was in particularly desperate straits. Through
some Russian students who were followers of his he was put into touch
with a publisher who offered him 1,200 roubles--far more than the author
himself ever got for it--for translating Marx's _Capital_. Bakunin
accepted the offer gladly and received an advance of 300 roubles. He did
not show himself to be in any hurry to complete the task, however, and
three months later he had only done sufficient to fill thirty-two
printed pages. He readily let himself be convinced by Nechaiev that he
had more important matters to fill his time and that he belonged to the
revolution and must live for the revolution only. So he laid the work
aside and gave Nechaiev full authority to come to an arrangement with
the publisher. Nechaiev set about this task in an inimitable manner. It
was impossible for Bakunin to communicate directly with the publisher
himself on account of the police, and a student named Liubavin had
undertaken to do so on his behalf. The contract had been formally made
out in Liubavin's name and in the publisher's books Liubavin was
nominally liable for the 300 roubles' advance. One day Liubavin received
a letter bearing the stamp of Nechaiev's organisation. Its most
remarkable passages are quoted below:

>'DEAR SIR,--On behalf of the bureau I have the honour to write to you
as follows. We have received from the committee in Russia a letter which
refers among other things to you. It states: "It has come to the
knowledge of the committee that a few young gentlemen, dilettanti
Liberals, living abroad, are beginning to exploit the knowledge and
energy of certain people known to us, taking advantage of their
hard-pressed financial straits. Valuable personalities, forced by these
dilettante exploiters to work for a day-labourer's hire, are thereby
deprived of the possibility of working for the liberation of mankind.
Thus a certain Liubavin has given the celebrated Bakunin the task of
translating a book by Marx, and, exploiting his financial distress just
like a real exploiting bourgeois, has given him an advance and now
insists on the work being completed. Bakunin, delivered in this manner
to the mercy of young Liubavin, who is so concerned about the
enlightenment of Russia, but only by the work of others, is prevented
from being able to work for the supremely important cause of the Russian
people, for which he is indispensable. How the behaviour of Liubavin and
others like him conflicts with the cause of the freedom of the people
and how contemptible, bourgeois and immoral their behaviour is compared
with that of those they employ and how little it differs from the
practices of the police must be clear to every decent person.
>
>"'The committee entrusts the foreign bureau to inform Liubavin:
>
>"'(1) That if he and parasites like him are of the opinion that the
translation of _Capital_ is so important to the Russian people at the
present time they should pay for it out of their own pocket instead of
studying chemistry and preparing themselves for fat professorships in
the pay of the state. ...
>
>'"(2) It must immediately inform Bakunin that in accordance with the
decision of the Russian revolutionary committee he is exempt from any
moral duty to continue with the work of translation. ..."
>
>'Convinced that you understand, we request you, dear sir, not to place
us in the unpleasant position of being compelled to resort to less
civilised measures. ...
>
>'AMSKIY,  
>'Secretary to the Bureau.'

Bakunin subsequently stoutly denied that he knew anything of the
contents of this letter, and there is every reason to believe him. But
when Liubavin sent him a letter indignantly protesting against these
threats, Bakunin, instead of talking to Nechaiev about it, for he must
have guessed who was behind it all, took occasion to be offended at
Liubavin's intelligibly not very courteous tone. He wrote to Liubavin
that he proposed to sever relations with him, that he would not continue
the translation and would repay the advance. He never did repay the
advance and must have known that he would never be able to do so.

In Nechaiev's opinion this species of blackmail was not only permissible
to a revolutionary but was actually demanded of him. At every
opportunity he threatened denunciation or the use of force, and stole
his opponents' letters in order to be able to compromise them with the
police. He shrank at nothing. He caused revolutionary appeals to be sent
to one of his greatest enemies, a student named Negrescul, who was being
kept under police observation, and, as Nechaiev expected, the material
fell into police hands and Negrescul was arrested. He succumbed to
tuberculosis in prison and died a few months after his release.

Bakunin knew what Nechaiev was capable of, as many others did by this
time, but he remained loyal to him as before. Not till Nechaiev actually
started threatening people whom Bakunin held dear--Herzen's daughter for
instance--did Bakunin raise his voice against him. The final impulse
that caused Bakunin to break with him seems to have been provided by
Nechaiev's plan to form a gang for the specific purpose of robbing
wealthy tourists in Switzerland. He even tried to force Ogarev's stepson
to join him, whereupon Bakunin protested. At that Nechaiev appropriated
a strongbox of Bakunin's containing correspondence, secret papers, and
the statutes of his revolutionary organisations--including the original
manuscript of the _Catechism_--and threatened Bakunin with publication
should he take any steps against him.

That was the end of Bakunin's friendship with Nechaiev. Bakunin was
horrified at the practical conclusions that Nechaiev drew from
principles that he himself had helped him to formulate. The story that
Nechaiev told some of his acquaintances, namely, that when he first came
abroad he was an 'unspoiled, good and honourable youth' and that it was
Bakunin who corrupted him, was, of course, not true. Nechaiev had
started his mystifications in Russia before his first journey abroad.
But Bakunin not only made no attempt to counteract Nechaiev's
inclinations, he actually encouraged them by giving them a kind of
theoretical foundation. Their quarrel is not sufficient to obliterate
the fact that Nechaiev was very strongly influenced by Bakunin and that
it was Bakunin himself who evolved the theory by which all things were
permitted.

Not much more needs be said about Nechaiev's further career. He lived
two more years abroad, first in London, then in Paris and finally in
Switzerland. He published more revolutionary literature and threatened
and blackmailed as before. Bakunin refused to have anything more to do
with him and was so embittered against him that he would have liked to
denounce him as a 'homicidal maniac, a dangerous and criminal lunatic,
whom it was necessary to avoid.' Nechaiev was finally betrayed by a
Polish _émigré_ in the service of the police. He was arrested in Zurich
in the middle of August, 1872, and repatriated to Russia as a common
criminal. On January 8, 1873, he was condemned to twenty years' hard
labour in the mines of Siberia. He was not sent to Siberia, however, but
confined in the Peter and Paul Fortress. Such was his power over people
that he actually succeeded in winning over the soldiers who kept guard
over him, and they helped to put him in touch with revolutionaries
outside. He devised a plan for seizing the fortress during a visit of
the Tsar's, but he was betrayed by one of his fellow-prisoners and
transferred to severe solitary confinement. He died of scurvy on
November 21, 1882.

Marx had been a close student of Russian affairs since the fifties. At
first he paid attention chiefly to Russian foreign policy, but later he
devoted himself with ever-increasing interest to the social movement in
Russia itself. At the end of the sixties he learned Russian in order to
be able to study the sources in the original. The activities of Bakunin
and Nechaiev attracted his attention early. More detailed information
was first supplied him by Hermann Lopatin, a respected Russian
revolutionary, who settled in London in the summer of 1870 and
established close terms of friendship with Marx. Lopatin had previously
lived in St. Petersburg, where he had had the opportunity of observing
Nechaiev's first steps at close quarters. After his first conversations
with Lopatin Marx wrote to Engels: 'He told me that the whole Nechaiev
yarn is a mass of lies. Nechaiev has never been in a Russian prison and
the Russian Government has never tried to have him murdered; and so on
and so forth.' Lopatin was the first to tell Marx of the murder of
Ivanov. From the autumn of 1871 onwards another Russian _émigré_, Utin,
kept him informed of everything, as we know to-day in all essentials
correctly.

If the International were to survive it was necessary to purge it of
Bakunin and Bakuninism. It was no longer an abstract question of
'anarchy or authority.' The International must not be a screen for
activities _à la_ Nechaiev. Even if Bakunin himself were incapable of
drawing the practical consequences of his own teaching, as Nechaiev had
done, the Nechaiev affair had demonstrated that people might always be
found who would take his theories seriously. One crime like Nechaiev's
carried out in Europe in the name of the International would suffice to
deal the workers' cause a reeling blow. The struggle against Bakunin had
become a matter of life and death for the International.

The struggle had to be fought under very unfavourable circumstances. The
French sections had been swept away by the White terror after the
Commune. Those who had been able to flee were refugees in Switzerland,
England or France. An immense amount of work devolved on the refugee
committee of the General Council, and Marx, on whom the main burden
fell, was occupied for months raising money for them, securing them
work, giving them advice. He made the personal acquaintance of
practically every refugee, and a number of them became his friends. The
most important of the refugee Communards were admitted to the General
Council, including Vaillant, Ranvier and other Blanquists. These were
Socialists who, in whatever else they differed from Marx, agreed with
him on the most important point of all, i.e. the necessity of the
International taking its place in the political struggle. Among the
multitude of refugees there were, as Engels wrote to Liebknecht, 'of
course the usual proportion of scum, with Vermersch, editor of _Pére
Duchêne_ (a paper published during the Commune) as the worst of the
lot.' The Jacobins formed a 'Section Française de 1871' and relapsed
into their favourite rôle of theatrical and bloodthirsty revolutionism.
The General Council were far too spineless for them, and they soon
started attacking it vigorously in _Qui Vive_, a paper edited by
Vermersch.

In their eyes the General Council was Marx. Marx, they maintained, was
living in luxury at the expense of the workers. He embezzled the
workers' money, and had made the International a 'German aristocratic'
domain. He was a Pan-German and a crafty servant of his master,
Bismarck. All this had been said before, but by the reactionary Press.
But now it was repeated and decked out with fondly invented details by
the ultra-revolutionaries, the enemies of 'authority.' Their particular
complaint was that the International was in German control and they
played as usual on all the chauvinistic instincts, old and new. There
was not a semblance of justification for their complaint. There were
three times as many English as Germans on the General Council, and the
Germans were outnumbered even by the French. The number of members
represented by the French was certainly not very large, and the
Blanquists could certainly not be reproached with harbouring affection
for the new German Empire.

The French _exaltés_ cost the General Council a great deal of time and a
great deal of trouble, and at the same time it was compelled to occupy
itself with a number of disagreeable internal disputes. Marx had secured
the election of his old friend Eccarius as general secretary. The
International was poor, and all it could pay its general secretary was
fifteen shillings a week, and even this he did not receive regularly. So
he added to his income by journalistic work, reporting International
affairs for _The Times_ and other newspapers. Occasionally he mentioned
things that were not intended for publication, and this repeatedly led
to heated arguments at General Council meetings, and sometimes Marx had
difficulty in protecting Eccarius from the general indignation. Then
came the London conference. It was decided that its sessions should be
private and that no communications should be made to the Press,
including the Party Press, and everyone but Eccarius abided by this
decision. A storm of indignation arose, and Eccarius was violently
attacked. This time even Marx could not help him, and ever afterwards
Eccarius felt that Marx had let him down. He had long been closely
associated with the English trade union leaders, and as soon as they
started opposing Marx he sided with them and did a great deal to
intensify personal animosities on the General Council. Occasionally its
meetings were very lively indeed. 'The meetings in High Holborn, where
the General Council met at that time,' Lessner writes in his memoirs,
'were the most tempestuous and exhausting that can be imagined. It was
no light task to stand up to the babel of tongues and the profound
differences of temperament and of ideas. Those who criticised Marx for
his intolerance ought to have seen the skill with which he got to the
heart of people's ideas and demonstrated the fallacies of their
deductions and conclusions.' The refugee Communards brought more than
enough temperament with them. Of the English members of the General
Council Odger and Lucraft had resigned, having taken advantage of the
International's pro-Communard manifesto to dissociate themselves from an
organisation in which they, as cautious and far-sighted individuals and
members of Royal Commissions and friends of some of the very best
people, had long since begun to experience a sensation of discomfort.
(Odger had a magnificent career, and ended by being knighted and being
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.) Those Englishmen who remained on the
General Council coquetted with the Liberals, split on purely personal
grounds into two and sometimes into three factions and did nothing to
lessen the general friction. Engels definitely settled in London in the
middle of September and Marx proposed his election to the General
Council, but even his admission to that body, valuable as it was, only
had negative consequences. To the Londoners Marx was an old friend. They
knew him, his wife and his children, and they knew how unspeakably hard
his life had been during all these years, and even those who did not
like him respected him for his selfless work for the common cause. But
Engels was a rich manufacturer from Manchester, a distinguished-looking
gentleman, with excellent manners, and somewhat cool and distant.
Certainly he was very clever and educated and a good Socialist, and many
years ago he had written a book; that they either knew or heard for the
first time now; but in their eyes he was first of all a stranger. And he
was not always a very nice stranger either. In later years Engels
himself told Bernstein that Marx generally played the rôle of
peace-maker and conciliator, but when he, Engels, was in the chair the
General Council meetings generally ended with a colossal row. In the
editorial chair of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ it had been the same.
The downfall of the International is not attributable to the friction on
the General Council, but efficiency was certainly not promoted by it.

Just at this moment of internal tension it was called upon to withstand
a serious test. The vigorous attack on the General Council contained in
the circular issued by the Bakuninist Congress at Sonvilliers attracted
a great deal of attention. It was printed and reprinted and long
extracts appeared in the bourgeois Press. ('The International monster is
devouring itself.') In France, where everything in any way connected
with the International was wildly persecuted, it was posted up on the
houses. The General Council replied with another circular, 'The Alleged
Split in the International,' revealing the secret history of the Bakunin
Alliance for the first time. This made the Bakuninists very angry
indeed. They said a General Congress must be summoned at once.
Certainly, the General Council replied, things could not continue like
this. Invitations were sent out on July 10, 1872, for a Congress to take
place on September 2 at the Hague. Marx wrote to Sorge that the life or
death of the International was at stake.

The Bakuninist sections in the Latin countries promptly protested at the
choice of the Hague. The Fédération Jurassienne wrote that the Congress
ought not to meet in a _milieu germanique_ and suggested Switzerland
instead. From their own point of view they were quite right. The
sections' limited funds meant that to a certain extent the composition
of the Congress depended on where it took place, for the cost of
travelling necessarily limited the number of delegates who could travel
from a great distance. It was therefore intelligible that the Swiss were
in favour of Switzerland. They expected their argument that Bakunin
would not be able to travel to Holland either through France or through
Germany, because in both countries he would be liable to arrest, to
carry particular weight. But Marx was in a similar position. The same
reasons would make it impossible for him, as well as other members of
the General Council, to travel to Switzerland. But antagonism had by
this time become far too profound for material considerations to carry
any weight. The Bakuninists considered the advisability of being
represented at the Congress at all. On August 4 the Italians at Rimini
decided not to be represented at the Hague, and proposed the summoning
of an opposition Congress at Neuchâtel, also on September 2. The Swiss
Bakuninists did not go so far as that. They decided, with Bakunin's
consent, to be represented at the Hague. Even the moderate spirits among
them could no longer conceal from themselves the fact that a split was
inevitable. In the last resort the differences between Marx and Bakunin
boiled down to the differences between the historical tasks necessarily
confronting the proletariat in countries in which capitalism was fully
developed and the illusions to which the semi- and
demi-semi-proletarians living in countries in which capitalist
development was only just beginning were equally necessarily subject.
Even the most intelligent of the Bakuninists formed a most distorted
picture of the situation. Malon, for instance, had for a long time
resisted the tendencies making for a split. Now he reconciled himself to
it. 'Now that I am calm and alone, I see that the split was inevitable,'
he wrote to a friend at the end of August. In his opinion it was
inevitable because of the temperamental differences between the Latin
and the German races. One day this, like everything else that divided
the nations, would disappear 'into the infinite of the human race.' But
now these differences still existed, and the recent war had only
intensified them. It would be in vain to go on trying to unite the
incompatible. Everyone who attended it knew that the Hague Congress
would be the last of the united International.

When it met at the Hague on September 2, the town was swarming with
journalists and secret agents. No assembly of the International had
roused the world's attention like this one. It was the first after the
Commune--a 'declaration of war of chaos on order.' An attempt had been
made to persuade the Dutch Government to forbid the Congress. Jules
Simon had travelled from Paris to the Hague to present his Government's
request to this effect, but he had as little success as others who
wanted the same. Next it had been announced that the Congress would
resolve on acts of terrorism, and that it was a rendezvous of regicides.
But the Dutch Government refused to be intimidated. Next an attempt had
been made to incite the population against the Congress. The _Haager
Dagblaad_, for instance, warned the citizens of the Hague not to allow
their wives and daughters to go out alone during the sessions of the
Congress, and called on all the jewellers to draw their shutters. The
police, however, took no action and seemed actually to regard the
Congress with benevolence. A Berlin secret police agent reluctantly
reported that up to September 5 all the meetings were strictly private,
and 'not only does the Dutch police keep no watch whatever on them but
protects the meeting-place in the Lombardstrasse so scrupulously that
the public is not even allowed a look into the ground-floor where the
meetings are held, or even so much as make an attempt to overhear
through the open window a single word of what is taking place within.'
As long as the sessions remained secret there was nothing for the
journalists to do but wander round the meeting hall and describe their
'impressions.' A few 'faked' interviews with Marx. Others described the
delegates, and Marx in particular. The correspondent of the
_Indépendence Belge_ wrote that the impression that Marx made on him was
that of a 'gentleman farmer,' which was friendly at any rate.

The Congress was not very numerously attended. No more than sixty-five
delegates were present. Congresses of the International had been better
attended in the past, and among the delegates were many who were not
known from before. But it was the first International Congress attended
by Marx and Engels. The first and private sessions were devoted to
examination of the delegates' mandates, and there was bitter strife
about each one, for each one was important. At previous Congresses this
part of the proceedings had been regarded as but a superfluous
formality. It soon became clear that there was a majority for Marx, with
forty votes to twenty-five. There were two opposing factions, each
united as far as internal questions affecting the International were
concerned, but far from united politically. The opposition was held
together by antagonism to Marx. It consisted of all the Belgian, all the
Dutch, all the Jurassian and nearly all the English and Spanish
delegates. The majority was more united, consisting of the Germans, the
German-Swiss, the Hungarians, the Bohemians, the German _émigrés_ from
America, but included many French _émigrés_ and delegates of illegal
sections in France. The Blanquists were particularly well represented
among the French _émigrés_.

This grouping by no means bore out the theory of the contrast between
the state-worshipping Germanic races who were loyal to Marx and the
freedom-loving, anti-authoritarian Latins. Guillaume, leader of the
Jurassian section, was extremely astonished when Eccarius told him '_que
le torchon brûlait au Conseil Général_.' He had believed that the
English delegates, who were trade unionists, were devoted followers of
Marx. He now found out that they were '_en guerre ouverte avec ceux qui
formaient la majorité_.' He was just as surprised when he found there
was Dutch opposition to the General Council. Attempts to unite the
opposition were made before the opening of the Congress, but it was only
towards its close that the fundamental political differences between the
various groups made it possible to come to a common understanding.

Violent disputes took place during the examination of the mandates. The
English delegates were unwilling to admit their fellow-countryman,
Maltman Barry, who was provided with a mandate from an American section,
on the ground that he was not a known trade union leader. At that Marx
sprang indignantly to his feet. It was an honour to Citizen Barry that
that was so, he exclaimed, because almost all the English trade union
leaders were sold to Gladstone or some other bourgeois politician. That
remark was held against Marx for a long time. The mandates of the
delegates of the German sections were also disputed. During their trial
for high treason at Leipzig in 1872 Bebel and Liebknecht had declared
the solidarity of their party with the International, though the party
did not belong to the International and its local groups were riot
sections of the International. This was formally correct. To prevent
their party from being banned Bebel and Liebknecht could not have done
otherwise. The Bakuninists, relying on this statement, demanded that the
German delegates' mandate should not be recognised. Now the sections the
German delegates represented were not very big and had only been formed
specially for the Congress, but behind many a Bakuninist mandate there
was not exactly a mass organisation either. The German mandate was
accepted.

Fully three days were occupied with these and similar matters. The real
Congress did not begin until September 5. It met in a working-class
quarter of the town. A French newspaper remarked sarcastically that next
to the Congress hall was a prison, 'then laundries, small workshops,
many pothouses, tap-rooms, here called _taperij_, and clandestine
establishments such as are used, as one would say in Congress style, by
the Dutch proletariat.' The sessions took place in the evening, in order
to enable workers to attend. 'The workers certainly did not fail to put
in an appearance. Never have I seen a crowd so packed, so serious, so
anxious to see and hear.' The events of the evening of September 5 were
described by _Le Français_ as follows: 'At last we have had a real
session of the International Congress, with a crowd ten times greater
than the hall could accommodate, with applause and interruptions and
pushing and jostling and tumultuous cries, and personal attacks and
extremely radical but nevertheless extremely conflicting declarations of
opinion, with recriminations, denunciations, protests, calls to order,
and finally a closure of the session, if not of the discussion, which at
past ten o'clock, in a tropical heat and amid inexpressible confusion,
imposed itself by the force of things.'

The first question discussed was that of the extension of the General
Council's powers in accordance with the resolution passed at the London
conference. The Opposition not only wanted no extension of the General
Council's powers, but objected to the powers the General Council already
possessed. They wanted to reduce it to a statistical office, or even
better, to a mere letter-box, a correspondence office. These advocates
of autonomy were opposed by Sorge, who had come from New York. He said
that the International not only needed a head, but one with plenty of
brains. Guillaume, who describes the scene, says that at this people
looked at Marx and laughed. The Congress gave the General Council its
extended powers. The resolution stated that it was the duty of the
General Council to carry out the decisions of the International Congress
and to see that the principles and general intentions of the statutes
were observed in every country, and that it had the power to suspend
branches, sections, committees and federations until the next Congress.
Thirty-six delegates voted for this resolution, with fifteen against and
six abstentions.

When the ballot was over Engels rose and proposed in his own and Marx's
name that the headquarters of the General Council be transferred from
London to New York. This caused an indescribable sensation. A few weeks
previously, when somebody had suggested removing the headquarters of the
International from London, Marx had opposed it strenuously, and now here
he was proposing it himself. Vaillant, speaking for the Blanquists, made
a passionate protest. So far as he was concerned, transferring the
General Council to New York was equivalent to transferring it to the
moon. The Blanquists could not possibly have any influence on the
General Council unless it remained where it was, i.e. in his place of
exile, London. But Marx had calculated rightly. If the Blanquists, who
otherwise supported him, opposed him in this, there were plenty of
opposition delegates to support him. A General Council in America would
obviously mean a General Council without Marx. And so they voted for the
resolution. It was carried by twenty-six votes to twenty-three.

Then the political debate began. The General Council proposed that the
following resolution of the London conference be incorporated in the
statutes. 'In its struggle against the collective power of the
possessing classes, the proletariat can only act as a class if it
constitutes its own distinct political party, opposed to all the old
parties formed by the possessing classes. The forming of a political
party by the proletariat is indispensable in order to assure the triumph
of the social revolution and its ultimate object, the abolition of all
classes. The coalition of working-class forces, already obtained in
economic struggles, must also serve as a lever in the hands of that
class in its struggle against the political power of its exploiters. The
lords of the earth and the lords of capital always use their political
privileges to defend and perpetuate their economic monopolies and to
enslave Labour, and therefore the conquest of political power is the
great duty of the proletariat.' Every point of view was represented in
the discussion, from that of the extremists opposed to political
intervention of any kind on the one hand to that of the Blanquists, who
had no patience with the economic struggle, on the other. The Blanquists
accepted the principle of the strike as a means of political action, but
their real interest remained the barricade. They wanted to put 'the
militant organisation of the revolutionary forces of the proletariat and
the proletarian struggle' on the programme of the next Congress.
Guillaume, as spokesman of the 'anti-authoritarians,' stated that the
majority wanted the seizure of political power and the minority wanted
its annihilation. The General Council resolution was carried by
twenty-nine votes to five, with eight abstentions. By this time many
delegates had left, being unable to remain at the Hague any longer, and
others no longer took part in the voting, having lost interest. The
Blanquists attacked the General Council for having caused the revolution
to take flight across the ocean and left the Congress. The Bakuninists,
however, decided after reflection that the situation was far better than
it had seemed at first. 'The authority of the General Council, voted for
in principle by the majority, is in fact abolished by the choice of New
York,' Guillaume wrote in triumph.

On the last day the Congress discussed the desirability of expelling
members of the Bakuninist Alliance from the International. A special
committee was appointed to examine the evidence submitted to it by the
General Council. Guillaume was invited to appear before it but refused,
giving the same explanation as he had given at the Congress in Latin
Switzerland in April, 1870. 'Every member of the International has the
full and complete right to join any secret society, even the Freemasons.
Any inquiry into a secret society would simply be equivalent to a
denunciation to the police,' he maintained. The utmost to which he would
consent was to a 'private conversation' with members of the committee.
Clever as he was, he could not answer the weighty evidence against him.
Nechaiev's letter to Liubavin made a great impression. Bakunin and
Guillaume were expelled from the International.

The Congress ended on September 7. On September 8 a meeting, organised
by the local section, took place at Amsterdam. Among the speakers were
Marx, Engels, Lafargue, Sorge, Becker and others. Marx's speech was
reported in _La Liberté_, the Brussels organ of the International, and
in the _Allgemeen Handelsblad_ of Amsterdam, and was by far the most
important made by him at the time of the Congress. In it he summed up
its results. 'He proclaimed the necessity of the working classes
fighting the old, decaying society in the political field and in the
social field alike. The worker must one day seize political supremacy in
order to establish the new organisation of labour. He must overthrow the
old politics sustaining the old institutions.' The International had
proclaimed the necessity of the political struggle and repudiated
pseudo-revolutionary abstention from politics. But he indicated the
future path in general outline only. No prescription for the seizure of
political power was valid for all countries and all times, as the
Blanquists, and others too, pretended. 'But we have never said that the
means to arrive at these ends were identical. We know the allowance that
must be made for the institutions, manners and traditions of different
countries. We do not deny that there exist countries like America,
England, and, if I knew your institutions better, I would add Holland,
where the workers may be able to attain their ends by peaceful means. If
that is true we must also recognise that in most of the countries of the
Continent force must be the lever to which it will be necessary to
resort for a time in order to attain the dominion of labour.'

Marx ended his speech with a defence of the decision to transfer the
General Council to America. America was the land of the workers, to
which hundreds of thousands emigrated every year, whether banished or
driven by want, and in America a new and fruitful field was opening for
the International. As far as he himself was concerned, he was retiring
from the General Council, but he denied the rumours that he was retiring
from the International. On the contrary, freed from the burden of
administrative work, he would devote himself with redoubled energy to
the task to which he had devoted twenty-five years of his life and would
continue with until his last breath, namely his work for the liberation
of the proletariat.

Marx's motives for transferring the General Council to New York have
been much discussed. At the Congress he had done all in his power to
gain the victory, and he had gained it, though in some things his
victory was more apparent than real. He had conducted a ruthless
struggle against the Bakuninists and seemed determined to conduct it to
the very end, i.e. the complete extermination of anarchism. And then all
of a sudden he caused the General Council to be banished from Europe. He
must obviously have realised that his influence on the life of the
International would be very seriously impaired. It has been suggested
that Marx had grown weary of the strain and the petty cares that his
work on the General Council involved, of the ever-increasing burden of
correspondence that he had to conduct, the exhausting and fruitless
debates with the English members, the meetings and conferences and
visits, and the whole troublesome, time-robbing labour that devolved
mainly upon his shoulders. It has been suggested that he wished to be
free of all this and to return to his most important task, the
completion of _Das Kapital_. Certainly Marx often complained of how
little time his work on the General Council left him for his scientific
work. But he always laid everything else aside when the International
demanded it. 'He was first of all a revolutionary.' One recalls those
words of Engels. Besides, after the Hague Congress, Marx could have done
much more scientific work without sacrificing any of his political work
whatever, for Engels now lived in London and could have represented him
on the General Council and carried out his wishes. But in spite of this
he insisted on the General Council moving away from London.

Marx had other reasons. For the General Council to have remained in
London would have spelled the ruin of the International. Bakunin had
been expelled, but the spirit of Bakunin lived on. Nearly all the
sections in Southern Europe, in Italy and Spain, were
'anti-authoritarian.' The Commune inspired and inflamed them, and their
watchword was action, action all the time. They wanted all or nothing,
and their only battle-cry was the social revolution. Marx and Engels saw
the danger. 'Spain is so backward industrially that there can be no talk
of an immediate, complete emancipation of the working class. Spain must
pass through various stages of development before it comes to that, and
a whole series of obstacles must be cleared out of the way.' The
Bakuninists violently attacked the young Spanish republic, which was
threatened on all sides as it was. Marx and Engels regarded the blind,
impetuous radicalism of the Bakuninists as fatal. 'The republic offered
the opportunity of compressing those preliminary stages into the
shortest possible time, and of rapidly removing those obstacles.' But
the Bakuninists did not listen and did not look. Anything but attack and
again attack and barricades was 'politics,' 'idolising the state,'
cowardly and counter-revolutionary. It was necessary for the
International to part from them. 'If we had been conciliatory at the
Hague,' Engels wrote to Bebel at the end of June, 1873, 'if we had
hushed up the split, what would the consequences have been? The
sectarians, namely the Bakuninists, would have had a whole year's time
to commit far greater stupidities and infamies in the International's
name.'

The Hague Congress had also shown that all the Proudhonist groups, the
Dutch, the Belgians and others as well, would have been ready to follow
the Bakuninists as soon as they left or were expelled from the
International, and all that would have remained would have been the
group that supported Marx during the Congress. It would very soon have
melted away. The German Party was bound to avoid anything that might
imperil its legal status, particularly after the outcome of the Leipzig
high treason trial. Marx approved of their policy in this. It would be
impossible for them to share in the life of the International, at least
for a long time to come. Of Marx's majority at the Congress that only
left the Blanquists.

Marx esteemed Blanqui very highly and had a high opinion of the
Blanquists' courage, and he had not a few personal friends among them.
But a whole world divided him from them politically. He had had several
serious disputes with them even before the Congress. At the Congress
they had followed him as long as it was a question of fighting against
the 'anti-politicians,' the 'destroyers of the state.' The Blanquists
stoutly asserted the omnipotence of the state. It must not be destroyed
but seized, but there was only one way of seizing it, and that was the
barricade--whether in Spain or France, England or Germany made no
difference. In their eyes the single duty of the International was to
organise armed risings.

We shall return to Marx's Amsterdam speech in another connection. It
alone gives the explanation of the decision to transfer the General
Council to New York. Had it remained in London, Marx would only have
been able to maintain his ground with the aid of the Blanquists. The
International would have become Blanquist, and its programme would have
shrunk to the single word: barricade.

The Congress had decided to transfer the General Council to New York for
the year 1872-3. Marx was convinced that developments in Europe would be
so rapid and so favourable that after a year the General Council would
be able to return from exile. This was a mistake. Marx correctly
estimated the direction the workers' movement was taking; as happened
more than once, he was mistaken about its tempo. He soon recognised his
error. A year after the Hague Congress he gave up the International for
lost. Its history in America is that of its gradual death. Its slow
decline was occasionally interrupted by petty crises, by splits and
splits again, and it is impossible to establish for certain even the
date when it finally expired. When Engels rose at the Hague Congress and
proposed that the General Council be transferred to America, the
International ceased to exist.

## Chapter 21: The Last Ten Years

Marx was so identified with the International in the public eye that
people refused to believe that the chief of the general staff would
remain in London after the general staff had been transferred to New
York. English newspapers announced that Marx was preparing to emigrate
to America. In 1876 Professor Funck Brentano actually told the Le Play
Society in Paris that Marx had been living in the United States ever
since the Hague Congress.

Marx, however, remained in London, still occupied with work for the
International, though to a smaller extent than before. His first task
was to supervise the publication of the decisions of the Hague Congress.
His friend Sorge kept plying him from New York with requests for
instructions. The furious attacks of the Bakuninists, who now shrank at
nothing, had at least occasionally to be answered with a few sharp
blows. A split occurred in the British Regional Council and Marx had
passages of arms with Hales, Mottershead, Jung and Eccarius.

From the spring of 1873 onwards it became clearer every month that what
had at first appeared to be only the liquidation of a phase in the life
of the International culminating in the Hague Congress was in fact the
liquidation of the International itself. In September Marx advised Sorge
to 'let the formal organisation of the International recede into the
background for the time being, but not to let the headquarters at New
York out of his hands, in order to prevent idiots or adventurers from
gaining control and compromising the cause.' Events and the inevitable
evolution of things would lead to the resurrection of the International
in an improved form; for the time being it was sufficient not to let the
connections with the best men in the various countries lapse. Marx
summed up the situation in a letter to Sorge in April, 1874. He said
there could be no question at the moment of the working classes playing
a decisive rôle in Europe. In England the International was for the time
being (once more 'for the time being') as good as dead, the new French
trade unions were but points of departure from which development would
take place when freer movement became possible again, and in Spain,
Italy and Belgium the proletariat was to all intents and purposes
impotent. Germany, practically the only country in which the workers'
movement was in the ascendant, did not count in the International.
Contrary to his hopes, for practically a year after the Hague Congress
Marx had no time to resume his theoretical work but had to devote
himself almost entirely to International affairs; and what time was left
to him he had to devote to the settling of matters he believed to have
been settled already.

_Das Kapital_ was to have been translated into French at the end of
1867. Elie Reclus, brother of Elisée Reclus, an anarchist who
subsequently became a well-known geographer, undertook the task, but
soon abandoned it. Two years later another Frenchman undertook it but
did not get very far. Not till the winter of 1871 was a French publisher
found who was willing to take the risk (for a risk it was at that time).
There were difficulties of all kinds from the first. The publisher, a
bookseller named Lachâtre, lived abroad, having been condemned to twenty
years' imprisonment for his part in the Commune, and his business was
managed by a legal administrator. Next there was a shortage of funds.
Marx invited his cousin, August Philips, who lived in Amsterdam, to
share in the cost of publication, but Philips said he would not think of
furthering Marx's revolutionary aims. In the end _Das Kapital_ was
published in French, though it only came out in instalments published at
intervals. Marx wrote to Lachâtre that this method of publication gave
him particular satisfaction. 'The work will be more accessible to the
working classes in this form, and for me that consideration takes
precedence of all others [^33].' Roy, the translator, did his work well,
but Marx had 'the deuce of an amount' to do all the same; not only had
he to revise the translation, which was no light task in view of the
condensed style of the original and the play made with Hegelian
phraseology in the chapter on the theory of value, but he simplified
passages here and expanded passages there, amplifying the statistical
data and indulging in controversies with French economists. The final
instalment did not appear till May, 1875, for there were periods when he
had to stop work on it altogether and others when he could only continue
by exerting himself to the utmost, for he was a sick man.

In autumn, 1873, he broke down altogether. He had been suffering from
headaches and insomnia during the summer and was ordered by his doctor
not to work more than four hours a day. Then his health improved
somewhat, but in November it grew worse again. The 'chronic mental
depression' grew worse and worse. The doctor ordered complete cessation
of work, and his friends feared the worst. Once more he recovered, but
in the summer of 1874 he again had to take a 'complete rest.' After
years of superhuman toil on _Das Kapital_, carried out under the most
adverse circumstances in the hunger and poverty of exile, harassed by
cares about to-morrow's bread to feed his wife and children, followed by
the work of building up the International and the exhausting struggle to
hold it together into which he cast the last ounce of his resources, his
old liver trouble broke out again. He never again shook it off
completely, though three visits to Carlsbad and a cure at the German
resort of Neuenahr caused such an improvement that it never became
threatening again. His first visit to Carlsbad in the summer of 1874 was
somewhat risky, as it was by no means certain that the German and
Austrian police would allow the 'chief of the Red International' to go
unmolested. In August, 1874, Marx applied to the Home Office for British
citizenship, but the application for naturalisation was refused on the
grounds (which of course Marx never knew) that 'this man was not loyal
to his king.' In Carlsbad, as the police boasted, he was 'continually
and uninterruptedly watched,' but gave 'cause for no suspicion,' so they
did not trouble him any more. After the enactment of the Socialist law
of 1878 the route through Germany was closed to him, but he no longer
needed the German and Bohemian watering places. The headaches and
insomnia, the 'nervous exhaustion' as Engels called it, remained.

After 1873 Marx never regained his old capacity for work. He remained
the insatiable reader that he had always been; he continued
indefatigably making extracts from what he read, he went on collecting
material, but he no longer had the capacity to organise it. Again and
again he sat down and started and in the autumn of 1878 believed that be
second volume of _Das Kapital_ would be finished within a year but he
never completed more than a few pages of the fair copy. Marx had learned
Russian. England had served as the main illustration of theoretical
development in the first volume of _Das Kapital_, and he intended to use
Russia as the basis of his treatment of ground rent in the second
volume. Marx could not get enough Russian literature. After his death
Engels found two whole cubic metres of Russian statistical material. It
was not conscientiousness alone that drove Marx on in his everlasting
search for new material. He used it also to hide from himself the
crippling of his creative powers. Engels hated those piles of Russian
books and once said to Lafargue that he would have liked to burn them.
For he suspected Marx of sheltering behind them in order to find peace
from the pricks of his own conscience and the urging of his friends. But
Engels did not discover how little had been completed of what he had
believed to have been completed, in spite of all his suspicions, until
after Marx's death, when he examined his manuscripts. 'If I had known,'
he wrote to Bebel in the late summer of 1883, 'I would have given him no
peace by day or night until the whole thing had been finished and
printed. Marx himself knew this better than anyone, and he also knew
that if it came to the worst, as it has, the manuscript could be edited
by me in his spirit. He actually said so to Tussy.' The second volume of
_Das Kapital_ was completed by Engels and published in 1885. The third
volume appeared in 1894. After 1877, when he wrote a contribution to
Engels's attack on Eugen Dühring, as well as a few articles opposing
Gladstone's Russian policy, Marx published practically nothing.

The latter appeared in Conservative newspapers. There was no Socialist
Press in England, but when it came to attacking Russia Marx was willing
to enter into alliance with the devil himself. The Franco-Prussian War
had enormously strengthened Russia's position in Europe, and Russia
remained the 'so far unassailed bulwark and reserve army of the
counter-revolution.' Russia was still an oppressive nightmare over
Europe. Anyone who fought Russia was objectively fighting in the service
of the revolution.

The International was broken. In the middle of the seventies there was
no proletarian army anywhere but in Germany. Under Marx's leadership it
did all in its power to denounce Bismarck's servility towards the Tsar,
in the Reichstag, in its newspapers, in pamphlets, like Liebknecht's
_The Oriental Question, or shall Europe become Cossack?_ which Marx
approved of, although he usually did not see eye to eye with Liebknecht.
But the German Party was far too weak to affect German foreign policy in
the slightest degree. The European proletariat, split, scattered or not
organised at all, was powerless. Marx was convinced that the future
belonged to it, and whatever happened in Europe nothing could shake his
conviction of its ultimate victory. 'So far I have always found,' he
once wrote to Johann Philipp Becker, 'that all really sound men who have
once taken the revolutionary road invariably draw new strength from
defeat and become ever more resolute the longer they swim in the stream
of events.' The bourgeois world was destined to destruction, though how
and when was uncertain, for it depended on factors over which the
proletariat so far had no control. 'General conditions in Europe are of
such a kind that they are heading more and more towards a European war.
We must go through it before there can be any thought of the European
working classes having decisive influence.' That was what Marx thought
in the spring of 1874. War might advance the rise of the proletariat to
power or might impede it. Marx closely followed the foreign politics of
the great European countries. In February, 1878, when his wife was ill
and he was suffering from headaches by day, insomnia by night, and bad
fits of coughing, he wrote two long letters to Liebknecht which show how
carefully he followed political and military events during the
Russo-Turkish war, which ended with the preliminary peace of Adrianople
at the end of January.

In 1874 Marx still expected a resurrection of the European workers'
movement as a result of a general European war. For as long as the
stronghold of the counter-revolution had not fallen, as long as its
shadow still lay over Europe, all hope of a victory for the revolution
was in vain. The movement might gain success in one or other or all the
countries of Central and Western Europe, but the last word would still
be spoken by the Tsar. And the Tsar could only be overthrown in a war
with another Great Power. The foundations on which Russian absolutism
rested were still too strong to be shaken by anything less than a
European war. Up to the middle of the seventies Marx was extremely
sceptical of all news of revolutionary movements in Russia, and the
Nechaiev affair was not calculated to make him change his mind.

But the more thoroughly he studied Russia, the more Russian literature
he read, the more Russian statistics he examined, the more probable it
began to appear to him that this colossus with feet of clay only needed
a slight blow from without to cause it to collapse. When Russia declared
war on Turkey in 1877 he felt practically certain of a Turkish victory,
which would be followed by a Russian revolution. And when the Turks
really did gain a victory he believed revolution in St. Petersburg to be
at hand. 'All classes of Russian society are economically, morally,
intellectually in complete decay,' he wrote to Sorge at the end of
September, 1877. 'This time the revolution will begin in the East.' On
February 4, 1878, he explained to Liebknecht that 'we are definitely on
the side of the Turks for two reasons: (1) Because we have studied the
Turkish peasant, i.e. the Turkish masses, and we have learnt that the
Turkish peasant is without doubt one of the most capable and moral
representatives of European peasantry (this argument could of course
also have been used of the Serbian and Bulgarian peasants whom the Turks
oppressed); (2) because the defeat of the Russians will considerably
hasten the social revolution in Russia, the elements of which already to
a great extent exist, and thereby also hasten the revolution in all
Europe.' When Marx wrote this Turkey had already been defeated. But Marx
did not abandon his idea of the necessity of a European war.

There was now a revolutionary movement in Russia that was incomparably
stronger than could have been hoped for two years previously. The
Narodnaya Volya ('People's Will') Party attacked absolutism with the
only weapon the revolutionaries had. That weapon was Terrorism. In 1879
and 1880 members of this Party made several abortive attempts on the
life of the Tsar. Many paid for them with their lives. Those who managed
to escape abroad (Leo Hartman, N. Morosov, and others) were received by
Marx as friends. Alexander II was assassinated by a member of the
Narodnaya Volya Party in March, 1881. On April 11 Marx wrote to his
daughter Jenny that the Terror was 'a historically inevitable means of
action, the morality or immorality of which it was as useless to discuss
as that of the earthquake at Chios.' The Russian Terrorists were
'excellent people through and through, _sans phrase mélodramatique_,
simple, straightforward, heroic.' It was no longer necessary for the
fortress to be stormed from without, for it was crumbling by itself. War
had become superfluous. Nay more, it would actually be harmful now.

Engels wrote to Bebel in the middle of December, 1879: 'In a few months
things in Russia are bound to come to a head. Either absolutism will be
overthrown, after which, the stronghold of reaction having collapsed, a
wind of a different kind will blow through Europe, or there will be a
European war which will bury the present German Party in the struggle
which every country will have to fight for its national existence.' On
September 12, 1880, Marx wrote to Danielson that he hoped that there
would be no general European war. 'Although in the long run it could not
hold up social development, and in that I include economic development,
but would rather intensify it, it would undoubtedly involve a futile
exhaustion of forces for a longer or shorter period.' Three months
before Marx's death Engels wrote to Bebel, repeating Marx's views as
follows: 'I would consider a European war a misfortune; this time a
terrible misfortune. It would inflame chauvinism everywhere for years,
as every country would have to fight for its existence. The whole work
of the revolutionaries in Russia, who stand on the eve of victory, would
be annihilated and made in vain, our party in Germany would be
temporarily swamped and broken up in the chauvinist flood, and the same
thing would happen in France.'

Russia was 'sinking into a morass.' Tsarism was succumbing in peaceful
putrefaction and its last supports were being smashed by the
revolutionaries' bombs. Marx over-estimated the disintegration of
Russian society and the strength of the revolutionary movement. The
power of absolutism, though weakened, was not shaken nearly to the
extent that Marx believed. It had become improbable that Russia would
actively intervene as in 1849 and give military aid in suppressing a
Central European revolution. The weight with which Russia had overlain
Europe for decades had become lighter. Europe could go its own way
without the fear of finding it barred at all decisive points by Russian
troops--but only if peace were kept, and a struggle of warring peoples
did not come to bar the way and hold up the struggle of the rising
proletarian class and throw it back for ten, twenty years or even more.

In the seventies and the beginning of the eighties the European workers'
movement took great steps forward and advanced faster than Marx expected
after the death of the International; and it did so without passing
through a general European war. True, it did not always take the path
that Marx considered the right one. He found much to criticise in the
German Party, and later in the French. But in spite of its faltering and
its uncertainties and all its temporary deviations it was on the right
track.

The 1874 elections showed that the 'Eisenacher,' the followers of
Liebknecht and Bebel, and the followers of Lassalle were practically
equal in strength. During the decade that followed Lassalle's death the
movement he had founded lost a great deal of its sectarian character.
The specific Lassallean demands still remained on its programme, but
they were not believed in with much conviction and in the end survived
practically only out of sheer tradition. The two German workers' parties
grew nearer and nearer to each other. They both fought the same enemy,
they were both persecuted alike, and gradually the wish to surmount the
breach and unite became so strong that towards the end of 1874
amalgamation into one great German workers' party was decided on. Marx
and Engels were indignant at the news. When Marx was sent a draft of the
programme of the new party, he wrote his observations on it and sent
them to the 'Eisenacher.' He took the programme point by point,
subjecting each to devastating criticism, proving the whole to be a hash
of ill-understood scientific Socialism, vulgar Democratic phraseology
and long-obsolete Lassallean demands, and he ended by threatening to
attack it publicly if it were adopted. It was adopted, and became the
programme of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party, founded at
Gotha at the end of May, 1875. Marx, in spite of his threat, made no
public attack on it, because the programme was regarded as Communistic
by workers and bourgeoisie alike. Nor did the split, which Marx regarded
as inevitable, occur. The Party remained united, and in 1891, at Erfurt,
adopted a pure Marxist programme.

Marx had made a mistake and recognised it. He never regarded himself as
infallible. Engels, in a letter to Bebel of November 4, 1875, described
the place that Marx and he assigned themselves in the international
workers' movement. Their task, he said, was 'uninfluenced by details and
distracting local conditions of the struggle, from time to time to
measure what had been said and done by the theoretical principles that
are valid for all modern proletarian movements.' They demanded one thing
only from the Party; that it remain true to itself. Bakuninists and
bourgeois politicians accused Marx of enthroning himself as Red Tsar in
London, sending out ukases for which implicit obedience was required;
and they said that these often led to prison, death and destruction.
Nothing could have been farther from the truth. 'It is easy for us to
criticise,' Engels acknowledged in a letter to Frau Liebknecht, when
Wilhelm Liebknecht was once again in prison, 'while in Germany every
imprudent or thoughtless word may lead to imprisonment and a temporary
interruption of family life.' Another time he wrote to Bebel: 'It is
easy for us to talk, but we know that your position is far more
difficult than ours.'

After the enactment of Bismarck's Socialist law in 1878, when the Party
spent some time in hesitating uncertainty and many thought that the
right policy was to be absolutely loyal and not provoke the enemy, in
the hope of causing him to moderate his severity, Marx attacked them
furiously. Though once more he threatened to attack them publicly, he
did not do so. On November 5, 1881, he wrote to Sorge that the
'wretched' attitude of the _Sozialdemokrat_, the paper the Party
published at Zurich and smuggled into Germany, led to constant disputes
with Liebknecht and Bebel in Leipzig, and that these disputes often
became very violent indeed. 'But we have avoided intervening publicly in
any way,' the letter continued. 'It would not be decent for people
living abroad in comparative peace to provide an edifying spectacle for
the bourgeoisie and the Government by aggravating the position of men
working in the most difficult conditions and at great personal
sacrifice.' The same trust in the logic of development that had guided
Marx as leader of the General Council of the International determined
his attitude to the growing German, Party now.

In France the Socialist ranks that had been scattered by the Commune
gradually re-formed towards the end of the seventies. A fair number of
them were former Bakuninists who drew nearer and nearer to Marxism.
Prominent among them were Jules Guesde and Benoît Malon. In November,
1877, Guesde founded _L'Egalité_, a weekly to which Bebel and Liebknecht
contributed from Germany. Although not at all clear in its views, the
circle grouped round _L'Egalité_ nevertheless contributed substantially
towards the propagation of the basic ideas of modern Socialism. So
rapidly did the movement grow that in October, 1879, the Fédération du
Parti des Travailleurs Socialistes was founded at a Congress at
Marseilles. Its programme, adopted at a Congress at Le Havre in
November, 1880, was fundamentally based on Marx. Guesde visited London
and the new party's minimum programme was the joint labour of Marx,
Engels, Guesde and Lafargue. It did not correspond with the wishes of
Marx and Engels in every way. Among other things Guesde insisted on
inserting a demand for a minimum legal wage. Marx opposed this, saying
that if the French proletariat were still childish enough to need such a
bait it was not worth while drawing up a programme for them at all. But
Guesde insisted and the demand remained in the programme. But this did
not cause Marx to withdraw his advice and help from the new Party, any
more than he had done in the case of the German Party when it drew up
its Gotha programme. He knew that it would overcome these infantile
ailments. He did not believe the young party to be united enough to
survive for long. This time he was right. No sooner had it been founded
when it split into two. Marx's connection with the Parti Ouvrier, led by
Guesde, was a very slender one. Engels wrote to Bernstein in October,
1881, that Marx had given Guesde advice from time to time through
Lafargue, but it was scarcely ever followed. In the violent dispute that
broke out between the two groups after the split at the Congress at St.
Etienne in September, 1882, Guesde and his friends were continually
attacked for 'submitting to the will of a man who lived in London
outside any party control.' They did not submit to his control and had
no justification whatever for their claim that theirs was the scientific
Socialism that Marx had founded. A remark that Marx once made to
Lafargue has often been quoted. 'What is quite certain is that I am not
a Marxist [^34].'

Nevertheless the movement in France made progress while working classes
in England, the most industrialised country in the world and the country
in which Marx lived, remained silent and inactive. Occasionally the
British working classes seemed to stir, but no attempt to form a
proletarian party ever got beyond the preliminary stages. In the spring
of 1881 Marx tried to bring the trade union leaders into contact with
the radical politicians. Engels, optimistic as ever, already visualised
a 'Proletarian-Radical Party' led by Joseph Cowen, M.P. for Newcastle,
'an old Chartist, half, if not a whole Communist and a very fine
fellow.' A year later he wrote to Kautsky 'There is no workers' party
here, there are only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals.' Yet Marx's
ideas gradually penetrated even in England. The first and by far the
most important English Marxist was H. M. Hyndman. He had read _Das
Kapital_ in French and was converted at once. He attached himself to
Marx, they frequently exchanged visits, and at Marx's quiet retreat in
Maitland Park Road, they would often talk till late into the night. But
in the summer of 1881 the friendship abruptly terminated. Hyndman wrote
a book, _England for All_, in which he popularised _Das Kapital_ and did
so very well. But he did not mention Marx's name, though he incidentally
remarked that he owed a great deal to an important thinker. Marx took
this seriously amiss and refused to accept the excuse that Englishmen
did not like being taught by foreigners. Hyndman was a vain man, with a
strong inclination to political adventurism, and his silence about Marx
was not due to objective reasons alone. Hyndman's alleged sole motive
for silence about Marx was paralleled by Guesde, who gave the same
reason for asking Malon to give out his programme, which Marx had
co-operated in drafting, as his own. Hyndman said that Engels's jealousy
was to blame for the breach. Objective and personal reasons may have
been, combined. To the end Marx remained practically unknown in England.

The old International was incapable of resurrection. In February, 1881,
Marx wrote to Domela Nieuwenhuis, the Dutch Socialist, that the right
moment for the formation of a new workers' association had not yet come.
But the right moment was drawing nearer every year. The old General
Council was dead, and the new was only in the making. There were no
congresses, no resolutions to which the movements in the various
countries could adhere. But Marx was alive. His significance for the
proletarian movement after the dissolution of the International cannot
be better illustrated than by a few sentences from a letter Engels wrote
to Bernstein in October, 1881. 'By his theoretical and practical work
Marx has acquired such a position that the best people in the workers'
movements in the various countries have full confidence in him. They
turn to him for advice at decisive moments, and generally find that his
advice is the best. He holds that position in Germany, France and
Russia, not to mention the smaller countries. Marx, and in the second
place myself, stand in the same relation to the other national movements
as we do to the French. We are in constant touch with them, in so far as
it is worth while and opportunity is provided, but any attempt to
influence people against their will would only do harm and destroy the
old trust that survives from the time of the International. In any case,
we have too much experience in revolutionary matters to attempt anything
of the sort. It is not Marx who imposes his opinions, much less his
will, upon the people, but it is they who come to him. That is what
Marx's real influence, which is of such extreme importance for the
movement, depends on.'

Marx issued no orders and set no patterns which the class war should
follow. Just as he believed the idea of commanding the European workers'
movement from London to be absurd, so did he abstain from devising a
plan of action that should be valid for all countries and all times. The
speech he made at Amsterdam after the Hague Congress has already been
mentioned. It had an unusual fate. When it appeared in the _Volksstaat_
in October, 1872, those passages in which Marx spoke of force as the
lever of the revolution in most Continental countries were missing. It
had been necessary to omit them for fear of police persecution. In
recent years it has again been quoted, put once more in abbreviated
form, though needlessly now; and this time the omitted passage is that
in which Marx spoke of the possibility of a peaceful seizure of the
state power by the proletariat in England and America. Only the whole
speech is the whole Marx. In 1881, the year in which Marx welcomed the
Russian Terrorists' attempted assassination of the Tsar, he said to
Hyndman: 'If you say that you do not share the views of my party for
England I can only reply that that party considers an English revolution
not necessary but--according to historic precedence--possible. If the
unavoidable evolution turns into a revolution, it would not only be the
fault of the ruling classes, but also of the working class. Every
pacific concession of the former has been wrung from them by "pressure
from without." Their action kept pace with that pressure and if the
latter has more and more weakened, it is only because the English
working class know not how to wield their power and use their liberties,
both of which they possess legally. In Germany the working class were
fully aware from the beginning of their movement that you cannot get rid
of a military despotism but by a revolution. England is the one country
in which a peaceful revolution is possible, but,' he added after a
pause, 'history does not tell us so.'

Hyndman quoted this conversation correctly. Three years after Marx's
death Engels wrote in the foreword to the English translation of _Das
Kapital_: 'Surely, at such a moment the voice ought to be heard of a man
whose theory is the result of a life-long study of the economic
conditions of England, and whom that study led to the conclusion that at
least in Europe, England is the only country where the inevitable social
revolution might be effected entirely by peaceful and legal means. He
certainly never forgot to add that he hardly expected the English ruling
classes to submit without a "pro-slavery rebellion" to this peaceful and
legal revolution.'

The proletariat would win, peacefully perhaps in the countries where
there was an old and deeply rooted democracy, but by force in those
countries that were in the hands of despotism. When his daughter Jenny
gave birth to a son in April, 1881, Marx wrote to her: 'My "womanly
half" hopes that the "newcomer" will increase the "better half" of
humanity; so far as I am concerned at this turning point in history I
favour children of the masculine sex. They have before them the most
revolutionary period mankind has ever known. It is bad to be an old man
at this time, for an old man can only foresee instead of seeing.' With
this unflinching confidence Karl Marx died.

His was a painful dying but an easy death. Both his elder daughters
lived in France. Jenny was married to Charles Longuet, Laura to Paul
Lafargue. Eleanor, known to everyone as Tussy, looked after her parents.
Marx was ill and his wife was wasting away with an incurable cancer. In
summer, 1881, they visited Jenny Longuet at Argenteuil. Frau Marx came
back to London in a state of collapse, was confined to bed and died on
December 2, 1881. For a long time Marx had known she was incurable, but
her death was a heavy blow. 'The Moor has died too,' Engels said when he
received the news of Frau Marx's death.

Marx was forbidden to attend the funeral, being bedridden after an
attack of pleurisy. As soon as he was well enough to travel the doctors
sent him to the south. At the end of February, 1882, he went to Algiers
but succumbed to pleurisy again. An exceptionally cold winter and a wet
spring aggravated his condition. He went to Monte Carlo in the hope of
an improvement, but succumbed to pleurisy for the third time. Not until
he reached Argenteuil and later the Lake Geneva did he recover
sufficiently to be able to return to England. London fog drove him to
the Isle of Wight. He caught cold again, had to keep to his room for a
long time, tortured by a cough and barely sleeping four hours a night.

Jenny Longuet died unexpectedly in Paris on January 11, 1883. Marx
hurried back to London. He scarcely spoke for days. He put up no more
resistance to the advance of illness. Laryngitis made it almost
impossible for him to swallow. He died on March 14, 1883, of a pulmonary
abscess. 'For the past six weeks,' Engels wrote to the faithful Sorge,
'I was in mortal terror as I turned the corner each morning lest I
should find the blinds pulled down. Yesterday afternoon at half-past
two, the best time of day for visiting him, I went there. The whole
house was in tears, it seemed to be the end. I made inquiries, tried to
find out what was happening, to console. There had been a slight
hemorrhage, but then there had been a sudden collapse. Our excellent old
Lenchen, who had nursed him better than a mother, came down. He was half
asleep, and she said I could go up with her. When we entered the room,
he lay there asleep, never to reawaken. His pulse and breathing had
stopped. In those two minutes he had peacefully and painlessly passed
away.'

He was buried in the cemetery at Highgate on March 17. Liebknecht spoke
for the German workers, Lafargue for the French workers, Engels for the
workers of the world.

His name, and his work, will re-echo down the centuries.

[^01]: _Unsere Taten sind Worte bis jetzt und noch lange  
  Hinter die Abstraktion stellt sich die Praxis von selbst_.

[^02]: _Wer jaget hinterdrein mit wildem Ungestüm?  
  Ein schwarzer Kerl aus Trier, ein markhaft Ungetüm.  
  Er gehet, hüpfet nicht, er springet auf den Hacken  
  Und raset voller Wut und gleich als wollt' er packen  
  Das weite Himmelszelt und zu der Erde ziehn  
  Streckt er die Arme sein weit in die Lüfte hin.  
  Geballt die böse Faust, so tobt er sonder Rasten,  
  Als wenn ihn bei den Schopf zehntausend Teufel fassten_.

[^03]: The German for peasant is _Bauer_.

[^04]: '_Depuis l'expédition de mon dernier très-humble rapport, j'ai eu
  aussi occasion do rencontrer Mr. le Comte de Nesselrode, dans le salon
  de son épouse, et de lui parler; mais au lieu de me fournir des
  renseignements qui auraient pu m'être utiles, ou intéressants, sous le
  rapport de la politique Mr. le Vice-Chancelier a saisi cette occasion
  pour me demander: si j'avais lu déjà l'article véritablement infame,
  que *la gazette Rhénane*, publiée à Cologne avait lancé dernièrement
  contre le Cabinet Russe,--en basant ses déclamations furibondes sur
  le faux prétexte d'une note qui m'aurait été adressée par lui,
  relativement à la tendance de la presse Allomande. J'ai répondu à Mr.
  le Comte de Nesselrode, que je ne connaissais pas textuellement cet
  article, mais que je me rappelais fort bien, que *la gazette d'Etat*
  avait publié, il n'y a pas longtems, une réfutation de quelques
  articles semblables, on déclarant brièvement, mais assez
  positivement, que les suppositions sur lesquelles le raisonnemont de
  ces articles avait été basé, manquaient de fondement et de tout motif
  raisonnable. Cette réfutation n'était point inconnue á Mr. le
  Vice-Chancelier; mais il m'a avvué, qu'elle ne suffisait pas, pour
  lui faire comprendre, comment un censeur employé par le gouvernement
  de Votre Majesté avait pu laisser passer un article d'une nature
  semblable, qui, selon lui, surpassait encore do beaucoup, en perfidie
  et en violence, tout ce qui avait été publié jusqu'ici dans los
  feuilles Prussiennes contre le gouvernement Imperial. Il y a ajouté
  encore qu'afin que je puisse en juger pour moi-même, en toute
  connaissance de cause, il m'enverait la feuille de *la gazette
  Rhénane*, qui renfermait l'article en question, et il l'a fait, en
  effet, encore le même soir.--Je suis donc véritablement heureux
  d'avoir trouvé, cette nuit, en revenant du bal patriotique, dans le
  numéro *de la gazette d'Etat* du 31. janvier, qui venait d'arriver
  par la poste, l'ordre émané tout récemment des trois Ministères de
  Votre Majesté qui président aux afi'aires de censure, et en vertu
  duquel *la gazette Rhénane* doit cesser de paraître à dater du 1.
  avril prochain! Aussi me ferai-je un devoir des plus empressés de
  faire valoir cette mesure énergique auprès de Mr. le Comte de
  Nesselrode aujourd'hui même à l'occasion d'un dîner auquel il m'a
  engagé. je crois, du reste, devoir faire observer encore
  très-humblement à ce sujet, que lors de la conversation que j'ai eu,
  avant-hier, avec Mr. le Vice-Chancelier, il m'avait très expressément
  assuré, que l'Empereur ne connaissait probablement pas encore
  l'article en question parce que, pour sa part, il avait hésité
  jusqu'ici à le placer sous les yeux de Sa Majesté Imperiale_.'

[^05]: _Wir liessen kühn der Freiheit Fahne wehen  
  Und ernst tat jeder Schiffman seine Pflicht,  
  War d'rum vergebens auch der Mannschaft Spähen:  
  Die Fahrt war schön and sie gereut uns nicht_.
  
	_Dass uns der Götter Zorn hat nachgetrachtet  
	Es schreckt uns nicht, dass unser Mast gefällt.  
	Denn auch Kolumbus ward zuerst verachtet  
	Und endlich sah er doch die neue Welt_.
  
	_Ihr Freunde, deren Beifall uns geworden,  
	Ihr Gegner, die ihr uns mit Kampf geehrt  
	Wir seh'n uns wieder einst an neuen Borden,  
	Wenn Alles bricht, der Mut bleibt unversehrt_.

[^06]: _Auch nach Weibergemeinschaft steht ihr Sinn,  
  Abschaffen woll'n sie die Ehe,  
  Dass alles in Zukunft ad libitum  
  Miteinander zu Bette gehe:  
  Tartar und Mongole mit Griechenfrau'n,  
  Cherusker mit gelben Chinesen,  
  Eisbären mit schwedischen Nachtigall'n,  
  Türkinnen und Irokesen,  
  Tranduftende Samoyedinnen soll'n  
  Zu Briten and Römern sich betten,  
  Plattnasige düstre Kaffern zu  
  Alabasterweissen Grisetten.  
  Ja, ändern wird sich die ganze Welt  
  Durch diese moderne Leitung-  
  Doch die schonsten Weiber bekommen die  
  Redakteure der_ Rheinischen Zeitung.

[^07]: '_C'est surtout à Paris que les communistes allemands ont établi
  le foyer et le point de départ de leurs intrigues; c'est par la France
  qu'ils espèrent agir; en dehors de ce royaume, si ce n'est en
  Angleterre, ils n'osent affronter avec une égale audace la sévérité
  des lois et celle des magistrats_.'

[^08]: _Der Dichter steht auf einer höh'ren Warte  
  Als auf den Zinnen der Partei_.

[^09]: '_Conjointement avec deux de mes amis Fréderic Engels et Philippe
  Gigot (tous deux à Bruxelles) j'ai organisé avec les communistes et
  socialistes allemands une correspondence suivie, qui devra s'occuper
  et de la discussion de questions scientifiques et de la surveillance à
  exercer sur les écrits populaires et la propagande socialiste, qu'on
  peut faire en Allemagne par ce moyen. Le but principal de notre
  correspondence sera pourtant celui, de mettre les socialistes
  allemands en rapport avec les socialistes français et anglais, de
  tenir les étrangers au courant des mouvements socialistes qui seront
  opérés en Allemagne et d'informer les Allemands en Allemagne des
  progrès du socialisme en France et en Angleterre. De cette manière
  des différences d'opinion pourront se fair jour; on arrivera à un
  échange d'idées et à une critique impartiale. C'est là un pas, que le
  mouvement social aura fait dans son expression_ littéraire _afin de
  se débarrasser des limites de la_ nationalité. _Et au moment de
  l'action, il est certainement d'un grand interêt pour chacun, d'être
  instruit de l'état des afi'aires à l'étranger aussi bien que chez
  lui_.

	'_Outre les communistes en Allemagne notre correspondence
	comprendra aussi les socialistes allemands à Paris et à
	Londres. Nos rapports avec l'Angleterre sont déjà établis;
	quant à la France nous croyons tous que nous ne pouvons y
	trouver un meilleur correspondent que vous_...'

[^10]: _Im Hochland fiel der erste Schuss,  
  Im Hochland wider die Pfaffen_.

[^11]: _Drauf ging der Tanz in Welschland los  
  Die Scyllen und Charybden,  
  Vesuv und Aetna brachen los,  
  Ausbruch auf Ausbruch, Stoss auf Stoss_. ...

[^12]: '_en identifiant la cause de la nationalité à la cause de la
  démocratie et à l'affranchissement de la classe opprimée_.'

[^13]: '_La tyrannie vous a banni, la libre France vous ouvre les
  portes, à vous et à tous ceux qui luttent pour la sainte cause de la
  fraternité des peuples_.'

[^14]: '_Après avoir reçu, le 3 mars, à cinq heures du soir, l'ordre (le
  quitter le royaume belge dans le délai de vingt-quatre heures, j'étais
  occupé encore, dans la nuit du même jour, de faire mes préparatifis de
  voyage, lorsqu'un commissaire de police, accompagné de dix gardes
  municipaux, pénétra dans mon domicile, fouilla toute la maison, et
  finit par m'arrêter, sous prétexte que je n'avais pas de papiers.
  Sans parler des papiers très réguliers que M. Duchâtel m'avait remis
  en m'expulsant de la France, je tenais en mains le passeport
  d'expulsion que la Belgique m'avait délivré il y avait quelques
  heures seulement_.

	'_Je ne vous aurais pas parlé, monsieur, de mon arrestation et
	des brutalités que j'ai souflertes, s'il ne s'y rattachait une
	circonstance qu'on aura peine à comprendre, même en Autriche_.
	
	'_Immédiatement après mon arrestation, ma femme se fait
	conduire chez M. Jottrand, président de l'association
	démocratique de Belgique, pour l'engager à prendre les mesures
	nécessaires. En rentrant chez elle, elle trouve à la porte un
	sergent de ville qui lui dit, avec une politesse exquise, que,
	si elle voulait parler à M. Marx, elle n'aurait qu' à le
	suivre. Ma femme accepte l'offre avec empressement. On la
	conduit au bureau de la police, et le commissaire lui déclare
	d'abord que M. Marx n'y était pas; puis il lui demande
	brutalement qui elle était, ce qu'elle allait faire chez M.
	Jottrand, et si elle avait ses papiers sur elle. Un démocrate
	belge, M. Gigot, qui avait suivi ma femme au bureau de la
	police avec la garde municipal, se révoltant des questions à la
	fois absurdes et insolentes du commissaire, est réduit au
	silence par des gardes qui s'emparent de lui et le jettent en
	prison. Sous le prétexte de vagabondage, ma femme est amenée à
	la prison de l'Hôtel-de-Ville, et enfermée avec des femmes
	perdues, dans une salle obscure. A onze heures du matin, elle
	est conduite en plein jour, sous toute une escorte de
	gendarmerie, au cabinet du juge d'instruction. Pendant deux
	heures, elle est mise au secret, malgré les plus vives
	réclamations qui arrivent de toutes parts. Elle reste là
	exposée à toute la rigeur de la saison et aux propos les plus
	indignes des gendarmes_.

	'_Elle paraît enfin devant le juge d'instruction, qui est tout
	étonné que la police, dans sa sollicitude, n'a pas arrêté
	egalement les enfants de bas-âge. L'interrogatoire ne pouvait
	étre que factice, et tout le crime de ma femme consiste en ce
	que, bien qu'appartenant à l'aristocratie prussienne, elle
	partage les sentiments démocratiques de son mari_.

	'_Je n'entre pas dans tous les détails de cette révoltante
	afiaire. Je dirai seulement que, lorsque nous étions relâchés,
	les vingt-quatre heures étaient justement expirées, et qu'il
	nous fallait partir sans pouvoir seulement emporter les effets
	les plus indispensables_.'

[^15]: _Mourir pour la patrie C'est le sort le plus beau Le plus digne
  d'envie_.

[^16]: '_Appel au Citoyens Français_.

	'_Des Armes_!

	'_Pour les Allemands marchant au secours de leur frères qui
	combattent en ce moment pour la liberté, qui se font égorger
	pour leur droits, et qu'on veut tromper de nouveau_.

	'_Les démocrates allemands de Paris se sont formés en légion
	pour aller proclamer ensemble la République allemande_.

	'_Il leur faut des armes, des munitions, de l'argent, des
	objets d'habillement. Prêtez-leur votre assistance; vos dons
	seront reçus avec gratitude. Ils serviront à délivrer
	l'Allemagne et en même temps la Pologne_.

	'_Démocrates allemands et polonais marcheront ensemble à la
	conquête de la liberté_.

	'_Vive la France! Vive la Pologne! Vive l'Allemagne unie et
	républicaine! Vive la fraternité des peuples_!'

[^17]: _Wenn wir noch knien könnten, wir lägen auf den Knien  
  Wenn wir noch beten könnten, wir beteten für Wien_.

[^18]: _...Auf der Lippe den Trotz und den zuckenden Hohn,  
  In der Hand den blitzenden Degen,  
  Noch im Sterben rufend: Die Rebellion!  
  So bin ich in Ehren erlegen...  
  Nun Ade, nun Ade, du kämpfende Welt,  
  Nun Ade, ihr ringenden Heere!  
  Nun Ade, du pulvergeschwärztes Feld,  
  Nun Ade, ihr Schwerter und Speere!  
  Nun Ade, doch nicht für immer Ade!  
  Denn sie toten den Geist nicht, ihr Brüder!  
  Bald richt'ich mich rasselnd in die Höh.  
  Bald kehr ich reisiger wieder_!

[^19]: '_La République française n'emploie jamais ses forces contre la
  liberté d'aucun peuple_.'

[^20]: '_Le but de l'association est la déchéance de toutes les classes
  privilégiées de soumettre ces classes à la dictature des prolétaires
  en maintenant la révolution en permanence jusqu' à la réalisation du
  communisme, qui doit être la dernière forme de constitution de la
  famille humaine_.'

[^21]: '_des liens de solidarité entre toutes les fractions du parti
  communiste révolutionnaire en faisant disparaître conformément au
  principe de la fraternité républicaine les divisions de nationalité_.'

[^22]: '_il endoctrine ses séides qu'il compte lâcher un jour
  individuellement en Allemagne avec une mission déterminée facile à
  deviner_.'

[^23]: '_Ma patrie maintenant c'est l'Internationale, dont tu es l'un
  des principaux fondateurs. Tu vois donc, cher ami, que je suis ton
  disciple, et je suis fier de l'être_.'

[^24]: '_La nouvelle de la venue a'u célèbre révolutionnaire russe
  avait mis le Locle en émoi; et dans les ateliers, dans les cercles,
  dans les salons, on ne parlait que de lui. ... On se disait que la
  présence, dans les rangs de l'Internationale, d'un homme aussi
  énergique, ne pouvait manquer de lui apporter une grande force_.'

[^25]: '_J'étais allé l'attendre à la gare avec le père Meuron, et nous
  le conduisîmes au Cercle International, où nous passâmes le reste de
  l'après--midi à causer avec quelques amis qui s'y étaient réunis_.'

[^26]: '_Si l'imposante stature de Bakounine frappait les imaginations,
  la familiarité de son accueil lui gagnait les cœurs; il fit
  immèdiatement la conquête a'e tout le monde_.'

[^27]: '_Dans les conversations, Bakounine racontait volontiers des
  historiettes, des souvenirs de sa jeunesse, des choses qu'il avait
  dites ou entendu dire. Il avait tout un répertoire d'anecdotes, de
  proverbes, des mots favorits qu'il aimait à répéter_.'

[^28]: '_Une fois, à la fin d'un dîner, en Allemagne, il avait, nous
  dit il en riant, porté ce toast, accueilli par un tonnerre
  d'applaudissements: "Je bois à la destruction de l'ordre public et au
  déchainement des mauvaises passions_."'

[^29]: _En premier lieu, comme bonheur suprême mourir en combattant
  pour la liberté; en second lieu, l'amour et l'amitié; en troisième
  lieu, la science et l'art; quatriêmement, fumer; cinquièmement, boire;
  sixièmement, manger; septièment, dormir_.'

[^30]: '_Le libre rapprochement d'hommes qui s'unissaient pour l'action
  collective, sans formalité, sans solennité, sans rites mystérieux,
  simplement parce qu'ils avaient confiance les uns dans les autres et
  que l'entente leur paraissait préférable à l'action isolée_.'

[^31]: '_Il réjouissait à la pensée que l'Internationale serait doublée
  d'une organisation secrète qui la préserverait du danger que pouvaient
  lui faire courir les intrigants et les ambitieux_.'

[^32]: '_Avant de marcher contra l'ennemi, il faut le détruire, le
  paralyser derrière soi_.'

[^33]: '_Sous cette forme l'ouvrage sera plus accessible à la classe
  ouvrière et pour moi cette considération l'emporte sur toute autre_.'

[^34]: '_Ce qu'il y a de certain, c'est que moi je ne suis pas
  Marxiste_.'
