---
title: Workers' Councils
author: Pannekoek, Anton
date: 1946
description: Published in Dutch in 1946. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/pannekoe/1947/workers-councils.htm>.
...

## Preface to 1950 edition

The main part of this book has been written during the war under the
occupation of Holland by the Germans, the first three parts 1942; the
fourth 1944; a fifth part was added after the war, 1947. The author, who
during many years attentively observed, and sometimes actively took part
in, the workers' movement, gives here a summary of what from these
experiences and study may be derived as to methods and aims of the
workers' fight for freedom. A somewhat different Dutch version was
published in Holland, 1946. The English version was printed at Melbourne
serially, as an addition to the monthly "Southern Advocate for Workers'
Councils," during the years 1947-49. Owing to many difficulties the
publication in book-form was delayed until 1950.

-- J. A. Dawson.

## Preface as it appeared in the original Dutch edition

This book has been written in the war years 1941-42 under the occupation
of Holland by the Germans. The author, who during many years attentively
observed and sometimes actively took part in the workers' movement,
gives here a summary of what from these experiences and study may be
derived as to methods and aims of the workers' fight for freedom. What a
century of workers' struggles presents to us is neither a series of ever
again failing attempts at liberalism, nor a steadfast forward march of
the workers following a fixed plan of old well-tried tactics. With the
development of society we see arise new forms of fight, and this
development imposed by the growth of capitalism and the growth of the
working class, must go on in ever mightier display.

The first part of the book shows the task which the workers have to
perform and the fight they have to wage. The following parts treat the
social and spiritual trends arising in the bourgeoisie that determine
the conditions under which the workers had and have to fight. All the
discourses are based on the deep connection between production system
and class-fight elucidated in Marxian theory.

-- The Editor.

## 1: The task

### 1.1: Labor

In the present and coming times, now that Europe is devastated and
mankind is impoverished by world war, it impends upon the workers of the
world to organize industry, in order to free themselves from want and
exploitation. It will be their task to take into their own hands the
management of the production of goods. To accomplish this great and
difficult work, it will be necessary to fully recognize the present
character of labor. The better their knowledge of society and of the
position of labor in it, the less difficulties, disappointments and
setbacks they will encounter in this striving.

The basis of society is the production of all goods necessary to life.
This production, for the most important part, takes place by means of
highly developed technics in large factories and plants by complicated
machines. This development of technics, from small tools that could be
handled by one man, to big machines handled by large collectives of
workers of different kind, took place in the last centuries. Though
small tools are still used as accessories, and small shops are still
numerous, they hardly play a role in the bulk of the production.

Each factory is an organization carefully adapted to its aims; an
organization of dead as well as of living forces, of instruments and
workers. The forms and the character of this organization are determined
by the aims it has to serve. What are these aims?

In the present time, production is dominated by capital. The capitalist,
possessor of money, founded the factory, bought the machines and the raw
materials, hires the workers and makes them produce goods that can be
sold. That is, he buys the labor power of the workers, to be spent in
their daily task, and he pays to them its value, the wages by which they
can procure what they need to live and to continually restore their
labor power. The value a worker creates in his daily work in adding it
to the value of the raw materials, is larger than what he needs for his
living and receives for his labor power. The difference that the
capitalist gets in his hands when the product is sold, the
surplus-value, forms his profit, which in so far as it is not consumed,
is accumulated into new capital. The labor power of the working class
thus may be compared with an ore mine, that in exploitation gives out a
produce exceeding the cost bestowed on it. Hence the term exploitation
of labor by capital. Capital itself is the product of labor; its bulk is
accumulated surplus-value.

Capital is master of production; it has the factory, the machines, the
produced goods; the workers work at its command; its aims dominate the
work and determine the character of the organization. The aim of capital
is to make profit. The capitalist is not driven by the desire to provide
his fellow-men with the necessities of life; he is driven by the
necessity of making money. If he has a shoe factory he is not animated
by compassion for the painful feet of other people; he is animated by
the knowledge that his enterprise must yield profit and that he will go
bankrupt if his profits are insufficient. Of course, the normal way to
make profit is to produce goods that can be sold at a good price, and
they can be sold, normally, only when they are necessary and practical
consumption-goods for the buyers. So the shoe-maker, to produce profits
for himself, has to produce well-fitting shoes, better or cheaper shoes
than others make. Thus, normally, capitalist production succeeds in what
should be the aim of production, to provide mankind with its life
necessities. But the many cases, where it is more profitable to produce
superfluous luxuries for the rich or trash for the poor, or to sell the
whole plant to a competitor who may close it, show that the primary
object of present production is profit for the capital.

This object determines the character of the organization of the work in
the shop. First it establishes the command by one absolute master. If he
is the owner himself, he has to take care that he does not lose his
capital; on the contrary he must increase it. His interest dominates the
work; the workers are his "hands," and they have to obey. It determines
his part and his function in the work. Should the workers complain of
their long hours and fatiguing work, he points to his task and his
solicitudes that keep him busy till late in the night after they have
gone home without concerning themselves any more. He forgets to tell,
what he hardly understands himself, that all his often strenuous work,
all his worry that keeps him awake at night, serves only the profit, not
the production itself. It deals with the problems of how to sell his
products, how to outrival his competitors, how to bring the largest
possible part of the total surplus-value into his own coffers. His work
is not a productive work; his exertions in fighting his competitors are
useless for society. But he is the master and his aims direct the shop.

If he is an appointed director he knows that he is appointed to produce
profit for the shareholders. If he does not manage to do so, he is
dismissed and replaced by another man. Of course, he must be a good
expert, he must understand the technics of his branch, to be able to
direct the work of production. But still more he must be expert in
profit-making. In the first place he must understand the technics of
increasing the net-profit, by finding out how to produce at least cost,
how to sell with most success and how to beat his rivals. This every
director knows. It determines the management of business. It also
determines the organization within the shop.

The organization of the production within the shop is conducted along
two lines, of technical and of commercial organization. The rapid
development of technics in the last century, based upon a wonderful
growth of science, has improved the methods of work in every branch.
Better technics is the best weapon in competition, because it secures
extra profit at the cost of the rivals. This development increased the
productivity of labor, it made the goods for use and consumption
cheaper, more abundant and more varied, it increased the means of
comfort, and, by lowering the cost of living, i.e., the value of labor
power, enormously raised the profit of capital. This high stage of
technical development brought into the factory a rapidly increasing
number of experts, engineers, chemists, physicists, well versed by their
training at universities and laboratories in science. They are necessary
to direct the intricate technical processes, and to improve them by
regular application of new scientific discoveries. Under their
supervision act skilled technicians and workers. So the technical
organization shows a carefully regulated collaboration of various kinds
of workers, a small number of university-trained specialists, a larger
number of qualified professionals and skilled workers, besides a great
mass of unskilled workers to do the manual work. Their combined efforts
are needed to run the machines and to produce the goods.

The commercial organization has to conduct the sale of the product. It
studies markets and prices, it advertises, it trains agents to stimulate
buying. It includes the so-called scientific management, to cut down
costs by distributing men and means; it devises incentives to stimulate
the workers to more strenuous efforts; it turns advertising into a kind
of science taught even at universities. It is not less, it is even more
important than technics to the capitalist masters; it is the chief
weapon in their mutual fight. From the view-point of providing society
with its life necessities, however, it is an entirely useless waste of
capacities.

But also the forms of technical organization are determined by the same
motive of profit. Hence the strict limitation of the better paid
scientific experts to a small number, combined with a mass of cheap
unskilled labor. Hence the structure of society at large, with its low
pay and poor education for the masses, with its higher pay -- so much as
higher education demands for the constant filling of the ranks -- for a
scientifically trained minority.

These technical officials have not only the care of the technical
processes of production. Under capitalism they have also to act as
taskmasters of the workers. Because under capitalism production of goods
is inseparably connected with production of profit, both being one and
the same action, the two characters of the shop-officials, of a
scientific leader of production and of a commanding helper of
exploitation, are intimately combined. So their position is ambiguous.
On the one hand they are the collaborators of the manual workers, by
their scientific knowledge directing the process of transformation of
the materials, by their skill increasing the profits; they also are
exploited by capital. On the other hand they are the underlings of
capital, appointed to hustle the workers and to assist the capitalist in
exploiting them.

It may seem that not everywhere the workers are thus exploited by
capital. In public-utility enterprises, for instance, or in co-operative
factories. Even if we leave aside the fact that the former, by their
profit, often must contribute to the public funds, thus relieving the
taxes of the propertied class, the difference with other business is not
essential. As a rule co-operatives have to compete with private
enterprises; and public utilities are controlled by the capitalist
public by attentive criticism. The usually borrowed capital needed in
the business demands its interest, out of the profits. As in other
enterprises there is the personal command of a director and the forcing
up of the tempo of the work. There is the same exploitation as in every
capitalist enterprise. There may be a difference in degree; part of what
otherwise is profit may be used to increase the wages and to improve the
conditions of labor. But a limit is soon reached. In this respect they
may be compared with private model enterprises where sensible
broad-minded directors try to attach the workers by better treatment, by
giving them the impression of a privileged position, and so are rewarded
by a better output and increased profit. But it is out of the question
that the workers here, or in public utilities or co-operatives, should
consider themselves as servants of a community, to which to devote all
their energy. Directors and workers are living in the social
surroundings and the feelings of their respective classes. Labor has
here the same capitalist character as elsewhere; it constitutes its
deeper essential nature under the superficial differences of somewhat
better or worse conditions.

Labor under capitalism in its essential nature is a system of squeezing.
The workers must be driven to the utmost exertion of their powers,
either by hard constraint or by the kinder arts of persuasion. Capital
itself is in a constraint; if it cannot compete, if the profits are
inadequate, the business will collapse. Against this pressure the
workers defend themselves by a continual instinctive resistance. If not,
if they willingly should give way, more than their daily labor power
would be taken from them. It would be an encroaching upon their funds of
bodily power, their vital power would be exhausted before its time, as
to some extent is the case now; degeneration, annihilation of health and
strength, of themselves and their offspring, would be the result. So
resist they must. Thus every shop, every enterprise, even outside the
times of sharp conflict, of strikes or wage reductions, is the scene of
a constant silent war, of a perpetual struggle, of pressure and
counter-pressure. Rising and falling under its influence, a certain norm
of wages, hours and tempo of labor establishes itself, keeping them just
at the limit of what is tolerable and intolerable (if intolerable the
total of production is effected). Hence the two classes, workers and
capitalists, while having to put up with each other in the daily course
of work, in deepest essence, by their opposite interests, are implacable
foes, living, when not fighting, in a kind of armed peace.

Labor in itself is not repulsive. Labor for the supplying of his needs
is a necessity imposed on man by nature. Like all other living beings,
man has to exert his forces to provide for his food. Nature has given
them bodily organs and mental powers, muscles, nerves and brains, to
conform to this necessity. Their wants and their means are harmoniously
adapted to one another in the regular living of their life. So labor, as
the normal use of their limbs and capacities, is a normal impulse for
man and animal alike. In the necessity of providing food and shelter
there is, to be sure, an element of constraint. Free spontaneousness in
the use of muscles and nerves, all in their turn, in following every
whim, in work or play, lies at the bottom of human nature. The
constraint of his needs compels man to regular work, to suppression of
the impulse of the moment, to exertion of his powers, to patient
perseverance and self-restraint. But this self-restraint, necessary as
it is for the preservation of oneself, of the family, of the community,
affords the satisfaction of vanquishing impediments in himself or the
surrounding world, and gives the proud feeling of reaching self-imposed
aims. Fixed by its social character, by practice and custom in family,
tribe or village, the habit of regular work grows into a new nature
itself, into a natural mode of life, a harmonious unity of needs and
powers, of duties and disposition. Thus in farming the surrounding
nature is transformed into a safe home through a lifelong heavy or
placid toil. Thus in every people, each in its individual way, the old
handicraft gave to the artisans the joy of applying their skill and
fantasy in the making of good and beautiful things for use.

All this has perished since capital became master of labor. In
production for the market, for sale, the goods are commodities which
besides their utility for the buyer, have exchange-value, embodying the
labor implemented; this exchange-value determines the money they bring.
Formerly a worker in moderate hours -- leaving room for occasional
strong exertion -- could produce enough for his living. But the profit
of capital consists in what the worker can produce in surplus to his
living. The more value he produces and the less the value of what he
consumes, the larger is the surplus-value seized by capital. Hence his
life-necessities are reduced, his standard of life is lowered as much as
possible, his hours are increased, the tempo of his work is accelerated.
Now labor loses entirely its old character of pleasant use of body and
limbs. Now labor turns into a curse and an outrage. And this remains its
true character, however mitigated by social laws and by trade-union
action, both results of the desperate resistance of the workers against
their unbearable degradation. What they may attain is to turn capitalism
from a rude abuse into a normal exploitation. Still then labor, being
labor under capitalism, keeps its innermost character of inhuman toil:
the workers, compelled by the threat of hunger to strain their forces at
foreign command, for foreign profit, without genuine interest, in the
monotonous fabrication of uninteresting or bad things, driven to the
utmost of what the overworked body can sustain, are used up at an early
age. Ignorant economists, unacquainted with the nature of capitalism,
seeing the strong aversion of the workers from their work, conclude that
productive work, by its very nature, is repulsive to man, and must be
imposed on unwilling mankind by strong means of constraint.

Of course, this character of their work is not always consciously felt
by the workers. Sometimes the original nature of work, as an impulsive
eagerness of action, giving contentment, asserts itself. Especially in
young people, kept ignorant of capitalism and full of ambition to show
their capacities as fully-qualified workers, feeling themselves moreover
possessor of an inexhaustible labor-power. Capitalism has its
well-advised ways of exploiting this disposition. Afterwards, with the
growing solicitudes and duties for the family, the worker feels caught
between the pressure of the constraint and the limit of his powers, as
in tightening fetters he is unable to throw off. And at last, feeling
his forces decay at an age that for middle-class man is the time of full
and matured power, he has to suffer exploitation in tacit resignation,
in continuous fear of being thrown away as a worn-out tool.

Bad and damnable as work under capitalism may be, still worse is the
lack of work. Like every commodity, labor-power sometimes finds no
buyer. The problematic liberty of the worker to choose his master goes
hand in hand with the liberty of the capitalist to engage or to dismiss
his workers. In the continuous development of capitalism, in the
founding of new enterprises and the decline or collapse of old ones, the
workers are driven to and fro, are accumulated here, dismissed there. So
they must consider it good luck even, when they are allowed to let
themselves be exploited. Then they perceive that they are at the mercy
of capital. That only with the consent of the masters they have access
to the machines that wait for their handling.

Unemployment is the worst scourge of the working class under capitalism.
It is inherent in capitalism. As an ever returning feature it
accompanies the periodical crises and depressions, which during the
entire reign of capitalism ravaged society at regular intervals. They
are a consequence of the anarchy of capitalist production. Each
capitalist as an independent master of his enterprise is free to manage
it at his will, to produce what he thinks profitable or to close the
shop when profits are failing. Contrary to the careful organization
within the factory there is a complete lack of organization in the
totality of social production. The rapid increase of capital through the
accumulated profits, the necessity to find profits also for the new
capital, urges a rapid increase of production flooding the market with
unsaleable goods. Then comes the collapse, reducing not only the profits
and destroying the superfluous capital, but also turning the accumulated
hosts of workers out of the factories, throwing them upon their own
resources or on meagre charity. Then wages are lowered, strikes are
ineffective, the mass of the unemployed presses as a heavy weight upon
the working conditions. What has been gained by hard fight in times of
prosperity is often lost in times of depression. Unemployment was
always the chief impediment to a continuous raising of the life standard
of the working class.

There have been economists alleging that by the modern development of
big business this pernicious alternation of crises and prosperity would
disappear. They expected that cartels and trusts, monopolizing as they
do large branches of industry, would bring a certain amount of
organization into the anarchy of production and smooth its
irregularities. They did not take into account that the primary cause,
the yearning for profit, remains, driving the organized groups into a
fiercer competition, now with mightier forces. The incapacity of modern
capitalism to cope with its anarchy was shown in a grim light by the
world crisis of 1930. During a number of long years production seemed to
have definitely collapsed. Over the whole world millions of workers, of
farmers, even of intellectuals were reduced to living on the doles,
which the governments by necessity, had to provide: From this crisis of
production the present war crisis took its origin.

In this crisis the true character of capitalism and the impossibility to
maintain it, was shown to mankind as in a searchlight. There were the
millions of people lacking the means to provide for their life
necessities. There were the millions of workers with strong arms, eager
to work; there were the machines in thousands of shops, ready to whirl
and to produce an abundance of goods. But it was not allowed. The
capitalist ownership of the means of production stood between the
workers and the machines. This ownership, affirmed if necessary by the
power of police and State, forbade the workers to touch the machines and
to produce all that they themselves and society needed for their
existence. The machines had to stand and rust, the workers had to hang
around and suffer want. Why? Because capitalism is unable to manage the
mighty technical and productive powers of mankind to conform to their
original aim, to provide for the needs of society.

To be sure, capitalism now is trying to introduce some sort of
organization and planned production. Its insatiable profit-hunger cannot
be satisfied within the old realms; it is driven to expand over the
world, to seize the riches, to open the markets, to subject the peoples
of other continents. In a fierce competition each of the capitalist
groups must try to conquer or to keep to themselves the richest portions
of the world. Whereas the capitalist class in England, France, Holland
made easy profits by the exploitation of rich colonies, conquered in
former wars, German capitalism with its energy, its capacities, its
rapid development, that had come too late in the division of the
colonial world, could only get its share by striving for world-power, by
preparing for world war. It had to be the aggressor, the others were the
defenders. So it was the first to put into action and to organize all
the powers of society for this purpose; and then the others had to
follow its example.

In this struggle for life between the big capitalist powers the
inefficiency of private capitalism could no longer be allowed to
persist. Unemployment now was a foolish, nay, a criminal waste of badly
needed manpower. A strict and careful organization had to secure the
full use of all the labor power and the fighting power of the nation.
Now the untenability of capitalism showed itself just as grimly from
another side. Unemployment was now turned into its opposite, into
compulsory labor. Compulsory toil and fighting at the frontiers where
the millions of strong young men, by the most refined means of
destruction mutilate, kill, exterminate, "wipe out" each other, for the
world-power of their capitalist masters. Compulsory labor in the
factories where all the rest, women and children included, are
assiduously producing ever more of these engines of murder, whereas the
production of the life necessities is constricted to the utmost minimum.
Shortage and want in everything needed for life and the falling back to
the poorest and ugliest barbarism is the outcome of the highest
development of science and technics, is the glorious fruit of the
thinking and working of so many generations! Why? Because
notwithstanding all delusive talk about community and fellowship,
organized capitalism, too, is unable to handle the rich productive
powers of mankind to their true purpose, using them instead for
destruction.

Thus the working class is confronted with the necessity of itself taking
the production in hand. The mastery over the machines, over the means of
production, must be taken out of the unworthy hands that abuse them.
This is the common cause of all producers, of all who do the real
productive work in society, the workers, the technicians, the farmers.
But it is the workers, chief and permanent sufferers from the capitalist
system, and, moreover, majority of the population, on whom it impends to
free themselves and the world from this scourge. They must manage the
means of production. They must be masters of the factories, masters of
their own labor, to conduct it at their own will. Then the machines will
be put to their true use, the production of abundance of goods to
provide for the life necessities of all.

This is the task of the workers in the days to come. This is the only
road to freedom. This is the revolution for which society is ripening.
By such a revolution the character of production is entirely reversed;
new principles will form the basis of society. First, because the
exploitation ceases. The produce of the common labor \[will belong to\]
all those who take part in the work. No surplus-value to capital any
more; ended is the claim of superfluous capitalists to a part of the
produce.

More important still than the cessation of their share in the produce is
the cessation of their command over the production. Once the workers are
masters over the shops the capitalists lose their power of leaving in
disuse the machines, these riches of mankind, precious product of the
mental and manual exertion of so many generations of workers and
thinkers. With the capitalists disappears their power to dictate what
superfluous luxuries or what rubbish shall be produced. When the workers
have command over the machines they will apply them for the production
of all that the life of society requires.

This will be possible only by combining all the factories, as the
separate members of one body, into a well organized system of
production. The connection that under capitalism is the fortuitous
outcome of blind competition and marketing, depending on purchase and
sale, is then the object of conscious planning. Then, instead of the
partial and imperfect attempts at organization of modern capitalism,
that only lead to fiercer fight and destruction, comes the perfect
organization of production, growing into a world-wide system of
collaboration. For the producing classes cannot be competitors, only
collaborators.

These three characteristics of the new production mean a new world. The
cessation of the profit for capital, the cessation of unemployment of
machines and men, the conscious adequate regulation of production, the
increase of the produce through efficient organization give to each
worker a larger quantity of product with less labor. Now the way is
opened for a further development of productivity. By the application of
all technical progress the produce will increase in such a degree that
abundance for all will be joined to the disappearance of toil.

### 1.2: Law and property

Such a change in the system of labor implies a change of Law. Not, of
course, that new laws must first be enacted by Parliament or Congress.
It concerns changes in the depth of society \[in the customs and
practice of society\], far beyond the reach of such temporary things as
Parliamentary acts. It relates to the fundamental laws, not of one
country only, but of human society, founded on man's convictions of
Right and Justice.

These laws are not immutable. To be sure, the ruling classes at all
times have tried to perpetuate the existing Law by proclaiming that it
is based on nature, founded on the eternal rights of man, or sanctified
by religion. This, for the sake of upholding their prerogatives and
dooming the exploited classes to perpetual slavery. Historical evidence,
on the contrary, shows that law continually changed in line with the
changing feelings of right and wrong.

The sense of right and wrong, the consciousness of justice in men, is
not accidental. It grows up, irresistibly, by nature, out of what they
experience as the fundamental conditions of their life. Society must
live; so the relations of men must be regulated in such a way -- it is
this that law provides for -- that the production of life-necessities
may go on unimpeded. Right is what is essentially good and necessary for
life. Not only useful for the moment, but needed generally; not for the
life of single individuals, but for people at large, for the community;
not for personal or temporal interests, but for the common and lasting
weal. If the life-conditions change, if the system of production
develops into new forms, the relations between men change, their feeling
of what is right or wrong changes with them, and the law has to be
altered.

This is seen most clearly in the laws regulating the right of property.
In the original savage and barbarian state the land was considered as
belonging to the tribe that lived on it, hunting or pasturing. Expressed
in our terms, we should say that the land was common property of the
tribe that used it for its living and defended it against other tribes.
The self-made weapons and tools were accessories of the individual,
hence were a kind of private property, though not in our conscious and
exclusive sense of this word, in consequence of the strong mutual bonds
amongst the tribesmen. Not laws, but use and custom regulated their
mutual relations. Such primitive peoples, even agricultural peoples in
later times (as the Russian peasants of before 1860) could not conceive
the idea of private ownership of a tract of land, just as we cannot
conceive the idea of private ownership of a quantum of air.

These regulations had to change when the tribes settled and expanded,
cleared the forests and dissolved into separate individuals (i.e.,
families), each working a separate lot. They changed still more when
handicraft separated from agriculture, when from the casual work of all,
it became the continual work of some: when the products became
commodities, to be sold in regular commerce and to be consumed by others
than the producers. It is quite natural that the farmer who worked a
piece of land, who improved it, who did his work at his own will,
without interference from others, had the free disposal of the land and
the tools; that the produce was his; that land and produce were his
property. Restrictions might be needed for defense, in mediaeval times,
in the form of possible feudal obligations. It is quite natural that the
artisan, as the only one who handled his tools, had the exclusive
disposal of them, as well as of the things he made; that he was the sole
owner.

Thus private ownership became the fundamental law of a society founded
on small-scale working-units. Without being expressly formulated it was
felt as a necessary right that whoever exclusively handled the tools,
the land, the product, must be master of them, must have the free
disposal of them. Private ownership of the means of production belongs
as its necessary juridical attribute to small trade.

It remained so, when capitalism came to be master of industry. It was
even more consciously expressed, and the French Revolution proclaimed
liberty, equality and property the fundamental Rights of the citizen. It
was private ownership of the means of production simply applied, when,
instead of some apprentices, the master-craftsman hired a larger number
of servants to assist him, to work with his tools and to make products
for him to sell. By means of exploiting the labor-power of the workers,
the factories and machines, as private property of the capitalist,
became the source of an immense and ever growing increase of capital.
Here private ownership performed a new function in society. As
capitalist ownership, it ascertained power and increasing wealth to the
new ruling class, the capitalists, and enabled them strongly to develop
the productivity of labor and to expand their rule over the earth. So
this juridical institute, notwithstanding the degradation and misery of
the exploited workers, was felt as a good and beneficent, even necessary
institution, promising an unlimited progress of society.

This development, however, gradually changed the inner character of the
social system. And thereby again the function of private ownership
changed. With the joint-stock companies the twofold character of the
capitalist factory-owner, that of directing the production and that of
pocketing the surplus-value, is splitting up. Labor and property, in
olden times intimately connected, are now separated. Owners are the
shareholders, living outside the process of production, idling in
distant country-houses and maybe gambling at the exchange. A shareholder
has no direct connection with the work. His property does not consist in
tools for him to work with. His property consists simply in pieces of
paper, in shares of enterprises of which he does not even know the
whereabouts. His function in society is that of a parasite. His
ownership does not mean that he commands and directs the machines: this
is the sole right of the director. It means only that he may claim a
certain amount of money without having to work for it. The property in
hand, his shares, are certificates showing his right -- guaranteed by
law and government, by courts and police -- to participate in the
profits; titles of companionship in that large Society for Exploitation
of the World, that is capitalism.

The work in the factories goes on quite apart from the shareholders.
Here the director and the staff have the care all day, to regulate, to
run about, to think of everything, the workers are working and toiling
from morning till evening, hurried and abused. Everybody has to exert
himself to the utmost to render the output as large as possible. But the
product of their common work is not for those who did the work. Just as
in olden times burgesses were ransacked by gangs of wayside robbers, so
now people entirely foreign to the production come forward and, on the
credit of their papers (as registered owners of share scrip), seize the
chief part of the produce. Not violently; without having to move as much
as a finger they find it put on their banking account, automatically.
Only a poor wage or a moderate salary is left for those who together did
the work of production; all the rest is dividend taken by the
shareholders. Is this madness? It is the new function of private
ownership of the means of production. It is simply the praxis of old
inherited law, applied to the new forms of labor to which it does no
longer fit.

Here we see how the social function of a juridical institute, in
consequence of the gradual change of the forms of production, turns into
the very reverse of its original aim. Private ownership, originally a
means to give everybody the possibility of productive work, now has
turned into the means to prevent the workers from the free use of the
instruments of production. Originally a means to ascertain to the
workers the fruits of their labor, it now turned into a means to deprive
the workers of the fruits of their labor for the benefit of a class of
useless parasites.

How is it, then, that such obsolete law still holds sway over society?
First, because the numerous middle-class and small-business people, the
farmers and independent artisans cling to it, in the belief that it
assures them their small property and their living; but with the result
that often, with their mortgaged holdings, they are the victims of usury
and bank-capital. When saying: I am my own master, they mean: I have not
to obey a foreign master; community in work as collaborating equals lies
far outside their imagination. Secondly and chiefly, however, because
the power of the State, with its police and military force, upholds old
law for the benefit of the ruling class, the capitalists.

In the working class, now, the consciousness of this contradiction is
arising as a new sense of Right and Justice. The old right, through the
development of small trade into big business, has turned into wrong, and
it is felt as a wrong. It contradicts the obvious rule that those who do
the work and handle the equipment must dispose of it in order to arrange
and execute the work in the best way. The small tool, the small lot
could be handled and worked by a single person with his family. So that
person had the disposal of it, was the owner. The big machines, the
factories, the large enterprises can only be handled and worked by an
organized body of workers, a community of collaborating forces. So this
body, the community, must have the disposal of it, in order to arrange
the work according to their common will. This common ownership does not
mean an ownership in the old sense of the word, as the right of using or
misusing at will. Each enterprise is, but part, the total productive
apparatus of society; so the right of each body or community of
producers is limited by the superior right of society, and has to be
carried out in regular connection with the others.

Common ownership must not be confounded with public ownership. In public
ownership, often advocated by notable social reformers, the State or
another political body is master of the production. The workers are not
masters of their work, they are commanded by the State officials, who
are leading and directing the production. Whatever may be the conditions
of labor, however human and considerate the treatment, the fundamental
fact is that not the workers themselves, but the officials dispose of
the means of production, dispose of the product, manage the entire
process, decide what part of the produce shall be reserved for
innovations, for wear, for improvements, for social expenses, what part
has to fall to the workers what part to themselves. In short, the
workers still receive wages, a share of the product determined by the
masters. Under public ownership of the means of production, the workers
are still subjected to and exploited by a ruling class. Public ownership
is a middle-class program of a modernized and disguised form of
capitalism. Common ownership by the producers can be the only goal of
the working class.

Thus the revolution of the system of production is intimately bound up
with a revolution of Law. It is based on a change in the deepest
convictions of Right and Justice. Each production-system consists of the
application of a certain technique, combined with a certain Law
regulating the relations of men in their work, fixing their rights and
duties. The technics of small tools combined with private ownership
means a society of free and equal competing small producers. The
technics of big machines, combined with private ownership, means
capitalism. The technics of big machines, combined with common
ownership, means a free collaborating humanity. Thus capitalism is an
intermediate system, a transitional form resulting from the application
of the old Law to the new technics. While the technical development
enormously increased the powers of man, the inherited law that regulated
the use of these powers subsisted nearly unchanged. No wonder that it
proved inadequate, and that society fell to such distress. This is the
deepest sense of the present world crisis. Mankind simply neglected in
time to adapt its old law to its new technical powers. Therefore it now
suffers ruin and destruction.

Technique is a given power. To be sure, its rapid development is the
work of man, the natural result of thinking over the work, of experience
and experiment, of exertion and competition. But once established, its
application is automatic, outside our free choice, imposed like a given
force of nature. We cannot go back, as poets have wished, to the general
use of the small tools of our forefathers. Law, on the other hand, must
be instituted by man with conscious design. Such as it is established,
it determines freedom or slavery of man towards man and towards his
technical equipment.

When inherited law, in consequence of the silent growth of technics, has
turned into a means of exploitation and oppression, it becomes an object
of contest between the social classes, the exploiting and the exploited
class. So long as the exploited class dutifully acknowledges existing
law as Right and Justice, so long its exploitation remains lawful and
unchallenged. When then gradually in the masses arises a growing
consciousness of their exploitation, at the same time new conceptions of
Right awaken in them. With the growing feeling that existing law is
contrary of justice, their will is roused to change it and to make their
convictions of right and justice the law of society. This means that the
sense of being wronged is not sufficient. Only when in great masses of
the workers this sense grows into such clear and deep convictions of
Right that they permeate the entire being, filling it with a firm
determination and a fiery enthusiasm, will they be able to develop the
powers needed for revolving the social structure. Even then this will be
only the preliminary condition. A heavy and lengthy struggle to overcome
the resistance of the capitalist class defending its rule with the
utmost power, will be needed to establish the new order.

### 1.3: Shop organization

Thus the idea of their common ownership of the means of production is
beginning to take hold of the minds of the workers. Once they feel the
new order, their own mastery over labor to be a matter of necessity and
of justice, all their thoughts and all their actions will be consecrated
to its realization. They know that it cannot be done at once; a long
period of fight will be unavoidable. To break the stubborn resistance of
the ruling classes the workers will have to exert their utmost forces.
All the powers of mind and character, of organization and knowledge,
which they are capable of mustering must be developed. And first of all
they have to make clear to themselves what it is they aim at, what this
new order means.

Man, when he has to do a work, first conceives it in his mind as a plan,
as a more or less conscious design. This distinguishes the actions of
man from the instinctive actions of animals. This also holds, in
principle, for the common struggles, the revolutionary actions of social
classes. Not entirely, to be sure; there is a great deal of
unpremeditated spontaneous impulse in their outbursts of passionate
revolt. The fighting workers are not an army conducted after a neatly
conceived plan of action by a staff of able leaders. They are a people
gradually rising out of submissiveness and ignorance, gradually coming
to consciousness of their exploitation, again and again driven to fight
for better living conditions, by degrees developing their powers. New
feelings spring up in their hearts, new thoughts arise in their heads,
how the world might and should be. New wishes, new ideals, new aims fill
their mind and direct their will and action. Their aims gradually take a
more concise shape. From the simple strife for better working
conditions, in the beginning, they grow into the idea of a fundamental
reorganization of society. For several generations already the ideal of
a world without exploitation and oppression has taken hold of the minds
of the workers. Nowadays the conception of the workers themselves master
of the means of production, themselves directing their labor, arises
ever more strongly in their minds.

This new organization of labor we have to investigate and to clarify to
ourselves and to one another, devoting to it the best powers of our
mind. We cannot devise it as a fantasy; we derive it from the real
conditions and needs of present work and present workers. It cannot, of
course, be depicted in detail; we do not know the future conditions that
will determine its precise forms. Those forms will take shape in the
minds of the workers then facing the task. We must content ourselves for
the present to trace the general outlines only, the leading ideas that
will direct the actions of the working class. They will be as the
guiding stars that in all the vicissitudes of victory and adversity in
fight, of success and failure in organization, keep the eyes steadily
directed towards the great goal. They must be elucidated not by minute
descriptions of detail, but chiefly by comparing the principles of the
new world with the known forms of existing organizations.

When the workers seize the factories to organize the work an immensity
of new and difficult problems arises before them. But they dispose of an
immensity of new powers also. A new system of production never is an
artificial structure erected at will. It arises as an irresistible
process of nature, as a convulsion moving society in its deepest
entrails, evoking the mightiest forces and passions in man. It is the
result of a tenacious and probably long class struggle. The forces
required for construction can develop and grow up in this fight only.

What are the foundations of the new society? They are the social forces
of fellowship and solidarity, of discipline and enthusiasm, the moral
forces of self-sacrifice and devotion to the community, the spiritual
forces of knowledge, of courage and perseverance, the firm organization
that binds all these forces into a unity of purpose, all of them are the
outcome of the class fight. They cannot purposely be prepared in
advance. Their first traces arise spontaneously in the workers out of
their common exploitation; and then they grow incessantly through the
necessities of the fight, under the influence of experience and of
mutual inducement and instruction. They must grow because their fullness
brings victory, their deficiency defeat. But even after a success in
fighting attempts at new construction must fail, so long as the social
forces are insufficient, so long as the new principles do not entirely
occupy the workers' hearts and minds. And in that case, since mankind
must live, since production must go on, other powers, powers of
constraint, dominating and suppressing forces, will take the production
in their hands. So the fight has to be taken up ever anew, till the
social forces in the working class have reached such a height as to
render them capable of being the self-governing masters of society.

The great task of the workers is the organization of production on a new
basis. It has to begin with the organization within the shop.
Capitalism, too, had a carefully planned shop-organization; but the
principles of the new organization are entirely different. The technical
basis is the same in both cases; it is the discipline of work imposed by
the regular running of the machines. But the social basis, the mutual
relations of men, are the very opposite of what they were. Collaboration
of equal companions replaces the command of masters and the obedience of
servants. The sense of duty, the devotion to the community, the praise
or blame of the comrades according to efforts and achievements, as
incentives take the place of fear for hunger and perpetual risk of
losing the job. Instead of the passive utensils and victims of capital,
the workers are now the self-reliant masters and organizers of
production, exalted by the proud feeling of being active co-operators in
the rise of a new humanity.

The ruling body in this shop-organization is the entirety of the
collaborating workers. They assemble to discuss matters and in assembly
take their decisions. So everybody who takes part in the work takes part
in the regulation of the common work. This is all self-evident and
normal, and the method seems to be identical to that followed when under
capitalism groups or unions of workers had to decide by vote on the
common affairs. But there are essential differences. In the unions there
was usually a division of task between the officials and the members;
the officials prepared and devised the proposals and the members voted.
With their fatigued bodies and weary minds the workers had to leave the
conceiving to others; it was only in part or in appearance that they
managed their own affairs. In the common management of the shop,
however, they have to do everything themselves, the conceiving, the
devising, as well as the deciding. Devotion and emulation not only play
their role in everybody's work-task, but are still more essential in the
common task of regulating the whole. First, because it is the
all-important common cause, which they cannot leave to others. Secondly,
because it deals with the mutual relations in their own work, in which
they are all interested and all competent, which therefore commands
their profound considerations, and which thorough discussion must
settle. So it is not only the bodily, but still more the mental effort
bestowed by each in his participation in the general regulation that is
the object of competition and appreciation. The discussion, moreover,
must bear another character than in societies and unions under
capitalism, where there are always differences of personal interest.
There in his deeper consciousness everybody is concerned with his own
safeguarding, and discussions have to adjust and to smooth out these
differences in the common action. Here, however, in the new community of
labor, all the interests are essentially the same, and all thoughts are
directed to the common aim of effective co-operative organization.

In great factories and plants the number of workers is too large to
gather in one meeting, and far too large for a real and thorough
discussion. Here decisions can only be taken in two steps, by the
combined action of assemblies of the separate sections of the plant, and
assemblies of central committees of delegates. The functions and the
practice of these committees cannot exactly be ascertained in advance
now; they are entirely new, an essential part of the new economic
structure. When facing the practical needs the workers will develop the
practical structure. Yet something of their character may, in general
lines, be derived by comparing them with bodies and organizations known
to us.

In the old capitalist world central committees of delegates are a
well-known institution. We have them in parliaments, in all kinds of
political bodies and in leading boards of societies and unions. They are
invested with authority over their constituents, or even rule over them
as their masters. As such it is in line with a social system of a
working mass of people exploited and commanded by a ruling minority.
Now, however, the task is to build up a form of organization for a body
of collaborating free producers, actually and mentally controlling their
common productive action, regulating it as equals after their own will
-- a quite different social system. Again in the old world we have union
councils administering the current affairs after the membership,
assembling at greater intervals, have fixed the general policy. What
these councils then have to deal with are the trifles of the day, not
vital questions. Now, however, basis and essence of life itself are
concerned, the productive work, that occupies and has to occupy
everybody's mind continually, as the one and greatest object of their
thoughts.

The new conditions of labor make these shop-committees something quite
different from everything we know in the capitalist world. They are
central, but not ruling bodies, they are no governing board. The
delegates constituting them have been sent by sectional assemblies with
special instructions; they return to these assemblies to report on the
discussion and its result, and after further deliberation the same or
other delegates may go up with new instructions. In such a way they act
as the connecting links between the personnels of the separate sections.
Neither are the shop-committees bodies of experts to provide the
directing regulations for the non-expert multitude. Of course, experts
will be necessary, single or in bodies, to deal with the special
technical and scientific problems. The shop-committees, however, have to
deal with the daily proceedings, the mutual relations, the regulation of
the work, where everybody is expert and at the same time an interested
party. Among other items it is up to them to put into practice what
special experts suggest. Nor are the shop-committees the responsible
bodies for the good management of the whole, with the consequence that
every member could shift his part of responsibility upon the impersonal
collectivity. On the contrary, whereas this management is incumbent upon
all in common, single persons may be consigned special tasks which to
fulfill with their entire capacity, in full responsibility, whilst they
carry all the honors for the achievement.

All members of the personnel, men and women, younger and older, who take
part in the work, as equal companions take their part in this
shop-organization, in the actual work as well as in the general
regulation. Of course, there will be much difference in the personal
tasks, easier or more difficult according to force and capacities,
different in character according to inclination and abilities. And, of
course, the differences in general insight will give a preponderance to
the advice of the most intelligent. At first, when as an inheritance of
capitalism there are large differences in education and training, the
lack of good technical and general knowledge in the masses will be felt
as a heavy deficiency. Then the small number of highly trained
professional technicians and scientists must act as technical leaders,
without thereby acquiring a commanding or socially leading position,
without gaining privileges other than the estimation of their companions
and the moral authority that always attaches to capacity and knowledge.

The organization of a shop is the conscious arrangement and connection
of all the separate procedures into one whole. All these
interconnections of mutually adapted operations may be represented in a
well-ordered scheme, a mental image of the actual process. As such it
was present in the first planning and in the later improvements and
enlargements. This image must be present in the minds of all the
collaborating workers; they all must have a thorough acquaintance with
what is their own common affair. Just as a map or a graph fixes and
shows in a plain, to everyone intelligible picture the connections of a
complicated totality, so here the state of the total enterprise, at
every moment, in all its developments must be rendered visible by
adequate representations. In numerical form this is done by bookkeeping.
Bookkeeping registers and fixes all that happens in the process of
production: what raw materials enter the shop, what machines are
procured, what product they yield, how much labor is bestowed upon the
products, how many hours of work are given by every worker, what
products are delivered. It follows and describes the flow of materials
through the process of production. It allows continually to compare, in
comprehensive accounts, the results with the previous estimates in
planning. So the production in the shop is made into a mentally
controlled process.

Capitalist management of enterprises also knows mental control of the
production. Here, too, the proceedings are represented by calculation
and bookkeeping. But there is this fundamental difference that
capitalist calculation is adapted entirely to the viewpoint of
production of profit. It deals with prices and costs as its fundamental
data; work and wages are only factors in the calculation of the
resulting profit on the yearly balance account. In the new system of
production, on the other hand, hours of work is the fundamental datum,
whether they are still expressed, in the beginning, in money units, or
in their own true form. In capitalist production calculation and
bookkeeping is a secret of the direction, the office. It is no concern
of the workers; they are objects of exploitation, they are only factors
in the calculation of cost and produce, accessories to the machines. In
the production under common ownership the bookkeeping is a public
matter; it lies open to all. The workers have always a complete view of
the course of the whole process. Only in this way they are able to
discuss matters in the sectional assemblies and in the shop-committees,
and to decide on what has to be done. The numerical results are made
visible, moreover, by statistical tables, by graphs and pictures that
display the situation at a glance. This information is not restricted to
the personnel of the shop; it is a public matter, open to all outsiders.
Every shop is only a member in the social production, and also the
connection of its doings with the work outside is expressed in the
book-keeping. Thus insight in the production going on in every
enterprise is a piece of common knowledge for all the producers.

### 1.4: Social organization

Labor is a social process. Each enterprise is part of the productive
body of society. The total social production is formed by their
connection and collaboration. Like the cells that constitute a living
organism, they cannot exist isolated and cut off from the body. So the
organization of the work inside the shop is only one-half of the task of
the workers. Over it, a still more important task, stands the joining of
the separate enterprises, their combination into a social organization.

Whereas organization within the shop already existed under capitalism,
and had only to be replaced by another, based on a new foundation,
social organization of all the shops into one whole is, or was until
recent years, something entirely new, without precedent. So utterly new,
that during the entire nineteenth century the establishing of this
organization, under the name of "socialism" was considered the main task
of the working class. Capitalism consisted of an unorganized mass of
independent enterprises -- "a jostling crowd of separate private
employers," as the program of the Labor Party expresses it -- connected
only by the chance relations of market and competition, resulting in
bankruptcies, overproduction and crisis, unemployment and an enormous
waste of materials and labor power. To abolish it, the working class
should conquer the political power and use it to organize industry and
production. This State-socialism was considered, then, as the first step
into a new development.

In the last years the situation has changed in so far that capitalism
itself has made a beginning with State-run organization. It is driven
not only by the simple wish to increase productivity and profits through
a rational planning of production. In Russia there was the necessity of
making up for the backwardness of economic development by means of a
deliberate rapid organization of industry by the bolshevist government.
In Germany it was the fight for world power that drove to State control
of production and State-organization of industry. This fight was so
heavy a task that only by concentrating into the hands of the State the
power over all productive forces could the German capitalist class have
a chance of success. In national-socialist organization property and
profit -- though strongly cut for State needs -- remain with the private
capitalist, but the disposal over the means of production, their
direction and management has been taken over by the State officials. By
an efficient organization the unimpaired production of profits is
secured for capital and for the State. This organization of the
production at large is founded on the same principles as the
organization within the factory, on the personal command of the general
director of society, the Leader, the head of the State. Wherever
Government takes control over industry, authority and constraint take
the place of the former freedom of the capitalist producers. The
political power of the State officials is greatly strengthened by their
economic power, by their command over the means of production, the
foundation of society.

The principle of the working class is in every respect the exact
opposite. The organization of production by the workers is founded on
free collaboration: no masters, no servants. The combination of all the
enterprises into one social organization takes place after the same
principle. The mechanism for this purpose must be built up by the
workers.

Given the impossibility to collect the workers of all the factories into
one meeting, they can only express their will by means of delegates. For
such bodies of delegates in later times the name of workers' councils
has come into use. Every collaborating group of personnel designates the
members who in the council assemblies have to express its opinion and
its wishes. These took an active part themselves in the deliberations of
this group, they came to the front as able defenders of the views that
carried the majority. Now they are sent as the spokesmen of the group to
confront these views with those of other groups in order to come to a
collective decision. Though their personal abilities play a role in
persuading the colleagues and in clearing problems, their weight does
not lay in their individual strength, but in the strength of the
community that delegated them. What carries weight are not simple
opinions, but still more the will and the readiness of the group to act
accordingly. Different persons will act as delegates according to the
different questions raised and the forthcoming problems.

The chief problem, the basis of all the rest, is the production itself.
Its organization has two sides, the establishment of general rules and
norms and the practical work itself. Norms and rules must be established
for the mutual relations in the work, for the rights and duties. Under
capitalism the norm consisted in the command of the master, the
director. Under State-capitalism it consisted in the mightier command of
the Leader, the central government. Now, however, all producers are free
and equal. Now in the economic field of labor the same change takes
place as occurred in former centuries in the political field, with the
rise of the middle class. When the rule of the citizens came in place of
the rule of the absolute monarch, this could not mean that for his
arbitrary will the arbitrary will of everybody was substituted. It meant
that, henceforward, laws established by the common will should regulate
the public rights and duties. So now, in the realm of labor, the command
of the master gives way to rules fixed in common, to regulate the social
rights and duties, in production and consumption. To formulate them will
be the first task of the workers' councils. This is not a difficult
task, not a matter of profound study or serious discordance. For every
worker these rules will immediately spring up in his consciousness as
the natural basis of the new society: everyone's duty to take part in
the production in accordance with his forces and capacities, everyone's
right to enjoy his adequate part of the collective product.

How will the quantities of labor spent and the quantities of product to
which he is entitled be measured? In a society where the goods are
produced directly for consumption there is no market to exchange them;
and no value, as expression of the labor contained in them establishes
itself automatically out of the processes of buying and selling. Here
the labor spent must be expressed in a direct way by the number of
hours. The administration keeps book \[records\] of the hours of labor
contained in every piece or unit quantity of product, as well as of the
hours spent by each of the workers. In the averages over all the workers
of a factory, and finally, over all the factories of the same category,
the personal differences are smoothed out and the personal results are
intercompared.

In the first times of transition when there is much devastation to be
repaired, the first problem is to build up the production apparatus and
to keep people alive. It is quite possible that the habit, imposed by
war and famine, of having the indispensable foodstuffs distributed
without distinction is simply continued. It is most probable that, in
those times of reconstruction, when all the forces must be exerted to
the utmost, when, moreover, the new moral principles of common labor are
only gradually forming, the right of consumption will be coupled to the
performance of work. The old popular saying that whoever does not work
shall not eat, expresses an instinctive feeling of justice. Here it is
not only the recognition that labor is the basis of all human life, but
also the proclaiming that now there is an end to capitalist exploitation
and to appropriating the fruits of foreign labor by property titles of
an idle class.

This does not mean, of course, that now the total produce is distributed
among the producers, according to the time given by each. Or, expressed
in another way, that every worker receives, in the form of products,
just the quantity of hours of labor spent in working. A considerable
part of the work must be spent on the common property, on the perfection
and enlargement of the productive apparatus. Under capitalism part of
the surplus-value served this purpose; the capitalist had to use part of
his profit, accumulated into new capital, to innovate, expand and
modernize his technical equipment, in his case driven by the necessity
not to be outflanked by his competitors. So the progress in technics
took place in forms of exploitation. Now, in the new form of production,
this progress is the common concern of the workers. Keeping themselves
alive is the most immediate, but building the basis of future production
is the most glorious part of their task. They will have to settle what
part of their total labor shall be spent on the making of better
machines and more efficient tools, on research and experiment, for
facilitating the work and improving the production.

Moreover, part of the total time and labor of society must be spent on
non-productive, though necessary activities, on general administration,
on education, on medical service. Children and old people will receive
their share of the produce without corresponding achievements. People
incapable of work must be sustained; and especially in the first time
there will be a large number of human wrecks left by the former
capitalist world. Probably the rule will prevail that the productive
work is the task of the younger part of the adults; or, in other words,
is the task of everybody during that period of his life when both the
tendency and the capacity for vigorous activity are greatest. By the
rapid increase of the productivity of labor this part, the time needed
to produce all the life necessities, will continually decrease, and an
increasing part of life will be available for other purposes and
activities.

The basis of the social organization of production consists in a careful
administration, in the form of statistics and bookkeeping. Statistics of
the consumption of all the different goods, statistics of the capacity
of the industrial plants, of the machines, of the soil, of the mines, of
the means of transport, statistics of the population and the resources
of towns, districts and countries, all these present the foundation of
the entire economic process in wellordered rows of numerical data.
Statistics of economic processes were already known under capitalism;
but they remained imperfect because of the independence and the limited
view of the private business men, and they found only a limited
application. Now they are the starting point in the organization of
production; to produce the right quantity of goods, the quantity used or
wanted must be known. At the same time statistics as the compressed
result of the numerical registration of the process of production, the
comprehensive summary of the bookkeeping, expresses the course of
development.

The general bookkeeping, comprehending and encompassing the
administrations of the separate enterprises, combines them all into a
representation of the economic process of society. In different degrees
of range it registers the entire process of transformation of matter,
following it from the raw materials at their origin, through all the
factories, through all the hands, down to the goods ready for
consumption. In uniting the results of co-operating enterprises of a
sort into one whole it compares their efficiency, it averages the hours
of labor needed and directs the attention to the ways open for progress.
Once the organization of production has been carried out the
administration is the comparatively simple task of a network of
interconnected computing offices. Every enterprise, every contingent
group of enterprises, every branch of production, every township or
district, for production and for consumption, has its office, to take
care of the administration, to collect, to treat and to discuss the
figures and to put them into a perspicuous form easy to survey. Their
combined work makes the material basis of life a mentally dominated
process. As a plain and intelligible numerical image the process of
production is laid open to everybody's views. Here mankind views and
controls its own life. What the workers and their councils devise and
plan in organized collaboration is shown in character and results in the
figures of bookkeeping. Only because they are perpetually before the
eyes of every worker the direction of social production by the producers
themselves is rendered possible.

This organization of economic life is entirely different from the forms
of organization developed under capitalism; it is more perfect and more
simple. The intricacies and difficulties in capitalist organization, for
which the much glorified genius of big business men was needed, always
dealt with their mutual struggle, with the arts and tricks of capitalist
warfare to subdue or annihilate the competitors. All this has
disappeared now. The plain aim, the providing for the life necessities
of mankind, makes the entire structure plain and direct. Administration
of large quantities, fundamentally, is hardly more difficult or more
complicated than that of small quantities; only a couple of cyphers has
to be put behind the figures. The rich and multiform diversity of wants
and wishes that in small groups of people is hardly less than in large
masses, now, by their massal character, can be secured more easily and
more completely.

The function and the place numerical administration occupies in society
depends on the character of this society. Financial administration of
States was always necessary as part of the central government, and the
computing officials were subordinate servants of the kings or other
rulers. Where in modern capitalism production is subjected to an
encompassing central organization, those who have the central
administration in their hands will be the leading directors of economy
and develop into a ruling bureaucracy. When in Russia the revolution of
1917 led to a rapid expansion of industry and hosts of workers still
permeated by the barbarous ignorance of the villages crowded into the
new factories they lacked the power to check the rising dominance of the
bureaucracy then organizing into a new ruling class. When in Germany,
1933, a sternly organized party conquered the State power, as organ of
its central administration it took in hand the organization of all the
forces of capitalism.

Conditions are entirely different when the workers as masters of their
labor and as free producers organize production. The administration by
means of bookkeeping and computing is a special task of certain persons,
just as hammering steel or baking bread is a special task of other
persons, all equally useful and necessary. The workers in the computing
offices are neither servants nor rulers. They are not officials in the
service of the workers' councils, obediently having to perform their
orders. They are groups of workers, like other groups collectively
regulating their work themselves, disposing of their implements,
performing their duties, as does every group, in continual connection
with the needs of the whole. They are the experts who have to provide
the basical data of the discussions and decisions in the assemblies of
workers and of councils. They have to collect the data, to present them
in an easily intelligible form of tables, of graphs, of pictures, so
that every worker at every moment has a clear image of the state of
things. Their knowledge is not a private property giving them power;
they are not a body with exclusive administrative knowledge that thereby
somehow could exert a deciding influence. The product of their labor,
the numerical insight needed for the work's progress, is available to
all. This general knowledge is the foundation of all the discussions and
decisions of the workers and their councils by which the organization of
labor is performed.

For the first time in history the economic life, in general and in
detail, lies as an open book before the eyes of mankind. The foundations
of society, under capitalism a huge mass hidden in the dark depths,
dimly lighted here and there by statistics on commerce and production,
now has entered into the full daylight and shows its detailed structure.
Here we dispose of a science of society consisting of a well-ordered
knowledge of facts, out of which leading causal relations are readily
grasped. It forms the basis of the social organization of labor, just as
the knowledge of the facts of nature, condensed they too into causal
relations, forms the basis of the technical organization of labor. As a
knowledge of the common simple facts of daily life it is available to
everyone and enables him to survey and grasp the necessities of the
whole as well as his own part in it. It forms the spiritual equipment
through which the producers are able to direct the production and to
control their world.

### 1.5: Objections

The principles of the new structure of society appear so natural and
self-evident, that there may seem to be little room for doubts or
objections. The doubts come from the old traditions that fill the minds
with cobwebs, so long as the fresh storm wind of social activity does
not blow through them. The objections are raised by the other classes
that up till now are leading society. So first we have to consider the
objections of the bourgeoisie, the ruling class of capitalists.

One might say that the objections of the members of the capitalist class
do not matter. We cannot convince them, nor is this necessary. Their
ideas and convictions, as well as our own, are class ideas, determined
by class conditions different from ours by the difference in life
conditions and in social function. We have not to convince them by
reasoning, but to beat them by power.

But, we should not forget that capitalist power to a great extent is
spiritual power, power over the minds of the workers. The ideas of the
ruling class dominate society and permeate the minds of the exploited
classes. They are fixed there, fundamentally, by the inner strength and
necessity of the system of production; they are actually implanted there
by education and propaganda, by the influence of school, church, press,
literature, broadcasting and film. As long as this holds, the working
class, lacking consciousness of its class position, acquiescing in
exploitation as the normal condition of life, does not think of revolt
and cannot fight. Minds submissive to the doctrines of the masters
cannot hope to win freedom. They must overcome the spiritual sway of
capitalism over their minds before they actually can throw off its yoke.
Capitalism must be beaten theoretically before it can be beaten
materially. Because then only the absolute certainty of the truth of
their opinions as well as of the justice of their aims can give such
confidence to the workers as is needed for victory. Because then only
hesitation and misgivings will lame the forces of the foe. Because then
only the wavering middle groups, instead of fighting for capitalism, may
to a certain degree conceive the necessity of social transformation and
the benefit of the new order.

So we have to face the objections raised from the side of the capitalist
class. They proceed directly from its view of the world. For the
bourgeoisie, capitalism is the only possible and natural system of
society, or at least, since more primitive forms preceded, its most
developed final form. Hence all the phenomena presented by capitalism
are not considered as temporary but as natural phenomena, founded on the
eternal nature of man. The capitalist class sees the deep aversion of
the workers against their daily labor; and how they only resign
themselves to it by dire necessity. It concludes that man in the great
mass is naturally averse to regular productive work and for that reason
is bound to remain poor -- with the exception of the energetic,
industrious and capable minority, who love work and so become leaders,
directors and capitalists. Then it follows that, if the workers should
be collectively masters of the production, without the competitive
principle of personal reward for personal exertion, the lazy majority
will do as little as possible, trying to live upon what a more
industrious minority performs; and universal poverty would inevitably be
the result. All the wonderful progress, all the abundance capitalism has
brought in the last century will then be lost, when the stimulus of
personal interest is removed; and mankind will sink back into barbarism.

To refute such objections it is sufficient to point out that they form
the natural viewpoint from the other side of society, from the side of
the exploiting class. Never in history were the old rulers able to
acknowledge the capability of a new rising class; they expected an
inevitable failure as soon as it should try to manage the affairs; and
the new class, conscious of its forces, could show these only in
conquering and after having conquered power. Thus now the workers grow
conscious of the inner strength of their class; their superior knowledge
of the structure of society, of the character of productive labor shows
them the futility of the capitalist point of view. They will have to
prove their capacities, certainly. But not in the form of standing a
test beforehand. Their test will be their fight and victory.

This is no arguing with the capitalist class, but to the fellow workers.
The middle class ideas still permeating large masses of them consist
chiefly in doubt and disbelief in their own forces. As long as a class
does not believe in themselves, they cannot expect that other groups
should believe in them. This lack of self-confidence, the chief weakness
now, cannot be entirely removed under capitalism with its many degrading
and exhausting influences. In times of emergency, however, world crisis
and impending ruin, compelling the working class to revolt and fight,
will also, once it has won, compel it to take control of production.
Then the command of dire need treads under foot the implanted timorous
diffidence of their own forces, and the imposed task rouses unexpected
energies. Whatever hesitation or doubt may be in their minds this one
thing the workers know for certain: that they, better than the idle
people of property, know what work is, that they can work, and that they
will work. The futile objections of the capitalist class will collapse
with this class itself.

More serious objections are raised from other sides. From such as
consider themselves and are considered as friends, as allies or
spokesmen of the working class. In later capitalism there is a
widespread opinion, among intellectuals and social reformers, among
trade union leaders and social democrats, that capitalist production for
profit is bad and has to disappear, and that it has to make place for
some kind of socialist system of production. Organization of production,
they say, is the means of producing abundance for all. The capitalist
anarchy of the totality of production must be abolished by imitating the
organized order within the factory. Just as in a well-directed
enterprise the perfect running of every detail and the highest
efficiency of the whole is secured by the central authority of the
director and the staff, so in the still more complicated social
structure the right interaction and connection of all its parts can only
be secured by a central leading power.

The lack of such a ruling power, they say, is what must be objected to
the system of organization by means of workers' councils. They argue
that nowadays production is not the handling of simple tools, easily to
survey by everybody, as in the bygone days of our ancestors, but the
application of the most abstract sciences, accessible only to capable
and well instructed minds. They say that a clear-sighted view on an
intricate structure and its capable management demand talents that only
few are gifted with; that it fails to see that the majority of people
are dominated by narrow selfishness, and that they lack the capacities
and even the interest to take up these large responsibilities. And
should the workers in stupid presumption reject the leadership of the
most capable, and try to direct production and society by their own
masses, then, however industrious they may be, their failure would be
inevitable; every factory would soon be a chaos, and decline would be
the result. They must fail because they cannot muster a leading power of
sufficient authority to impose obedience and thus to secure a smooth
running of the complicated organization.

Where to find such a central power? They argue, we have it already in
State government. Till now Government restricted its functions to
political affairs; it will have to extend them to economic affairs -- as
already it is compelled to do in some minor cases -- to the general
management of production and distribution. For is not war against hunger
and misery equally, and even more important than war against foreign
enemies?

If the State directs the economic activities it acts as the central body
of the community. The producers are master of the production, not in
small groups separately, but in such a way that in their totality, as
the entire class, as the whole people they are master. Public ownership
of the means of production, for their most important part, means State
ownership, the totality of the people being represented by the State. By
the democratic State, of course, where people choose their rulers. A
social and political organization where the masses choose their leaders,
everywhere, in the factories, in the unions, in the State, may be called
universal democracy. Once chosen, these leaders of course must be
strictly obeyed. For only in this way, by obedience to the commandment
of able leaders of production, the organization, can work smoothly and
satisfactorily.

Such is the point of the spokesmen of State socialism. It is clear that
this plan, of social organization is entirely different from a true
disposal by the producers over the production. Only in name are the
workers masters of their labor, just as only in name are the people
masters of the State. In the so-called democracies, so-called because
parliaments are chosen by universal suffrage, the governments are not at
all delegates designated by the population as executors of its will.
Everybody knows that in every country the government is in the hands of
small, often hereditary or aristocratic groups of politicians and high
officials. The parliamentarians, their body of supporters, are not
selected by the constituents as mandataries to perform their will. The
voters, practically, have only to choose between two sets of
politicians, selected, presented and advertised to them by the two main
political parties, whose leaders, according to the result, either form
the ruling cabinet, or as "loyal opposition" stand in abeyance for their
turn. The State officials, who manage the affairs, are not selected by
the people either; they are appointed from above, by the government.
Even if shrewd advertising calls them servants of the people, in reality
they are its rulers, its masters. In the system of State socialism it is
this bureaucracy of officials that, considerably enlarged, directs
production. They dispose of the means of production, they have the upper
command of labor. They have to take care that everything runs well, they
administrate the process of production and determine the partition of
the produce. Thus the workers have got new masters, who assign to them
their wages and keep at their own disposal the remainder of the produce.
This means that the workers are still exploited; State socialism may
quite as well be called State capitalism, according to the emphasis laid
on its different sides, and to the greater or smaller share of influence
of the workers.

State socialism is a design for reconstructing society on the basis of a
working class such as the middle class sees it and knows it under
capitalism. In what is called a socialistic system of production the
basic fabric of capitalism is preserved, the workers running the
machines at the command of the leaders; but it is provided with a new
improved upper story, a ruling class of humane reformers instead of
profit-hungry capitalists. Reformers who as true benefactors of mankind
apply their capacities to the ideal task of liberating the working
masses from want and misery.

It is easily understood that during the 19th century, when the workers
only began to resist and to fight, but were not yet able to win power
over society, this socialist ideal found many adherents. Not only among
socially minded of the middle class who sympathised with the suffering
masses, but also among the workers themselves. For here loomed up before
them a vision of liberation from their yoke by the simple expression of
their opinion in voting, by the use of the political power of their
ballot to put into government their redeemers instead of their
oppressors. And certainly, if it were only a matter of placid discussion
and free choice between capitalism and socialism on the part of the
masses, then socialism would have a good chance.

But reality is different. Capitalism is in power and it defends its
power. Can anybody have the illusion that the capitalist class would
give up its rule, its domination, its profit, the very basis of its
existence, hence its existence itself, at the result of a vote? Or still
more, to a campaign of publicity arguments, of public opinion
demonstrated in mass meetings or street processions? Of course it will
fight, convinced of its right. We know that even for reforms, for every
minor reform in capitalism there had to be fighting. Not to the utmost,
to be sure; not or seldom by civil war and bloodshed. Because public
opinion, in the bulk of the middle class, aroused by the determined
resistance of the workers, saw that in their demands capitalism itself,
in its essence, was not engaged, that profit as such was not endangered.
Because it was felt that, on the contrary, capitalism would be
consolidated rather, reform appeasing the workers and attaching them
more firmly to the existing system.

If, however, the existence of the capitalist class itself, as a ruling
and exploiting class is at stake, the entire middle class stands behind
it. If its mastery, its exploitation, its profit is threatened, not by a
sham revolution of outward appearances, but by a real revolution of the
foundations of society, then we may be sure that it will resist with all
its powers. Where, then, is the power to defeat it? The irrefutable
arguments and the good intentions of noble-minded reformers, all these
are not able to curb, still less to destroy its solid force. There is
only one power in the world capable of vanquishing capitalism: the power
of the working class. The working class can not be freed by others; it
can only be freed by itself.

But the fight will be long and difficult. For the power of the
capitalist class is enormous. It is firmly entrenched in the fabric of
State and government, having all their institutes and resources at its
disposal, their moral authority as well as their physical means of
suppression. It disposes of all the treasures of the earth, and can
spend unlimited amounts of money to recruit, pay and organize defenders,
and to carry away public opinion. Its ideas and opinions pervade the
entire society, fill up books and papers and dominate the minds of even
the workers. Here lies the chief weakness of the masses. Against it the
working class, certainly, has its numbers, already forming the majority
of the population in capitalist countries. It has its momentous economic
function, its direct hold over the machines, its power to run or stop
them. But they are of no avail as long as their minds are dependent on
and filled by the masters' ideas, as long as the workers are separate,
selfish, narrow-minded, competing individuals. Number and economic
importance alone are as the powers of a sleeping giant; they must first
be awakened and activated by practical fight. Knowledge and unity must
make them active power. Through the fight for existence, against
exploitation and misery, against the power of the capitalist class and
the State, through the fight for mastery over the means of production,
the workers must acquire the consciousness of their position, the
independence of thought, the knowledge of society, the solidarity and
devotion to their community, the strong unity of class that will enable
them to defeat capitalist power.

We cannot foresee what whirls of world politics will arouse them. But we
can be sure that it is not a matter of years only, of a short
revolutionary fight. It is a historical process that requires an entire
epoch of ups and downs, of fights and lulls, but yet of unceasing
progress. It is an intrinsic transformation of society, not only because
the power relations of the classes are reversed, because property
relations are changed, because production is reorganized on a new basis,
but chiefly -- decisive basis of all these things -- because the working
class itself in its deepest character is transformed. From obedient
subjects they are changed into free and self-reliant masters of their
fate, capable to build and manage their new world.

It was the great socialist humanitarian Robert Owen who has taught us
that for a true socialist society the character of man must change; and
that it is changed by environment and education. It was the great
communist scientist Karl Marx who, completing the theory of his
predecessor, has taught us that mankind itself has to change its
environment and has to educate itself, by fighting, by the class-fight
against exploitation and oppression. The theory of State socialism by
reform is an arid mechanical doctrine in its belief that for a social
revolution a change of political institutions, of outer conditions of
life is sufficient, without the inner transformation of man that turns
submissive slaves into proud and spirited fighters. State socialism was
the political program of social-democracy, utopian, because it pretended
to bring about a new system of production by simply converting people
through propaganda to new political opinions. Social-democracy was not
able, nor was it willing to lead the working class into a real
revolutionary fight. So it went down when the modern development of big
capitalism made socialism won by the ballot an obsolete illusion.

Yet socialist ideas still have their importance, though in a different
way now. They are widespread all over society, among socially feeling
middle-class people as well as among the masses of the workers. They
express the longing for a world without exploitation, combined, in the
workers, with the lack of confidence in their own power. This state of
mind will not disappear at once after the first successes have been won;
for it is then that the workers will perceive the immensity of their
task, the still formidable powers of capital, and how all the traditions
and institutions of the old world are barring their way. When thus they
stand hesitating, socialism will point to what appears to be an easier
road, not beset with such insurmountable difficulties and endless
sacrifices. For just then, in consequence of their success, numbers of
socially-minded reformers will join their ranks as capable allies and
friends, putting their capacities in the service of the rising class,
claiming, of course, important positions, to act and to lead the
movement after their ideas. If the workers put them in office, if they
install or support a socialist government, then the powerful existing
machinery of the State is available for the new purpose and can be used
to abolish capitalist exploitation and establish freedom by law. How far
more attractive this mode of action than implacable class war! Yes,
indeed; with the same result as what happened in revolutionary movements
in the 19th century, when the masses who fought down the old regime in
the streets, were thereupon invited to go home, to return to their work
and put their trust in the self-appointed "provisional government" of
politicians that was prepared to take matters in hand.

The propaganda of the socialist doctrine has the tendency to throw
doubts into the minds of the workers, to raise or to strengthen distrust
in their own powers, and to dim the consciousness of their task and
their potentialities. That is the social function of socialism now, and
at every moment of workers' success in the coming struggles. From the
hard fight for freedom brilliant ahead, the workers are to be lured by
the soft shine of a mild new servitude. Especially when capitalism
should receive a severe blow, all who distrust and fear the unrestricted
freedom of the masses, all who wish to preserve the distinction of
masters and servants, of higher and lower, will rally round this banner.
The appropriate catchwords will readily be framed: "order" and
"authority" against "chaos," "socialism" and "organization" against
"anarchy." Indeed, an economic system where the workers are themselves
masters and leaders of their work, to middle-class thinking is identical
with anarchy and chaos. Thus the only role socialism can play in future
will be to act as an impediment standing in the way of the workers'
fight for freedom.

To summarize: the socialist plan of reconstruction, brought forward by
reformers, must fail, first because they have no means to produce the
forces to vanquish the power of capitalism. Second, because only the
workers themselves can do that. Exclusively by their own fight they can
develop into the mighty power needed for such a task. It is this fight
that socialism tries to forestall. And once the workers have beaten down
capitalist power and won freedom, why should they give it up and submit
to new masters?

There is a theory to explain why indeed they should and they must. The
theory of actual inequality of men. It points out that nature itself
makes them different: a capable, talented and energetic minority rises
out of an incapable, stupid and slow majority. Notwithstanding all
theories and decrees instituting formal and legal equality, the talented
energetic minority takes the lead and the incapable majority follows and
obeys.

It is not for the first time that a ruling class tries to explain, and
so to perpetuate, its rule as the consequences of an inborn difference
between two kinds of people, one destined by nature to ride, the other
to be ridden. The landowning aristocracy of former centuries defended
their privileged position by boasting their extraction from a nobler
race of conquerors that had subdued the lower race of common people. Big
capitalists explain their dominating place by the assertion that they
have brains and other people have none. In the same way now especially
the intellectuals, considering themselves the rightful rulers of
tomorrow, claim their spiritual superiority. They form the rapidly
increasing class of university-trained officials and free professions,
specialized in mental work, in study of books and of science, and they
consider themselves as the people most gifted with intellect. Hence they
are destined to be leaders of the production, whereas the ungifted mass
shall execute the manual work, for which no brains are needed. They are
no defenders of capitalism; not capital, but intellect should direct
labor. The more so, since now society is such a complicated structure,
based on abstract and difficult science, that only the highest
intellectual acumen is capable of embracing, grasping and handling it.
Should the working masses, from lack of insight, fail to acknowledge
this need of superior intellectual lead, should they stupidly try to
take the direction into their own hands, chaos and ruin will be the
inevitable consequence.

Now it must be remarked that the term intellectual here does not mean
possessor of intellect. Intellectuals is the name for a class with
special functions in social and economic life, for which mostly
university training is needed. Intellect, good understanding, is found
in people of all classes, among capitalists and artisans, among farmers
and workers. What is found in the "intellectuals" is not a superior
intelligence, but a special capacity of dealing with scientific
abstractions and formulas, often merely of memorizing them, and
combined, usually, with a limited notion of other realms of life. In
their self-complacency appears a narrow intellectualism ignorant of the
many other qualities that play an important role in all human
activities. A rich and varied multitude of dispositions, different in
character and in degree, is in man: here theoretical power of
abstraction, there practical skill, here acute understanding, there rich
fantasy, here rapidity of grasping, there deep brooding, here patient
perseverance of purpose, there rash spontaneity, here indomitable
courage in action and fight, there all-embracing ethical philanthropy.
All of them are necessary in social life; in turns, according to
circumstances, they occupy the foremost place in the exigencies of
practice and labor. It were silly to distinguish some of them as
superior, others as inferior. Their difference implies the predilection
and qualification of people for the most varied kinds of activity. Among
them the capacity for abstract or scientific studies, under capitalism
often degenerated to a limited training, takes its important place in
attending to and directing the technical processes: but only as one
among many other capacities. Certainly for these people there is no
reason to look down upon the nonintellectual masses. Has not the
historian Trevelyan, treating the times of nearly three centuries ago,
spoken of "the wealth of imagination, the depth of emotion, the vigor
and variety of intellect that were to be found among the poor ... once
awakened to the use of their minds"?

Of course in all of these qualities some people are more gifted than
others; men and women of talent or genius excel their fellow-beings.
Probably they are even more numerous than it appears now under
capitalism, with its neglect, misuse and exploitation of human
qualities. Free humanity will employ their talents to the best use; and
the consciousness to promote with their greater force the common cause,
will give them a greater satisfaction than any material privilege in a
world of exploitation could do.

Let us consider the claim of the intellectual class, the domination of
spiritual over manual work. Must not the mind rule over the body, the
bodily activities? Certainly. Human mind is the highest product of
nature; his spiritual capacities elevate man above the animals. Mind is
the most valuable asset of man; it makes him lord of the world. What
distinguishes human work from the activities of the animals is this very
rule of the mind, the thinking out, the meditating and planning before
the performing. This domination of theory, of the powers of the mind
over practical work grows ever stronger, through the increasing
complication of the process of production and its increasing dependence
on science.

This does not mean, however, that spiritual workers should hold sway
over manual workers. The contradistinction between spiritual and manual
work is not founded in nature, but in society; it is an artificial
class-distinction. All work, even the most simple, is spiritual as well
as manual. For all kinds of work, till by repetition it has become
automatic, thinking is necessary; this combination of thinking and
acting is the charm of all human activity. Also under the natural
division of labor, as a consequence of differences in predilection and
capacity, this charm remains. Capitalism, however, has vitiated these
natural conditions. To increase profit it has exaggerated the division
of labor to the extreme of one-sided specializing. Three centuries ago
already, in the beginning of the manufactury-system, the endless
repetition of always the same limited manipulations turned labor into a
monotonous routine where, through undue training of some limbs and
faculties at the cost of others, body and mind were crippled. In the
same way capitalism now, in order to increase productivity and profit,
has separated the mental and the manual part of work and made each of
them the object of specialized training at the cost of other capacities.
It made the two sides that together constitute natural labor, the
exclusive task of separate trades and different social classes. The
manual workers, fatigued by long hours of spiritless work in dirty
surroundings, are not able to develop the capacities of their minds. The
intellectuals, on the other hand, through their theoretical training,
kept aloof from the practical work and the natural activity of the body,
must resort to artificial substitutes. In both groups full human
endowment is crippled. Assuming this capitalistic degeneration to be
permanent human nature, one of these classes now claims superiority and
domination over the other.

By yet another line of argument the claim of the intellectual class for
spiritual and, hence, social leadership is supported. Learned writers
have pointed out that the entire progress of humanity is due to some few
geniuses. It was this limited number of discoverers, of inventors, of
thinkers, that built up science, that improved technics, that conceived
new ideas and opened new ways, where then the masses of their fellow-men
followed and imitated them. All civilization is founded upon this small
number of eminent brains. So the future of mankind, the further progress
of culture depends on the breeding and selection of such superior people
and would be endangered by a general levelling.

Suppose the assertion to be true, the retort, with becoming irony, could
be that the result of these superior brains, this pitiful world of ours,
is indeed in keeping with such a narrow basis, and nothing to boast of.
Could those great precursors witness what has been made of their
discoveries they would not be very proud. Were we not able to do better,
we should despair of humanity.

But the assertion is not true. Whoever makes a detailed study of any of
the great discoveries in science, technics or what else is surprised by
the great number of names associated with it. In the later popular and
abridged historical text books, however, the source of so many
superficial misconceptions, only a few prominent names are preserved and
exalted, as if theirs was the sole credit. So these were coined
exceptional geniuses. In reality every great progress proceeded from a
social surrounding pregnant with it, where from all sides the new ideas,
the suggestions, the glimpses of insight sprang up. None of the great
men, extolled in history, because they took the decisive and salient
steps, could have done so but for the work of a large number of
precursors on whose achievements his are based. And besides, these most
talented thinkers, praised in later centuries as the authors of the
world's progress, were not at all the spiritual leaders of their time.
They were often unknown to their contemporaries, quietly working in
retirement; they mostly belonged to the subjected class, sometimes even
they were persecuted by the rulers. Their present-day equivalents are
not those noisy claimants for intellectual leadership, but silent
workers again, hardly known, derided perhaps or persecuted. Only in a
society of free producers, who are able to appreciate the importance of
spiritual achievements and eager to apply them to the well-being of all,
the creative genius will be recognized and estimated by his fellow-men
at the full value.

Why is it that from the life work of all these men of genius in the past
nothing better than present capitalism could result? What they were able
to do was to lay the scientific and technical foundations of high
productivity of labor. By causes beyond them it became the source of
immense power and riches for the ruling minority that succeeded in
monopolizing the fruits of this progress. A society of freedom and
abundance for all, however, cannot be brought about by any superiority
of some few eminent individuals whatever. It does not depend on the
brains of the few, but on the character of the many. As far as it
depends on science and technics to create abundance, they are already
sufficient. What is lacking is the social forces that bind the masses of
the workers into a strong unity of organization. The basis of the new
society is not what knowledge they can adopt and what technics they can
imitate from others, but what community feeling and organized activity
they can raise in themselves. This new character cannot be infused by
others, it cannot proceed from obedience to any masters. It can only
sprout from independent action, from the fight for freedom, from revolt
against the masters. All the genius of superior individuals is of no
avail here.

The great decisive step in the progress of mankind, the transformation
of society now impending, is essentially a transformation of the working
masses. It can be accomplished only by the action, by the revolt, by the
effort of the masses themselves; its essential nature is self-liberation
of mankind. From this viewpoint it is clear that here no able leadership
of an intellectual elite can be helpful. Any attempt to impose it could
only be obnoxious, retarding as it does the necessary progress, hence
acting as a reactionary force. Objections from the side of the
intellectuals, based on the present inadequateness of the working class,
in practice will find their refutation when world conditions compel the
masses to take up the fight for world revolution.

### 1.6: Difficulties

More essential difficulties in the reconstruction of society arise out
of the differences in outlook that accompany differences in development
and size of the enterprises.

Technically and economically society is dominated by big enterprise, by
big capital. The big capitalists themselves, however, are only a small
minority of the propertied class. They have behind them, to be sure, the
entire class of rentiers and shareholders. But these, as mere parasites,
cannot give a solid support in the struggle of the classes. So big
capital would be in an awkward position were it not backed by the small
bourgeoisie, by the entire class of smaller business men. In its
domination of society it takes advantage of the ideas and the moods
growing out of the world of small trade, occupying the minds alike of
masters and workers in these trades. The working class has to give good
consideration to these ideas, because its task and its goal, conceived
on the basis of the developments of big capitalism, are conceived and
judged in these circles after the familiar conditions of small trade.

In small capitalistic business the boss as a rule is the owner,
sometimes the sole owner; or if not, the shareholders are some few
friends or relatives. He is his own director and usually the best
technical expert. In his person the two functions of technical leader
and profit-making capitalist are not separated and hardly to be
distinguished even. His profit seems to proceed not from his capital,
but from his labor, not from exploitation of the workers, but from the
technical capacities of the employer. His workers, either engaged as a
few skilled assistants or as unskilled hands, are quite well aware of
the generally larger experience and expertness of the boss. What in
large enterprise, with its technical leadership by salaried officials,
is an obvious measure of practical efficiency -- the exclusion of all
property interests -- would here take the retrogressive form of the
removal of the best technical expert and of leaving the work to the less
expert or incompetent.

It must be clear that here there is no question of a real difficulty
impeding the technical organization of industry. It is hardly to be
imagined that the workers in the small shop should want to expel the
best expert, even the former boss, if he is honestly willing with all
his skill to co-operate in their work, on the foot of equality. Is not
this contrary to basis and doctrine of the new world, the exclusion of
the capitalist? The working class, when reorganizing society on a new
basis, is not bound to apply some theoretical doctrine; but, to direct
its practical measures, it possesses a great leading principle. The
principle, living touchstone of practicability to the clear-sighted
minds, proclaims that those who do the work must regulate the work, and
that all who collaborate practically in the production dispose of the
means of production, with the exclusion of all property or capital
interests. It is on the basis of this principle that the workers will
face all problems and difficulties in the organization of production and
will find a solution.

Surely the technically backward branches of production exercised in
small trade will present special, but not essential difficulties. The
problem of how to organize them by means of self-governing associations,
and to connect them with the main body of social organization must be
solved mainly by the workers engaged in these branches, though
collaboration from other sides may come to their aid. Once the political
and social power is firmly in the hands of the working class and its
ideas of reconstruction dominate the minds, it seems obvious that
everybody who is willing to co-operate in the community of labor will be
welcome and will find the place and the task appropriate to his
capacities. Besides, in consequence of the increasing community feeling
and the desire for efficiency in work, the units of production will not
remain the isolated dwarfish shops of former times.

The essential difficulties are situated in the spiritual disposition,
the mode of thinking produced by the conditions of small trade in all
who are engaged here, masters as well as artisans and workers. It
prevents them to see the problem of big capitalism and big enterprise as
the real and main issue. It is easily understood, however, that the
conditions of small trade, the basis of their ideas, cannot determine a
transformation of society that takes its origin and its driving force
from big capitalism. But it is equally clear that such a disparity of
general outlook may be an ample source of discord and strife, of
misunderstandings and difficulties. Difficulties in the fight, and
difficulties in the constructive work. In small-trade circumstances
social and moral qualities develop in another way than in big
enterprises; organization does not dominate the minds in the same
degree. Whereas the workers may be more headstrong and less submissive,
the impulses of fellowship and solidarity are less also. So propaganda
has to play a greater role here; not in the sense of impressing a
theoretical doctrine, but in its pure sense of exposing wider views on
society in general, so that the ideas are determined not by the narrow
experience of their own conditions but by the wider and essential
conditions of capitalist labor at large.

This holds good still more for agriculture, with its larger number and
greater importance of small enterprises. There is a material difference,
besides, because here the limited amount of soil brought into being one
more parasite. Its absolute necessity for living room and foodstuff
production enables the owners of the soil to levy tribute from all who
want to use it; what in political economy is called rent. So here we
have from olden times an ownership not based on labor, and protected by
State power and law; an ownership consisting only in certificates, in
titles, assuring claims on an often big part of the produce of society.
The farmer paying rent to the landowner or interest to the real-estate
bank, the citizen, whether capitalist or worker, paying in his
house-rent high prices for barren soil, they are all exploited by landed
property. A century ago, in the time of small capitalism, the difference
between the two forms of income, the idle income of the landowner as
contrasted with the hard-won earnings of business man, worker and
artisan, was so strongly felt as undue robbery, that repeatedly projects
were proposed to abolish it, by nationalization of the soil. Later on,
when capitalist property ever more took on the same form of certificates
commanding income without labor, land reform became silent. The
antagonism between capitalist and landowner, between profit and rent
disappeared; landed property is now simply one of the many forms of
capitalist property.

The farmer tilling his own soil combines the character of three social
classes, and his earnings are indiscriminately composed of wages for his
own labor, profit from directing his farm and exploiting the farm hands,
and rent from his ownership. Under the original conditions partly still
living as tradition of an idealized past, the farmer produced nearly all
the necessaries for himself and his family on his own or on rented soil.
In modern times agriculture has to provide foodstuffs for the industrial
population also, which gradually everywhere, and increasingly in the
capitalist countries, forms the majority. In return the rural classes
receive the products of industry, which they need for ever more
purposes. This is not entirely a home affair. The bulk of the world's
need of grain is supplied by large enterprises, on virgin soil in the
new continents, on capitalist lines; while it exhausted the untouched
fertility of those vast plains, it depressed by its cheap competition
the rent of European landed property, causing agrarian crises. But also
in the old European lands agrarian production nowadays is production of
commodities, for the market; the farmers sell the chief part of their
products and buy what they need for living. So they are subject to the
vicissitudes of capitalist competition, now pressed down by low prices,
mortgaged or ruined, then profiteering by favorable conditions. Since
every increase of rent tends to be petrified in higher land prices,
rising product prices make the former owner a rentier, whereas the next
owner, starting with heavier expenses, suffers ruin in the case of
falling prices. So the economic position of the agricultural class in
general is weakened. On the whole their condition and their outlook on
modern society is similar in a way to that of small capitalists or
independent business people in industry.

There are differences, however, due to the limited amount of soil.
Whereas in industry or commerce whoever has a small capital can venture
to start a business and fight against competitors, the farmer cannot
enter the lists when others occupy the land he needs. To be able to
produce he must first have the soil. In capitalist society free disposal
of the soil is only possible as ownership; if he is not landowner he can
only work and apply his knowledge and capacity by suffering himself to
be exploited by the possessor of the soil. So ownership and labor are
intimately connected in his mind; this lies at the root of the often
criticized property-fanaticism of the farmers. Ownership enables him to
gain his living during all his years by heavy toiling. By letting or
selling his property, hence living on the idle landowner's rent,
ownership also enables him in his old age to enjoy the sustenance which
every worker should be entitled to after a life of toil. The continuous
struggle against the variable forces of nature and climate, with
technics only slightly beginning to be directed by modern science, hence
strongly dependent on traditional methods and personal capacity, is
aggravated by the pressure from capitalist conditions. This struggle has
created a strong stubborn individualism, that makes the farmers a
special class with a special mentality and outlook, foreign to the ideas
and aims of the working class.

Still, modern development has worked a considerable change here also.
The tyrannical power of the great capitalist concerns, of landed estate
banks and railway magnates on whom the farmers depend for credit and for
transport, squeezed and ruined them, and sometimes brought them to the
verge of rebellion. On the other hand, the necessity of securing some of
the advantages of large enterprise for small-scale business did much to
enforce co-operation, as well for the buying of fertilizers and
materials as for procuring the necessary foodstuffs for the accumulated
city population. Here the demand for a uniform standardized product, in
dairy production for instance, exacts rigid prescripts and control, to
which the individual farms have to submit. So the farmers are taught a
bit of community feeling, and their rugged individualism has to make
many concessions. But this inclusion of their work into a social
entirety assumes the capitalist form of subjection to a foreign
master-power, thus stinging their feelings of independence.

All these conditions determine the attitude of the rural class to the
workers' reorganization of society. The farmers, though as independent
managers of their own enterprises comparable to industrial capitalists,
usually take part themselves in the productive work, which depends in a
high degree on their professional skill and knowledge. Though pocketing
rent as landowners, their existence is bound up with their strenuous
productive activity. Their management and control over the soil in their
character of producers, of workers, in common with the laborers, is
entirely in accordance with the principles of the new order. Their
control over the soil in their character of landowners is entirely
contrary to these principles. They never learnt, though, to distinguish
between these totally different sides of their position. Moreover, the
disposal over the soil as producers, according to the new principle, is
a social function, a mandate of society, a service to provide their
fellow-people with foodstuffs and raw materials, whereas old tradition
and capitalist egotism tend to consider it an exclusive personal right.

Such differences in outlook may give rise to many dissensions and
difficulties between the producing classes of industry and of
agriculture. The workers must adhere with absolute strictness to the
principle of exclusion of all the exploitation-interests of ownership;
they admit only interests based on productive work. Moreover, for the
industrial workers, the majority of the population, being cut off from
the agrarian produce means starvation, which they cannot tolerate. For
the highly industrial countries of Europe, certainly, the transoceanic
traffic, the interchange with other food-producing continents, here
plays an important role. But there is no doubt that in some way a common
organization of the industrial and the agricultural production in each
country must be established.

The point is that between the industrial workers and the farmers,
between the city and the country, there are considerable differences in
outlook and ideas, but no real differences or conflicts of interest.
Hence there will be many difficulties and misunderstandings, sources of
dissent and strife, but there will be no war to the knife as between
working class and capital. Though so far mostly the farmers, led by
traditional political and narrow social slogans, as defenders of
property interests stood on the side of capital against the workers --
and this may still be so in future -- the logic of their own real
interests must finally place them over against capital. This, however,
is not sufficient. As small business men they may be satisfied to be
freed from pressure and exploitation through a victory of the workers
with or without their help. But then, according to their ideas, it will
be a revolution that makes them absolute and free private possessors of
the soil, similar to former middle-class revolutions. Against this
tendency the workers in intensive propaganda have to oppose the new
principles: production a social function, the community of all the
producers master of their work; as well as their firm will to establish
this community of industrial and agricultural production. Whereas the
rural producers will be their own masters in regulating and directing
their work on their own responsibility, its interlocking with the
industrial part of production will be a common cause of all the workers
and their central councils. Their continual mutual intercourse will
provide agriculture with all technical and scientific means and methods
of organization available, to increase the efficiency and productivity
of the work.

The problems met with in the organization of agricultural production are
partly of the same kind as in industry. In big enterprises, such as the
large estates for corn, wheat, and other mass production with the aid of
motorized machines, the regulation of the work is made by the community
of the workers and their councils. Where for careful treatment in detail
small production units are necessary, co-operation will play an
important role. The number and diversity of small-scale farms will offer
the same kind of problems as small-scale industry, and their managing
will be the task of their self-governing associations. Such local
communities of similar and yet individually different farms will
probably be necessary to relieve social management as a whole from
dealing and reckoning with every small unit separately. All these forms
of organization cannot be imagined before hand; they will be devised and
built by the producers when they stand before the necessities of
practice.

### 1.7: Council organization

The social system considered here might be called a form of communism,
only that name, by the world-wide propaganda of the "Communist Party" is
used for its system of State socialism under party dictatorship. But
what is a name? Names are ever misused to fool the masses, the familiar
sounds preventing them from critically using their brains and clearly
recognizing reality. More expedient, therefore, than looking for the
right name will it be to examine more closely the chief characteristic
of the system, the council organization.

The Workers' Councils are the form of self-government which in the times
to come will replace the forms of government of the old world. Of course
not for all future; none such form is for eternity. When life and work
in community are natural habit, when mankind entirely controls its own
life, necessity gives way to freedom and the strict rules of justice
established before dissolve into spontaneous behavior. Workers' councils
are the form of organization during the transition period in which the
working class is fighting for dominance, is destroying capitalism and is
organizing social production. In order to know their true character it
will be expedient to compare them with the existing forms of
organization and government as fixed by custom as self-evident in the
minds of the people.

Communities too large to assemble in one meeting always regulate their
affairs by means of representatives, of delegates. So the burgesses of
free medieval towns governed themselves by town councils, and the middle
class of all modern countries, following the example of England, have
their Parliaments. When speaking of management of affairs by chosen
delegates we always think of parliaments; so it is with parliaments
especially that we have to compare the workers' councils in order to
discern their predominant features. It stands to reason that with the
large differences between the classes and between their aims, also their
representative bodies must be essentially different.

At once this difference strikes the eye: Workers' councils deal with
labor, have to regulate production, whereas parliaments are political
bodies, discussing and deciding laws and State affairs. Politics and
economy, however, are not entirely unrelated fields. Under capitalism
State and Parliament took the measures and enacted the laws needed for
the smooth course of production; such as the providing for safety in
traffic and dealings, for protection of commerce and industry, of
business and travel at home and abroad, for administration of justice,
for coinage and uniform weights and measures. And its political work,
too, not at first sight connected with economic activity, dealt with
general conditions in society, with the relations between the different
classes, constituting the foundation of the system of production. So
politics, the activity of Parliaments may, in a wider sense, be called
an auxiliary for production.

What, then, under capitalism, is the distinction between politics and
economy? They compare together as the general regulation compares with
the actual practice. The task of politics is to establish the social and
legal conditions under which productive work may run smoothly; the
productive work itself is the task of the citizens. Thus there is a
division of labor. The general regulations, though necessary
foundations, constitute only a minor part of social activity, accessory
to the work proper, and can be left to a minority of ruling politicians.
The productive work itself, basis and content of social life, consists
in the separate activities of numerous producers, completely filling
their lives. The essential part of social activity is the personal task.
If everybody takes care of his own business and performs his task well,
society as a whole runs well. Now and then, at regular intervals, on the
days of parliamentary election, the citizens have to pay attention to
the general regulations. Only in times of social crisis, of fundamental
decisions and severe contests, of civil strife and revolution, has the
mass of the citizens had to devote their entire time and forces to these
general regulations. Once the fundamentals decided, they could return to
their private business and once more leave these general affairs to the
minority of experts, to lawyers and politicians, to Parliament and
Government.

Entirely different is the organization of common production by means of
workers' councils. Social production is not divided up into a number of
separate enterprises each the restricted life-task of one person or
group; now it forms one connected entirety, object of care for the
entirety of workers, occupying their minds as the common task of all.
The general regulation is not an accessory matter, left to a small group
of specialists; it is the principal matter, demanding the attention of
all in conjunction. There is no separation between politics and economy
as life activities of a body of specialists and of the bulk of
producers. For the one community of producers politics and economy have
now coalesced into the unity of general regulation and practical
productive labor. Their entirety is the essential object for all.

This character is reflected in the practice of all proceedings. The
councils are no politicians, no government. They are messengers,
carrying and interchanging the opinions, the intentions, the will of the
groups of workers. Not, indeed, as indifferent messenger boys passively
carrying letters or messages of which they themselves know nothing. They
took part in the discussions, they stood out as spirited spokesmen of
the prevailing opinions. So now, as delegates of the group, they are not
only able to defend them in the council meeting, but at the same time
they are sufficiently unbiased to be accessible to other arguments and
to report to their group opinions more largely adhered to. Thus they are
the organs of social intercourse and discussion.

The practice of' parliaments is exactly the contrary. Here the delegates
have to decide without asking instructions from their voters, without
binding mandate. Though the M.P., to keep their allegiance, may deign to
speak to them and to expound his line of conduct, he does so as the
master of his own deeds. He votes as honor and conscience dictate him,
according to his own opinions. Of course; for he is the expert in
politics, the specialist in legislative matters and cannot let himself
be directed by instructions from ignorant people. Their task is
production, private business, his task is politics, the general
regulations. He has to be guided by high political principles and must
not be influenced by the narrow selfishness of their private interests.
In this way it is made possible that in democratic capitalism
politicians, elected by a majority of workers, can serve the interests
of the capitalist class.

In the labor movement also the principles of parliamentarism took a
footing. In the mass organizations of the unions, or in such gigantic
political organizations as the German Social-Democratic Party, the
officials on the boards as a kind of government got power over the
members, and their annual congresses assumed the character of
parliaments. The leaders proudly called them so, parliaments of labor,
to emphasize their importance; and critical observers pointed to the
strife of factions, to the demagogy of leaders, and to the intrigue
behind the scenes as indications of the same degeneration as appeared in
the real parliaments. Indeed, they were parliaments in their fundamental
character. Not in the beginning, when the unions were small, and devoted
members did all the work themselves, mostly gratuitously. But with the
increase of membership there came the same division of labor as in
society at large. The working masses had to give all their attention to
their separate personal interests, how to find and keep their job, the
chief contents of their life and their mind; only in a most general way
they had, moreover, to decide by vote over their common class and group
interests. It was to the experts, the union officials and party leaders,
who knew how to deal with capitalist bosses and State secretaries, that
the detailed practice was left. And only a minority of local leaders was
sufficiently acquainted with these general interests to be sent as
delegates to the congresses, where notwithstanding the often binding
mandates, they actually had to vote after their own judgment.

In the council organization the dominance of delegates over the
constituents has disappeared because its basis, the division of labor,
has disappeared. Now the social organization of labor compels every
worker to give his entire attention to the common cause, the totality of
production. The production of the necessaries for life as the basis of
life, as before entirely occupies the mind. Not in the form, now, as
care for the own enterprise, the own job, in competition with others.
Life and production now can be secured only by collaboration, by
collective work with the companions. So this collective work is
uppermost in the thoughts of everybody. Consciousness of community is
the background, the basis of all feeling and thinking.

This means a total revolution in the spiritual life of man. He has now
learnt to see society, to know community. In former times, under
capitalism, his view was concentrated on the small part related with his
business, his job, himself and his family. This was imperative, for his
life, his existence. As a dim, unknown background society hovered behind
his small visible world. To be sure, he experienced its mighty forces
that determined luck or failure as the outcome of his labor; but guided
by religion he saw them as the working of supernatural Supreme Powers.
Now, on the contrary, society comes into the full light, transparent and
knowable; now the structure of the social process of labor lies open
before man's eyes. Now his view is directed to the entirety of
production; this is imperative, for his life, his existence. Social
production is now the object of conscious regulation. Society is now a
thing handled, manipulated by man, hence understood in its essential
character. Thus the world of the workers' councils transforms the mind.

To parliamentarism, the political system of the separate business, the
people were a multitude of separate persons; at the best, in democratic
theory, each proclaimed to be endowed with the same natural rights. For
the election of delegates they were grouped according to residence in
constituencies. In the times of petty-capitalism a certain community of
interests might be assumed for neighbors living in the same town or
village. In later capitalism this assumption ever more became a fiction.
Artisans, shopkeepers, capitalists, workers living in the same quarter
of a town have different and opposed interests; they usually give their
vote to different parties, and chance majorities win. Though
parliamentary theory considers the man elected as the representative of
the constituency, it is clear that all these voters do not belong
together as a group that sends him as its delegate to represent its
wishes.

Council organization, in this respect, is quite the contrary of
parliamentarism. Here the natural groups, the collaborating workers, the
personnels of the factories act as unities and designate their
delegates. Because they have common interests and belong together in the
praxis of daily life, they can send some of them as real representatives
and spokesmen. Complete democracy is realized here by the equal rights
of everyone who takes part in the work. Of course, whoever stands
outside the work does not have a voice in its regulation. It cannot be
deemed a lack of democracy that in this world of self-rule of the
collaborating groups all that have no concern with the work -- such as
remained in plenty from capitalism: exploiters, parasites, rentiers --
do not take part in the decisions.

Seventy years ago Marx pointed out that between the rule of capitalism
and the final organization of a free humanity there will be a time of
transition in which the working class is master of society but in which
the bourgeoisie has not yet disappeared. He called this state of things
the dictatorship of the proletariat. At that time this word had not yet
the ominous sound of modern systems of despotism, nor could it be
misused for the dictatorship of a ruling party, as in later Russia. It
meant simply that the dominant power over society was transferred from
the capitalist to the working class. Afterwards people, entirely
confined within the ideas of parliamentarism, tried to materialize this
conception by taking away the franchise for political bodies from the
propertied classes. It is clear that, violating as it did the
instinctive feeling of equal rights, it was in contrast to democracy. We
see now that council organization puts into practice what Marx
theoretically anticipated but for what at that time the practical form
could not yet be imagined. When production is regulated by the producers
themselves, the formerly exploiting class automatically is excluded from
taking part in the decisions, without any artificial stipulation. Marx's
conception of the dictatorship of the proletariat now appears to be
identical with the labor democracy of council organization.

This labor democracy is entirely different from political democracy of
the former social system. The so-called political democracy under
capitalism was a mock democracy, an artful system conceived to mask the
real domination of the people by a ruling minority. Council organization
is a real democracy, the democracy of labor, making the working people
master of their work. Under council organization political democracy has
disappeared, because politics itself disappeared and gave way to social
economy. The activity of the councils, put in action by the workers as
the organs of collaboration, guided by perpetual study and strained
attention to circumstances and needs, covers the entire field of
society. All measures are taken in constant intercourse, by deliberation
in the councils and discussion in the groups and the shops, by actions
in the shops and decisions in the councils. What is done under such
conditions could never be commanded from above and proclaimed by the
will of a government. It proceeds from the common will of all concerned;
because it is founded on the labor experience and knowledge of all, and
because it deeply influences the life of all. Measures can be executed
only in such a way that the masses put them into practice as their own
resolve and will; foreign constraint cannot enforce them, simply because
such a force is lacking. The councils are no government; not even the
most central councils bear a governmental character. For they have no
means to impose their will upon the masses; they have no organs of
power. All social power is vested in the hands of the workers
themselves. Wherever the use of power is needed, against disturbances or
attacks upon the existing order, it proceeds from the collectivities of
the workers in the shops and stands under their control.

Governments were necessary, during the entire period of civilization up
to now, as instruments of the ruling class to keep down the exploited
masses. They also assumed administrative functions in increasing
measure; but their chief character as power structures was determined by
the necessity of upholding class domination. Now that the necessity has
vanished, the instrument, too, has disappeared. What remains is
administration, one of the many kinds of work, the task of special kinds
of workers; what comes in its stead, the life spirit of organization, is
the constant deliberation of the workers, in common thinking attending
to their common cause. What enforces the accomplishment of the decisions
of the councils is their moral authority. But moral authority in such a
society has a more stringent power than any command or constraint from a
government.

When in the preceding time of governments over the people political
power had to be conceded to the people and their parliaments a
separation was made between the legislative and the executive part of
government, sometimes completed by the judicial as a third independent
power. Law-making was the task of parliaments, but the application, the
execution, the daily governing was reserved to a small privileged group
of rulers. In the labor community of the new society this distinction
has disappeared. Deciding and performing are intimately connected; those
who have to do the work have to decide, and what they decide in common
they themselves have to execute in common. In the case of great masses,
the councils are their organs of deciding. Where the executive task was
entrusted to central bodies these must have the power of command, they
must be governments; where the executive task falls to the masses
themselves this character is lacking in the councils. Moreover,
according to the varied problems and objects of regulation and decision,
different persons in different combinations will be sent out and gather.
In the field of production itself every plant has not only to organize
carefully its own extensive range of activities, it has also to connect
itself horizontally with similar enterprises, vertically with those who
provide them with materials or use their products. In the mutual
dependence and interconnection of enterprises, in their conjunction to
branches of production, discussing and deciding councils will cover ever
wider realms, up to the central organization of the entire production.
On the other hand the organization of consumption, the distribution of
all necessaries to the consumer, will need its own councils of delegates
of all involved, and will have a more local or regional character.

Besides this organization of the material life of mankind there is the
wide realm of cultural activities, and of those not directly productive
which are of primary necessity for society, such as education of the
children, or care for the health of all. Here the same principle holds,
the principle of self-regulation of these fields of work by those who do
the work. It seems altogether natural that in the care for universal
health, as well as in the organization of education, all who take part
actively, here the physicians, there the teachers, by means of their
associations regulate and organize the entire service. Under capitalism,
where they had to make a job and a living out of the human disease or
out of drilling children, their connection with society at large had the
form either of competitive business or of regulation and command by
Government. In the new society, in consequence of the much more intimate
connection of health with labor, and of education with labor, they will
regulate their tasks in close touch and steady collaboration of their
organs of intercourse, their councils, with the other workers' councils.

It must be remarked here that cultural life, the domain of arts and
sciences; by its very nature is so intimately bound up with individual
inclination and effort, that only the free initiative of people not
pressed down by the weight of incessant toil can secure its flowering.
This truth is not refuted by the fact that during the past centuries of
class society princes and governments protected and directed arts and
sciences, aiming of course to use them as utensils for their glory and
the preservation of their domination. Generally speaking, there is a
fundamental disparity for the cultural as well as for all the
non-productive and productive activities, between organization imposed
from above by a ruling body and organization by the free collaboration
of colleagues and comrades. Centrally directed organization consists in
regulation as much as possible uniform all over the realm; else it could
not be surveyed and conducted from one centre. In the self-regulation by
all concerned the initiative of numerous experts, all poring over their
work, perfecting it by emulating, imitating, consulting each other in
constant intercourse, must result in a rich diversity of ways and means.
Dependent on the central command of a government, spiritual life must
fall into dull monotony; inspired by the free spontaneity of massal
human impulse it must unfold into brilliant variety. The council
principle affords the possibility of finding the appropriate forms of
organization.

Thus council organization weaves a variegated net of collaborating
bodies through society, regulating its life and progress according to
their own free initiative. And all that in the councils is discussed and
decided draws its actual power from the understanding, the will, the
action of working mankind itself.

### 1.8: Growth

When in the difficult fight against capital, in which the workers'
councils came up and developed, victory is won by the working class, it
takes up its task, the organization of production.

We know, of course, that victory will not be one event, finishing the
fight and introducing a then following period of reconstruction. We know
that social fight and economic construction will not be separated, but
will be associated as a series of successes in fight and starts of new
organization, interrupted perhaps by periods of stagnation or social
reaction. The workers' councils growing up as organs of fight will at
the same time be organs of reconstruction. For clear understanding,
however, we will distinguish these two tasks, as if they were separate
things, coming one after another. In order to see the true character of
the transformation of society we must treat it, in a schematical way, as
a uniform, continuous process starting "the day after the victory."

As soon as the workers are master of the factories, master of society,
they will set the machines running. They know that this cannot wait; to
live is the first necessity, and their own life, the life of society
depends on their labor. Out of the chaos of crumbling capitalism the
first working order must be created by means of the councils. Endless
difficulties will stand in their way; resistance of all kinds must be
overcome, resistance by hostility, by misunderstanding, by ignorance.
But new unsuspected forces have come into being, the forces of
enthusiasm, of devotion, of insight. Hostility must be beaten down by
resolute action, misunderstanding must be taken away by patient
persuading, ignorance must be overcome by incessant propaganda and
teaching. By making the connection of the shops ever stronger, by
including ever wider realms of production, by making ever more precise
accounts and estimates in the plannings, the regulation of the process
of production continually progresses. In this way step by step social
economy is growing into a consciously dominated organization able to
secure life necessities to all.

With the realization of this program the task of the workers' councils
is not finished. On the contrary, this is only the introduction to their
real, more extensive and important work. A period of rapid development
now sets in. As soon as the workers feel themselves master of their
labor, free to unfold their forces, their first impulse will be the
determinate will to do away with all the misery and ugliness, to finish
with the shortcomings and abuses, to destroy all poverty and barbarism
that as inheritances of capitalism disgrace the earth. An enormous
backwardness must be made up for; what the masses got lagged far behind
what they might and should get under existing conditions. With the
possibility of fulfilling them, their wants will be raised to higher
standards; the height of culture of a people is measured by the extent
and the quality of its life exigencies. By simply using the available
means and methods of working, quantity and quality of homes, of food, of
clothing for all can be raised to a level corresponding to the existing
productivity of labor. All productive force that in the former society
was wasted or used for luxury of the rulers can now be used to satisfy
the higher wants of the masses. Thus, first innovation of society, a
general prosperity will arise.

But also the backwardness in the methods of production will from the
beginning have the attention of the workers. They will refuse to be
harrowed and fatigued with primitive tools and obsolete working methods.
If the technical methods and the machines are improved by the systematic
application of all known inventions of technics and discoveries of
science, the productivity of labor can be increased considerably. This
better technics will be made accessible to all; the including in
productive work of the many who before had to waste their forces in the
bungling of petty trade, because capitalism had no use for them, or in
personal service of the propertied class, now helps to lower the
necessary hours of labor for all. So this will be a time of supreme
creative activity. It has to proceed from the initiative of the expert
producers in the enterprises; but it can take place only by continual
deliberation, by collaboration, by mutual inspiration and emulation. So
the organs of collaboration, the councils, are put into (unceasing)
action. In this new construction and organization of an ever more
excellent productive apparatus the workers' councils, as the connecting
strings of society, will rise to the full height of their faculties.
Whereas the abundance of life necessities, the universal prosperity,
represents the passive side of the new life, the innovation of labor
itself as its active side makes life a delight of glorious creative
experience.

The entire aspect of social life changes. Also in its outer appearance,
in surroundings and utensils, showing in their increasing harmony and
beauty the nobleness of the work that shaped them new. What William
Morris said, speaking of the crafts of olden times with their simple
tools: that the beauty of their products was due to work being a joy for
man -- hence it was extinguished in the ugliness of capitalism -- again
asserts itself; but now on the higher stage of mastery over the most
perfect technics. William Morris loved the tool of the craftsman and
hated the machine of the capitalist. For the free worker of the future
the handling of the perfectly constructed machine, providing a tension
of acuteness, will be a source of mental exaltation, of spiritual
rejoicing, of intellectual beauty.

Technics make man a free master of his own life and destiny. Technics,
in a painful process of growth during many thousands of years of labor
and fight developed to the present height, put an end to all hunger and
poverty, to all toiling and slavery. Technics put all the forces of
nature at the service of mankind and its needs. The growth of the
science of nature opens to man new forms and new possibilities of life
so rich and manifold that they far surpass what we can imagine to-day.
But technics alone cannot perform that. Only technics in the hands of a
humanity that has bound itself consciously by strong ties of brotherhood
into a working community controlling its own life. Together,
indissolvably connected, technics as material basis and visible power,
the community as ethical basis and consciousness, they determine the
entire renovation of labor.

And now, with his work, man himself is changing. A new feeling is taking
hold of him, the feeling of security. Now at last the gnawing solicitude
for life falls off from mankind. During all the past centuries, from
original savageness till modern civilization, life was not secure. Man
was not master over his subsistence. Always, also in times of
prosperity, and for the wealthiest even, behind the illusion of
perpetual welfare, in the subconsciousness lurked a silent solicitude
for the future. As a permanent oppression this anxiety was sunk in the
hearts, weighed heavily upon the brain and hampered the unfolding of
free thinking. For us, who ourselves live under this pressure, it is
impossible to imagine what a deep change in outlook, in world vision, in
character, the disappearance of all anxiety about life will bring about.
Old delusions and superstitions that in past times had to uphold mankind
in its spiritual helplessness, now are dropped. Now that man feels
certain that he truly is master of his life, their place is taken by
knowledge accessible to all, by the intellectual beauty of an
all-encompassing scientific world view.

Even more than in labor itself, the innovation of life will appear in
the preparing of future labor, in the education and training of the next
generation. It is clear that, since every organization of society has
its special system of education adapted to its needs, this fundamental
change in the system of production must be accompanied immediately by a
fundamental change in education. In the original small-trade economy, in
the farmer and artisan world, the family with its natural division of
labor was the basic element of society and of production. Here the
children grew up and learned the methods of working by gradually taking
their part in the work. Afterwards, under capitalism, the family lost
its economic basis, because productive labor ever more was transferred
to the factories. Labor became a social process with broader theoretical
basis; so a broader knowledge and a more intellectual education was
necessary for all. Hence schools were founded, as we know them: masses
of children, educated in the isolated small homes without any organic
connection with labor, flocking into the schools to learn such abstract
knowledge as is needed for society, here again without direct connection
with living labor. And different of course according to social classes.
For the children of the bourgeoisie, for the future officials and
intellectuals a good theoretical and scientific training, enabling them
to direct and rule society. For the children of the farmers and the
working class an indispensable minimum: reading, writing, computing,
needed for their work, completed by history and religion, to keep them
obedient and respectful towards their masters and rulers. Learned
writers of pedagogy text books, unacquainted with the capitalistic basis
of these conditions which they assume to be lasting, vainly try to
explain and to smooth out the conflicts proceeding from this separation
of productive labor and education, from the contradiction between narrow
family isolation and the social character of production.

In the new world of collaborate production these contradictions have
disappeared, and harmony between life and labor is restored, now on the
wide base of society at large. Now again education of the youth consists
in learning the working methods and their foundation by gradually taking
part in the productive process. Not in family isolation; now that the
material provision of life necessities has been taken over by the
community, besides its function as productive, the family loses that of
consumption unit. Community life, corresponding to the strongest
impulses within the children themselves, will take much larger place;
out of the small homes they enter into the wide air of society. The
hybridical combination of home and school gives way to communities of
children, for a large part regulating their own life under careful
guidance of adult educators. Education, instead of passively imbibing
teachings from above, is chiefly personal activity, directed towards and
connected with social labor. Now the social feelings, as an inheritance
of primeval times living in all, but extremely strong in children, can
develop without being suppressed by the need of egotism of the
capitalist struggle for life.

Whereas the forms of education are determined by community and
self-activity, its contents are given by the character of the production
system, towards which it prepares. This production system was ever more,
especially in the last century, based upon the application of science to
technics. Science gave man mastery over the forces of nature; this
mastery has made possible the social revolution and affords the basis of
the new society. The producers can be master of their labor, of
production, only if they master these sciences. Hence the growing
generation must be instructed in the first place in the science of
nature and its application. No longer, as under capitalism, will science
be a monopoly of a small minority of intellectuals, and the uninstructed
masses be restricted to subordinate activities. Science in its full
extent will be open to all. Instead of the division between one-sided
manual and one-sided mental work as specialities of two classes, now
comes the harmonious combination of manual and mental work for
everybody. This will be necessary also for the further development of
the productivity of labor, depending as it does on the further progress
of its foundations, science and technics. Now it is not merely a
minority of trained intellectuals, but it is all the good brains of the
entire people, all prepared by the most careful education, that occupy
themselves with the creation of knowledge and its application in labor.
Then may be expected a tempo of progress in the development of science
and technics, compared to which the much praised progress under
capitalism is only a poor commencement.

Under capitalism there is a distinctive difference between the tasks of
the young and of the adults. Youth has to learn, the adults have to
work. It is clear that as long as labor is toiling in foreign service
\[for a purpose in opposition to the well-being and comfort of the
workers\] to produce the highest profit for capital, every capacity,
once acquired, must be used up to the limits of time and force. No time
of a worker should be wasted for learning ever new things. Only an
exceptional adult had the possibility, and still less had the duty
regularly to instruct himself during his further life. In the new
society this difference disappears. Now in youth the learning consists
in taking part, in increasing rate with the years, in the productive
work. And now with the increase of productivity and the absence of
exploitation ever more leisure is available to the adults for spiritual
activities. It enables them to keep apace with the rapid development of
the methods of work. This indeed is necessary for them. To take part in
the discussions and decisions is only possible if they can study the
problems of technics that continually incite and stimulate their
attention. The grand development of society through the unfolding of
technics and science, of security and abundance, of power over nature
and life, can only be ascertained by the growth of capability and
knowledge of all the partners. It gives new contents of thrilling
activity to their life, it elevates existence and makes it a conscious
delight of eager participation in the spiritual and practical progress
of the new world.

Added to these sciences of nature are now the new sciences of society
that were lacking under capitalism. The special feature of the new
system of production is that man now dominates the social forces which
determine his ideas and impulses. Practical domination must find its
expression in theoretical domination, in knowledge of the phenomena and
the determining forces of human action and life, of thinking and
feeling. In former times, when through ignorance about society their
social origin was unknown, their power was ascribed to the supernatural
character of spirit, to a mysterious power of the mind, and the
disciplines dealing with them, the so-called humanities, were labeled
spiritual sciences: psychology, philosophy, ethics, history, sociology,
aesthetics. As with all science their beginnings were full of primitive
mysticism and tradition; but contrary to the sciences of nature their
rise to real scientific height was obstructed by capitalism. They could
not find a solid footing because under capitalism they proceeded from
the isolated human being with its individual mind, because in those
times of individualism it was not known that man is essentially a social
being, that all his faculties emanate from society and are determined by
society. Now, however, that society lies open to the view of man, as an
organism of mutually connected human beings, and that the human mind is
understood as their main organ of interconnection, now they can develop
into real sciences.

And the practical importance of these sciences for the new community is
no less than that of the sciences of nature. They deal with the forces
lying in man, determining his relations to his fellow men and to the
world, instigating his actions in social life, appearing in the events
of history past and present. As mighty passions and blind impulses they
worked in the great social fights of mankind, now elating man to
powerful deeds, then by equally blind traditions keeping him in
apathetic submissivity, always spontaneous, ungoverned, unknown. The new
science of man and society discloses these forces and so enables man to
control them by conscious knowledge. From masters driving him through
passive instincts they become servants, ruled by self-restraint,
directed by him towards his well-conceived purposes.

The instruction of the growing generation in the knowledge of these
social and spiritual forces, and its training in consciously directing
them will be one of the chief educational tasks of the new society. Thus
the young will be enabled to develop all endowments of passion and
willpower, of intelligence and enthusiasm, and to apply them in
efficient activity. It is an education of character as well as of
knowledge. This careful education of the new generation, theoretical and
practical, in natural science and in social consciousness, will form a
most essential element in the new system of production. Only in this way
an unhampered progression of social life will be secured. And in this
way, too, the system of production will develop to ever higher forms.
Thus by theoretical mastery of the sciences of nature and society, and
by their practical application in labor and life, the workers will make
the earth into a happy abode of free mankind.

## 2: The fight

### 2.1: Trade unionism

The task of the working class, to take production in its own hand and to
organize it first has to be dealt with. In order to carry on the fight
it is necessary to see the goal in clear and distinct lines before us.
But the fight, the conquest of power over production is the chief and
most difficult part of the work. It is in this fight that the workers'
councils will be created.

We cannot exactly foresee the future forms of the workers' fight for
freedom. They depend on social conditions and must change along with the
increasing power of the working class. It will be necessary, therefore,
to survey how, so far, it has fought its way upward, adapting its modes
of action to the varying circumstances. Only by learning from the
experience of our predecessors and by considering it critically will we
be able in our turn to meet the demands of the hour.

In every society depending on the exploitation of a working class by a
ruling class there is a continuous struggle over the division of the
total produce of labor, or in other words: over the degree of
exploitation. Thus medieval times, as well as later centuries, are full
of incessant struggles and furious fights between the landowners and the
farmers. At the same time we see the fight of the rising burgher class
against nobility and monarchy, for power over society. This is a
different kind of class struggle, associated with the rise of a new
system of production, proceeding from the development of technics,
industry and commerce. It was waged between the masters of the land and
the masters of capital, between the declining feudal and the rising
capitalist system. In a series of social convulsions, of political
revolutions and wars, in England, in France and in other countries
consecutively, the capitalist class has gained complete mastery over
society.

The working class under capitalism has to carry on both kinds of fight
against capital. It has to keep up a continual struggle to mitigate the
heavy pressure of exploitation, to increase wages, to enlarge or keep up
its share in the total produce. Besides, with the growth of its
strength, it has to gain mastery over society in order to overthrow
capitalism and bring about a new system of production.

When for the first time, in the beginning of the Industrial Revolution
in England, spinning and then weaving machines were introduced, we hear
of revolting workers destroying the machines. They were not workers in
the modern sense, not wage earners. They were small artisans,
independent before, now starved by the competition of cheaply producing
machines, and trying in vain to remove the cause of their misery.
Afterwards, when they or their children became wage workers, themselves
handling the machines, their position was different. It was the same for
the hosts from the countryside, who, during the entire 19th century of
growing industry, flocked into the towns, lured by what to them appeared
good wages. In modern times it is ever more the offspring of the workers
themselves that fill the factories.

For all of them the struggle for better working conditions is of
immediate necessity. The employers, under the pressure of competition,
to enlarge their profits, try to lower the wages and to increase the
hours as much as possible. At first the workers, powerless by the
constraint of hunger, have to submit in silence. Then resistance bursts
forth, in the only possible form, in the refusal to work, in the strike.
In the strike for the first time the workers discover their strength, in
the strike arises their fighting power. From the strike springs up the
association of all the workers of the factory, of the branch, of the
country. Out of the strike sprouts the solidarity, the feeling of
fraternity with the comrades in work, of unity with the entire class:
the first dawn of what some day will be the life-spending sun of the new
society. The mutual help, at first appearing in spontaneous and casual
money collections, soon takes the lasting form of the trade union.

For a sound development of trade-unionism certain conditions are
necessary. The rough ground of lawlessness, of police arbitrarity and
prohibitions, mostly inherited from pre-capitalistic times, must be
smoothed before solid buildings may be erected. Usually the workers
themselves had to secure these conditions. In England it was the
revolutionary campaign of Chartism; in Germany, half a century later, it
was the fight of Social Democracy that, by enforcing social
acknowledgement for the workers, laid the foundations for the growth of
the unions.

Now strong organizations are built up, comprising the workers of the
same trade all over the country, forming connections with other trades,
and internationally with unions all over the world. The regular paying
of high dues provides the considerable funds from which strikers are
supported, when unwilling capitalists must be forced to grant decent
working conditions. The ablest among the colleagues, sometimes victims
of the foe's wrath from former fights, are appointed as salaried
officials, who, as independent and expert spokesmen of the workers, can
negotiate with the capitalist employers. By strike at the right moment,
supported by the entire power of the union, and by ensuing negotiations,
agreements can be reached about better and more uniform wages and about
fair working hours, in so far as the latter are not yet fixed by law.

So the workers are no longer powerless individuals, forced by hunger to
sell their labor-power at any price. They are now protected by their
union, protected by the power of their own solidarity and co-operation;
for every member not only gives part of his earnings for the colleagues,
but is ready also to risk his job in defending the organization, their
community. Thus a certain equilibrium is reached between the power of
the employers and the power of the workers. The working conditions are
no longer dictated by all-powerful capitalist interests. The unions are
recognized gradually as representatives of the workers' interests;
though ever again fighting is necessary, they become a power that takes
part in the decisions. Not in all trades surely, and not at once
everywhere. Usually skilled crafts-men are the first in building their
unions. The unskilled masses in the great factories, standing against
more powerful employers, mostly come later; their unions often started
from sudden outbursts of great fights. And against the monopolistic
owners of giant enterprises the unions have little chance; these
all-powerful capitalists wish to be absolute master, and in their
haughtiness they hardly allow even servile yellow shop unions.

Apart from this restriction, and even assuming trade unionism to be
fully developed and in control of all industry, this does not mean that
exploitation is abolished, that capitalism is repressed. What is
repressed is the arbitrariness of the single capitalist; abolished are
the worst abuses of exploitation. And this is in the interest of the
fellow-capitalists, too -- to guard them against unfair competition --
and in the interest of capitalism at large. By the power of the unions
capitalism is normalized; a certain norm of exploitation is universally
established. A norm of wages, allowing for the most modest life
exigencies, so that the workers are not driven again and again into
hunger revolts, is necessary for uninterrupted production. A norm of
working hours, not quite exhausting the vitality of the working class --
though reduction of hours is largely neutralized by acceleration of
tempo and more intense exertion -- is necessary for capitalism itself,
to preserve a usable working class as the basis of future exploitation.
It was the working class that by its fight against the narrowness of
capitalist greed had to establish the conditions of normal capitalism.
And ever again it has to fight, to preserve the uncertain equilibrium.
In this fight the trade unions are the instruments; thus the unions
perform an indispensable function in capitalism. Narrow-minded employers
do not see this, but their broader-minded political leaders know quite
well that trade unions are an essential element of capitalism, that
without the workers' unions as normalizing power capitalism is not
complete. Though products of the workers' fight, kept up by their pains
and efforts, trade unions are at the same time organs of capitalist
society.

With the development of capitalism, however, conditions gradually grow
more unfavorable for the workers. Big capital grows, feels its power,
and wishes to be master at home. Capitalists also have learnt to
understand the power of association; they organize into employers'
unions. So instead of the equality of forces arises a new ascendancy of
capital. Strikes are countered by lock-outs that drain the funds of the
trade unions. The money of the workers cannot compete with the money of
the capitalists. In the bargaining about wages and working conditions
the unions are more than ever the weaker party, because they have to
fear, and hence must try to avoid great fights that exhaust the reserves
and thereby endanger the secured existence of the organization and its
officials. In the negotiations the union officials often have to accept
a lowering of conditions in order to avoid fighting. To them this is
unavoidable and self-evident, because they realize that by the changed
conditions the relative fighting power of their organization has
diminished.

For the workers, however, it is not self-evident that they are silently
to accept harder working and living conditions. They want to fight. So a
contradiction of viewpoints arises. The officials seem to have common
sense on their side; they know that the unions are at a disadvantage and
that fight must result in defeat. But the workers feel by instinct that
great fighting powers still lie hidden in their masses; if only they
knew how to use them. They rightly realize that by yielding, again and
again, their position must grow worse, and that this can be prevented
only by fighting. So conflicts must arise in the unions between the
officials and the members. The members protest against the new tariffs
\[awards\] favorable to the employers; the officials defend the
agreements reached by long and difficult negotiations and try to have
them ratified. So they often have to act as spokesmen of capital
interests against workers' interests. And because they are the
influential rulers of the unions, throwing all the weight of power and
authority on this side, the unions in their hands may be said to develop
into organs of capital.

The growth of capitalism, the increase of the number of workers, the
urgent necessity of association, make the trade unions giant
organizations, needing an ever increasing staff of officials and
leaders. These develop into a bureaucracy administering all business, a
ruling power over the members, because all the power factors are in
their hands. As the experts they prepare and manage all affairs; they
administrate the finances and the spending of money for different
purposes; they are editors of the union papers, by which they can force
their own ideas and points of view upon the members. Formal democracy
prevails; the members in their assemblies, the chosen delegates in the
congresses have to decide, just as the people decide politics in
Parliament and State. But the same influences that render Parliament and
Government lords over the people are operative in these Parliaments of
Labor. They turn the alert bureaucracy of expert officials into a kind
of union government, over the members absorbed by their daily work and
cares. Not solidarity, the proletarian virtue, but discipline, obedience
to the decisions is asked from them. Thus there arises a difference in
viewpoint, a contrast in opinions on the various questions. It is
enhanced by the difference in life conditions: the insecurity of the
workers' job, always threatened by depression forces and unemployment,
as contrasted to the security that is necessary for officials to
well-manage the union affairs.

It was the task and the function of trade unionism, by their joint
united fight to raise the workers out of their helpless misery, and to
gain for them an acknowledged place in capitalist society. It had to
defend the workers against the ever increasing exploitation of capital.
Now that big capital consolidates more than ever into a monopolistic
power of banks and industrial concerns, this former function of trade
unionism is finished. Its power falls short compared to the formidable
power of capital. The unions are now giant organizations, with their
acknowledged place in society; their position is regulated by law, and
their tariff \[Court Award\] agreements are given legally binding force
for the entire industry. Their leaders aspire at forming part of the
power ruling industrial conditions. They are the apparatus by means of
which monopolistic capital imposes its conditions upon the entire
working class. To this now all-powerful capital it is, normally, far
more preferable to disguise its rule in democratic and constitutional
forms than to show it in the naked brutality of dictatorship. The
working conditions which it thinks suitable to the workers will be
accepted and obeyed much more easily in the form of agreements concluded
by the unions than in the form of dictates arrogantly imposed. Firstly,
because to the workers the illusion is left that they are masters of
their own interests. Secondly, because all the bonds of attachment,
which as their own creation, the creation of their sacrifices, their
fight, their elation, render the unions dear to the workers, now are
subservient to the masters. Thus under modern conditions trade unions
more than ever are turned into organs of the domination of monopolist
capital over the working class.

### 2.2: Direct action

As an instrument of fight for the working class against capital the
trade unions are losing their importance. But the fight itself cannot
cease. The depressing tendencies grow stronger under big capitalism and
so the resistance of the workers must grow stronger, too. Economic
crises grow more and more destructive and undermine apparently secured
progress. The exploitation is intensified to retard the lowering of the
profit rate for the rapidly increasing capital. So again and again the
workers are provoked to resistance. But against the strongly increased
power of capital the old methods of fight no longer can serve. New
methods are needed, and before long their beginnings present themselves.
They spring up spontaneously in the wild \[outlaw\] strike, in the
direct action.

Direct action means action of the workers themselves without the
intermediary of trade union officials. A strike is called wild \[outlaw
or unofficial\] as contrasted to the strike proclaimed by the union
according to the rules and regulations. The workers know that the latter
is without effect, where the officials against their own will and
insight are made to proclaim it, perhaps thinking a defeat a healthy
lesson for the foolish workers, and in every case trying to finish it as
soon as possible. Thus, when the pressure is too heavy, when
negotiations with the directors drag along without effect, at last in
smaller or larger groups the exasperation breaks loose in a wild strike.

Fight of the workers against capital is not possible without
organization. And organization springs up spontaneously, immediately.
Not of course in such form that a new union is founded, with a board
chosen and regulations formulated in ordered paragraphs. Sometimes, to
be sure, it was done in this way; attributing the inefficiency to
personal shortcomings of the old leaders, and embittered against the old
trade union, they founded a new one, with their most able and energetic
men at the head. Then indeed in the beginning all was energy and strong
action; but in the long run the new union, if it remains small, lacks
power notwithstanding its activity, and if it grows large, of necessity
develops the same characteristics as the old one. After such experiences
the workers at last will follow the other way, of keeping the direction
of their fight entirely in their own hands.

Direction in their own hands, also called their own leadership, means
that all initiative and all decisions proceed from the workers
themselves. Though there is a strike committee, because all cannot be
always together, everything is done by the strikers; continually in
touch with one another they distribute the work, they devise all
measures and decide on all actions directly. Decision and action, both
collective, are one.

The first and most important task is the propaganda to expand the
strike. The pressure upon capital must be intensified. Against the
enormous power of capital not only the individual workers, but also the
separate groups are powerless. The sole power that is a match for
capital is the firm unity of the entire working class. Capitalists know
or feel this quite well, and so the only inducement to concessions is
the fear the strike might spread universally. The more manifestly
determinate the will of the strikers, the greater the numbers taking
part in it, the more the chance of success.

Such an extension is possible because it is not the strike of a tardy
group, in worse conditions than others, trying to raise itself to the
general level. Under the new circumstances discontent is universal; all
the workers feel depressed under capitalist superiority; fuel for
explosions has accumulated everywhere. It is not for others, it is for
themselves if they join the fight. As long as they feel isolated, afraid
to lose their job, uncertain what the comrades will do, without firm
unity, they shrink from action. Once, however, they take up the fight,
they are changed into new personalities; selfish fear recedes to the
background and forth spring the forces of community, solidarity and
devotion, rousing courage and perseverance. These are contagious; the
example of fighting activity rouses in others, who feel in themselves
the same forces awakening, the spirit of mutual and of self-confidence.
Thus the wild strike as a prairie fire may spring over to other
enterprises and involve ever greater masses.

Such cannot be the work of a small number of leaders, either union
officials or self-imposed new spokesmen, though, of course, the push of
some few intrepid comrades may give strong impulses. It must be the will
and the work of all, in common initiative. The workers have not only to
do, but also to contrive, to think out, to decide everything themselves.
They cannot shift decision and responsibility to a body, a union, that
takes care of them. They are entirely responsible for their fight,
success or failure depends on themselves. From passive they have turned
into active beings, determinedly taking their destiny into their own
hands. From separate individuals each caring for himself, they have
become a solid, firmly cemented unity.

Such spontaneous strikes present yet another important side; the
division of the workers into different separate unions is effaced. In
the trade union world traditions from former petty-capitalist times play
an important role in separating the workers in often competing, jealous
and bickering corporations; in some countries religious and political
differences act as partition fences in establishing separate liberal,
catholic, socialist and other unions. In the workshop the members of
different unions stand beside one another. But even in strikes they
often are kept asunder, so as not to have them infected with too much
unity ideas, and the concordance in action and negotiation is solely
kept up by the boards and officials. Now, however, in direct actions,
these differences of union membership become unreal as outside labels.
For such spontaneous fights unity is the first need; and unity there is,
else there could be no fight. All who stand together in the shop, in the
very same position, as direct associates, subject to the same
exploitation, against the same master, stand together in common action.
Their real community is the shop; personnel of the same enterprise, they
form a natural union of common work, common lot and common interests.
Like specters from the past the old distinctions of different membership
fall back, almost forgotten in the new living reality of fellowship in
common fight. The vivid consciousness of new unity enhances the
enthusiasm and the feeling of power.

Thus in the wild strikes some characteristics of the coming forms of
fight make their appearance: first the self-action, the self-initiative,
keeping all activity and decision in their own hands; and then the
unity, irrespective of old memberships, according to the natural
grouping of the enterprises. These forms come up, not through shrewd
planning, but spontaneously, irresistible, urged by the heavy superior
power of capital against which the old organizations cannot fight
seriously any more. Hence it does not mean that now the scales have
turned, that now the workers win. Also wild strikes mostly bring defeat;
their extent is too narrow. Only in some favorable cases they have
success in preventing a lowering in working conditions. Their importance
is that they demonstrate a fresh fighting spirit that cannot be
suppressed. Out of the deepest instincts of self-preservation, of duty
against family and comrades, the will to assert oneself ever again
springs up. There is a gain of increasing self-reliance and
class-feeling. They are the harbingers of future greater fights, when
great social emergencies, with heavier pressure and deeper distress,
drive the masses into stronger action.

When wild strikes break out on a larger scale, comprising great masses,
entire branches of industry, towns or districts, the organization has to
assume new forms. Deliberation in one assembly is impossible; but more
than ever mutual understanding is necessary for common action. Strike
committees are formed out of the delegates of all the personnels, for
continual discussion of circumstances. Such strike committees are
entirely different from union boards of officials; they show the
characteristics already of workers' councils. They come up out of the
fight, to give it unity of direction. But they are no leaders in the old
sense, they have no direct power. The delegates, often different
persons, come to express the opinion and the will of the personnels
\[groups\] that sent them. For these personnels stand for the action in
which the will manifests itself. Yet the delegates are no simple
messengers of their mandatory groups; they took a foremost part in the
discussion, they embody the prevalent convictions. In the committee
assemblies the opinions are discussed and put to the test of momentary
circumstances; the results and the resolutions are brought back by the
delegates into the personnel \[group\] assemblies. Through these
intermediaries the shop personnels themselves take part in the
deliberations and decisions. Thus unity of action for great masses is
secured.

Not, to be sure, in such a way that every group bows obediently to the
decisions of the committee. There are no paragraphs to confer such power
on it. Unity in collective fighting is not the outcome of judicious
regulation of competencies but of spontaneous necessities in a sphere of
passionate action. The workers themselves decide, not because such a
right is given to them in accepted rules, but because they actually
decide, by their actions. It may happen that a group cannot convince
other groups by arguments, but then by its action and example it carries
them away. The self-determination of the workers over their fighting
action is not a demand put up by theory, by arguments of practicability,
but the statement of a fact evolving from practice. Often in great
social movements it occurred -- and doubtless will occur again -- that
the actions did not comply with the decisions. Sometimes central
committees made an appeal for universal strike, and only small groups
here and there followed; elsewhere the committees weighed scrupulously,
without venturing a decision, and the workers broke loose in massal
fight. It may be possible even that the same workers who
enthusiastically resolved to strike shrink back when standing before the
deed. Or, conversely, that prudent hesitation governs the decisions and
yet, driven by inner forces, a non-resolved strike irresistibly breaks
out. Whereas in their conscious thinking old watchwords and theories
play a role and determine arguments and opinions, at the moment of
decision on which weal and woe depend, strong intuition of real
conditions breaks forth, determining the actions. This does not mean
that such intuition always guides right; people may be mistaken in their
impression of outer conditions. But it decides; it cannot be replaced by
foreign leadership, by guardians however clever, directing them. By
their own experiences in fight, in success and adversity, by their own
efforts the workers must acquire the capacities rightly to take care of
their interests.

Thus the two forms of organization and fight stand in contrast, the old
one of trade unions and regulated strike, the new one of spontaneous
strike and workers' councils. This does not mean that the former at some
time will be simply substituted by the latter as the only alternative.
Intermediate forms may be conceived, attempts to correct the evils and
weakness of trade unionism and preserve its right principles; to avoid
the leadership of a bureaucracy of officials, to avoid the separation by
narrow craft and trade interests, and to preserve and utilize the
experiences of former fights. This might be done by keeping together,
after a big strike, a core of the best fighters, in one general union.
Wherever a strike breaks out spontaneously this union is present with
its skilled propagandists and organizers to assist the inexperienced
masses with their advice, to instruct, to organize, to defend them. In
this way every fight means a progress of organization, not in the sense
of fees paying membership, but in the sense of growing class unity.

An example for such a union might be found in the great American union
"Industrial Workers of the World" (I.W.W.). At the end of last century
in contrast to the conservative trade unions of well-paid skilled labor,
united in the "American Federation of Labor," it grew up out of special
American conditions. Partly out of the fierce struggles of the miners
and lumbermen, independent pioneers in the wilds of the Far West,
against big capital that had monopolized and seized the riches of wood
and soil. Partly out of the hunger strikes of the miserable masses of
immigrants from Eastern and Southern Europe, accumulated and exploited
in the factories of the Eastern towns and in the coal mines, despised
and neglected by the old unions. The I.W.W. provided them with
experienced strike leaders and organizers, who showed them how to stand
against police terrorism, who defended them before public opinion and
the courts, who taught them the practice of solidarity and unity and
opened to them wider views on society, on capitalism and class fight. In
such big fights ten thousands of new members joined the I.W.W., of whom
only a small fraction remained. This "one big union" was adapted to the
wild growth of American capitalism in the days when it built up its
power by subjecting the masses of the independent pioneers.

Similar forms of fight and organization may be propagated and may come
up elsewhere, when in big strikes the workers stand up, without as yet
having the complete self-confidence of taking matters entirely in their
own hands. But only as temporary transition forms. There is a
fundamental difference between the conditions of future fight in big
industry and those of America in the past. There it was the rise, now it
will be the downfall of capitalism. There the rugged independence of
pioneers or the primitive, existence-seeking egoism of immigrants were
the expression of a middle class individualism that had to be curbed
under the yoke of capitalist exploitation. Now masses trained to
discipline during a life time by machine and capital, connected by
strong technical and spiritual ties to the productive apparatus,
organize its utilization on the new basis of collaboration. These
workers are thoroughly proletarian, all obstinacy of middle class
individualism having been worn off long ago by the habit of collaborate
work. The forces of solidarity and devotion hidden in them only wait for
great fights to develop into a dominating life principle. Then even the
most suppressed layers of the working class, who only hesitatingly join
their comrades, wanting to lean upon their example, will soon feel the
new forces of community growing also in themselves. Then they will
perceive that the fight for freedom asks not only their adherence but
the development of all their powers of self-activity and self-reliance.
Thus overcoming all intermediate forms of partial self-determination the
progress will definitely go the way of council organization.

### 2.3: Shop occupation

Under the new conditions of capitalism a new form of fight for better
working conditions came up, the shop occupation, mostly called sit-down
strike, the workers ceasing to work but not leaving the factory. It was
not invented by theory, it arose spontaneously out of practical needs;
theory can do no more than afterwards explain its causes and
consequences. In the great world crisis of 1930 unemployment was so
universal and lasting that there arose a kind of class antagonism
between the privileged number of employed and the unemployed masses. Any
regular strike against wage cuttings was made impossible, because the
shops after being left by the strikers, immediately would be flooded by
the masses outside. So the refusal to work under worse conditions must
needs be combined with sticking to the place of work by occupying the
shop.

Having sprung up, however, in these special circumstances, the sit-down
strike displays some characteristics that make it worth while to
consider it more closely as the expression of a further developed
fighting form. It manifests the formation of a more solid unity. In the
old form of strike the working community of the personnel dissolved when
leaving the shop. Dispersed over the streets and homes between other
people they were separated into loose individuals. To discuss and decide
as one body they had then to assemble in meeting halls, in streets and
squares. However often police and authorities tried to hinder or even to
forbid this, the workers held fast to their right of using them, through
the consciousness that they fought with legitimate means for lawful
aims. The legality of trade union practice was generally recognized by
public opinion.

When, however, this legality is not recognized, when the increasing
power of big capital over State authorities disputes the use of hall and
square for assemblies, the workers, if they will fight, have to assert
their rights by taking them. In America every great strike was as a rule
accompanied by a continuous fight with the police over the use of the
streets and rooms for meeting. The sit-down strike releases the workers
from this necessity by their taking the right to assemble at the
adequate place, in the shop. At the same time the strike is made truly
efficient by the impossibility of strike-breakers to take their places.

Of course this entails new stiff fighting. The capitalists as owners of
the shop consider occupation by the strikers as a violation of their
ownership; and on this juridical argument they call for the police to
turn the workers out. Indeed, from the strict juridical viewpoint, shop
occupation is in conflict with formal law. Just as strike is in conflict
with formal law. And in fact the employer regularly appealed to this
formal law as a weapon in the fight, by stigmatizing the strikers as
contract breakers, thus giving him the right to put new workers in their
places. But against this juridical logic strikes have persisted and
developed as a form of fight; because they were necessary.

Formal law, indeed, does not represent the inner reality of capitalism,
but only its outer forms, to which middle class and juridical opinion
cling. Capitalism in reality is not a world of equal and contracting
individuals, but a world of fighting classes. When the power of the
workers was too small the middle class opinion of formal law prevailed,
the strikers as contract breakers were turned out and replaced by
others. Where, however, trade union fight had won its place, a new and
truer juridical conception asserted itself: a strike is not a break, not
a cessation, but a temporary suspending of the labor contract, to settle
the dispute over working terms. Lawyers may not accept theoretically
this point of view, but society does, practically.

In the same way shop occupation asserted itself as a method in fight,
where it was needed and where the workers were able to take a stand.
Capitalists and lawyers might splutter over the violation of property
rights. For the workers, however, it was an action that did not attack
the property rights but only temporarily suspended their effects. Shop
occupation is not shop-expropriation. It is only a momentary suspension
of the disposal by the capitalist. After the contest has been settled,
he is master and undisputed owner as before.

Yet, at the same time, it is more. In it, as in a light flash at the
horizon, a glimpse of future development springs up. By shop occupation
the workers, unwittingly, demonstrate that their fight has entered into
a new phase. Here their firm interjunction as a shop-organization
appears, a natural unity not to be dissolved into single individuals.
Here the workers become conscious of their intimate connection with the
shop. To them it is not another man's building where only at his command
they come to work for him till he sends them away. To them the shop with
its machines is a productive apparatus they handle, an organ that only
by their work is made a living part of society. It is nothing foreign to
them; they are at home here, much more than the juridical owners, the
shareholders who do not even know its whereabouts. In the factory the
workers grow conscious of the contents of their life, their productive
work, their work-community as a collectivity that makes it a living
organism, an element of the totality of society. Here, in shop
occupation, a vague feeling arises that they ought to be entirely master
of production, that they ought to expel the unworthy outsiders, the
commanding capitalists, who abuse it in wasting the riches of mankind
and in devastating the earth. And in the heavy fight that will be
necessary, the shops again will play a primary role, as the units of
organization, of common action, perhaps as the supports and strongholds,
pivots of force and objects of struggle. Compared with the natural
connection of workers and shops the command of capital appears as an
artificial outside domination, powerful as yet, but hanging in the air;
whereas the growing hold of the workers is firmly rooted in the earth.
Thus in shop occupation the future forecasts its light in the growing
consciousness that the shops belong with the workers, that together they
form a harmonious unity, and that the fight for freedom will be fought
over, in, and by means of the shops.

### 2.4: Political strikes

Not all the great strikes of the workers in the last century were fought
over wages and working conditions. Besides the so-called economic
strikes, political strikes occurred. Their object was the promotion or
the prevention of a political measure. They were not directed against
the employers but against State government, to induce it to give to the
workers more political rights, or to dissuade it from obnoxious acts.
Thus it could happen that the employers agreed with the aims and
promoted the strike.

A certain amount of social equality and political rights for the working
class is necessary in capitalism. Modern industrial production is based
upon intricate technics, product of highly developed knowledge, and
demands careful personal collaboration and capability of the workers.
The utmost exertion of forces cannot, as in the case of coolies or
slaves, be enforced by rough physical compulsion, by whip or outrage; it
would be revenged by equally rough mishandling of the tools. The
constraint must come from inner motives, from moral means of pressure
based upon individual responsibility. The workers must not feel
powerless embittered slaves; they must have the means to go against
inflicted wrongs. They have to feel themselves free sellers of their
labor-power, exerting all their forces, because, formally and
apparently, they are determining their own lot in the general
competition. To maintain themselves as a working class they need not
only the personal liberty and legal equality proclaimed by middle class
laws: Special rights and liberties, too, are necessary to secure these
possibilities; the right of association, the right of meeting in
assembly, the right to form unions, freedom of speech, freedom of press.
And all these political rights must be protected by universal suffrage,
for the workers to assert their influence over Parliament and law.

Capitalism began by refusing these rights, assisted herein by the
inherited despotism and backwardness of existing governments, and tried
to make the workers powerless victims of its exploitation. Only
gradually, in consequence of fierce struggle against inhuman oppression,
some rights were won. Because in its first stage capitalism feared the
hostility of the lower classes, the artisans impoverished by its
competition, and the workers starved by low wages, the suffrage was kept
restricted to the wealthy classes. Only in later times, when capitalism
was firmly rooted, when its profits were large and its rule was secured,
the restrictions on the ballot were gradually removed. But only under
compulsion of strong pressure, often of hard fight from the side of the
workers. Fight for democracy fills the history of home politics during
the 19th century, first in England, and then in all countries where
capitalism introduced itself.

In England universal suffrage was one of the main points of the charter
of demands put up by the English workers in the Chartist movement, their
first and most glorious period of fight. Their agitation had been a
strong inducement to the ruling landowner class to yield to the pressure
of the simultaneous Reform movement of the rising industrial
capitalists. So through the Reform Act 1832 the industrial employers got
their share in political power; but the workers had to go home
empty-handed, and to continue their strenuous struggle. Then, at the
climax of Chartism, a "holy month" was projected in 1839, when all the
work had to rest till the demands were granted. Thus the English workers
were the first to proclaim the political strike as a weapon in their
fight. But it could not be put into effect; and at an outburst (1842) it
had to be broken off without success; it could not curb the greater
power of the now combined ruling classes of landowners and factory
owners. Not till a generation later, when after a period of
unprecedented industrial prosperity and expansion the propaganda was
once more taken up, now by the trade unions combined in the
"International Workers' Association" (the "First International" of Marx
and Engels), public opinion in the middle class was ready to extend, in
consecutive steps, the suffrage to the working class.

In France universal suffrage since 1848 formed part of republican
constitution, dependent as such government always was on the support of
the workers. In Germany the foundation of the Empire, in the years
1866-70, product of a feverish capitalist development activating the
entire population, entailed universal suffrage as a warrant of continued
contact with the masses of the people. But in many other countries the
propertied class, often only a privileged part of it, kept fast to its
monopoly of political influence. Here the campaign for the ballot,
obviously the gate to political power and freedom, roused ever larger
parts of the working class to participation, to organization and to
political activity. Conversely, the fear of the propertied classes for
political domination of the proletariat stiffened their resistance.
Formally the matter looked hopeless for the masses; universal suffrage
had to be legally enacted by a Parliament chosen by the privileged
minority, and thus invited to destroy its own foundations. This implies
that only by extraordinary means, by pressure from outside, finally by
political mass strikes the aim could be achieved. How it happens may be
learnt from the classical example of the Belgian suffrage strike in
1893.

In Belgium, through a limited census-suffrage, government was
perpetually in the hands of a small clique of conservatives of the
clerical party. Labor conditions in the coal mines and factories were
notoriously among the worst in Europe and led to explosions in frequent
strikes. Extension of suffrage as a way to social reform, frequently
proposed by some few liberal parliamentarians, always again was defeated
by the conservative majority. Then the Workers' Party, agitating,
organizing and preparing for many years, decided upon a universal
strike. Such a strike had to exert political pressure during the
parliamentary discussion on a new suffrage proposal. It had to
demonstrate the intense interest and the grim will of the masses, who
abandoned their work to give all attention to this fundamental question.
It had to arouse all the indifferent elements among the workers and the
small business men to take part in what for all of them was a life
interest. It had to show the narrow-minded rulers the social power of
the working class, to impress upon them that it refused longer to be
kept under tutelage. At first, of course, the parliamentary majority
took a stand, refused to be coerced by pressure from outside, wishing to
decide after their own will and conscience; so it took the suffrage bill
from the rolls and ostensibly began to discuss other matters. But in the
meantime the strike went on, extended evermore, and brought production
to a standstill; traffic ceased, and even dutiful public services became
restive. The governmental apparatus itself was hampered in its
functions; and in the business world, with the growing feeling of
uncertainty, opinion became loud that to grant the demands was less
dangerous than to provoke a catastrophe. So the determination of the
parliamentarians began to crumble; they felt that they had to choose
between yielding or crushing the strike by military force. But could the
soldiers be trusted in such a case? Thus their resistance had to give
way; will and conscience had to be revised, and at last they accepted
and enacted the proposals. The workers, by means of a political strike,
had reached their aim and won their fundamental political right.

After such a success many workers and their spokesmen supposed that this
new powerful weapon could be used oftener to win important reforms. But
therein they were disappointed; the history of labor movement knows of
more failures than successes in political strikes. Such a strike tries
to impose the will of the workers upon a government of the capitalist
class. It is somewhat of a revolt, a revolution, and calls up in that
class the instincts of self-defense and the impulses of suppression.
These instincts were repressed when part of the bourgeoisie itself grew
annoyed by the backwardness of political institutions and felt the need
of fresh reforms. Then the mass action of the workers was an instrument
to modernize capitalism. Because the workers were united and full of
enthusiasm, whereas the propertied class in any case was divided, the
strike succeeded. It could succeed not because of the weakness of the
capitalist class, but because of the strength of capitalism. Capitalism
is strengthened when its roots, by universal suffrage, securing at least
political equality, are driven deeper into the working class. Workers'
suffrage belongs to developed capitalism; because the workers need the
ballot, as well as trade unions, to maintain themselves in their
function in capitalism.

If now, however, in minor points they should suppose themselves able to
impose their will against the real interests of the capitalists, they
find this class as a solid block against them. They feel it as by
instinct; and not being carried away by a great inspiring aim that
dispels all hesitations, they remain uncertain and divided. Every group,
seeing that the strike is not universal, hesitates in its turn.
Volunteers of the other classes offer themselves for the most needed
services and traffic; though they are not really able to uphold
production, their activity at least discourages the strikers.
Prohibition of assemblies, display of armed forces, martial law may
still more demonstrate the power of government and the will to use it.
So the strike begins to crumble and must be discontinued, often with
considerable losses and disillusion for the defeated organizations. In
experiences like these the workers discovered that by its inner strength
capitalism is able to withstand even well organized and massal assaults.
But at the same time they felt sure that in mass strikes, if only
applied at the right time, they possess a powerful weapon.

This view was confirmed in the first Russian Revolution of 1905. It
exhibited an entirely new character in mass-strikes. Russia at that time
showed only the beginnings of capitalism: some few large factories in
great towns, supported mostly by foreign capital with State subsidies,
where starving peasants flocked to work as industrial hands. Trade
unions and strikes were forbidden; government was primitive and
despotic. The Socialist Party, consisting of intellectuals and workers,
had to fight for what middle-class revolutions in Western Europe had
already established: the destruction of absolutism and the introduction
of constitutional rights and law. Hence the fight of the Russian workers
was bound to be spontaneous and chaotic. First as wild strikes against
miserable working conditions, severely suppressed by Cossacks and
police, then acquiring a political character, in demonstrations and the
unfolding of red flags in the streets, the struggle manifest itself.
When the Japanese war of 1905 had weakened the Czarist government and
shown up its inner rottenness, the revolution broke out as a series of
wild-strike movements on a gigantic scale. Now they flamed up, springing
like wildfire from one factory, one town to another, bringing the entire
industry to a standstill; then they dissolved into minor local strikes,
dying away after some concessions from the employers, or smoldered until
new outbreaks came. Often there were street demonstrations and fights
against police and soldiers. Days of victory came where the delegates of
the factories assembled unmolested to discuss the situation, then,
joined by deputations of other groups, of rebellious soldiers even, to
express their sympathy, whilst the authorities stood passively by. Then
again the Government made a move and arrested the entire body of
delegates, and the strike ended in apathy. Till at last, in a series of
barricade fights in the capital cities the movement was crushed by
military force.

In Western Europe political strikes had been carefully premeditated
actions for specially indicated aims, directed by the union or the
Socialist Party leaders. In Russia the strike movement was the revulsion
of heavily abused humanity, uncontrolled, as a storm or a flood forcing
its way. It was not the fight of organized workers claiming a long
denied right; it was the rise of a down-trodden mass to human
consciousness in the only form of fight possible. Here there could be no
question of success or defeat, the fact of an outbreak was already a
victory, no more to be undone, the beginning of a new epoch. In outward
appearance the movement was crushed and Czarist government again was
master. But in reality these strikes had struck a blow at Czarism from
which it could not recover. Some reforms were introduced, political,
industrial and agrarian. But the whole fabric of the State with its
arbitrary despotism of incapable chinowniks could not be modernized, it
had to disappear. This revolution prepared the next one, in which old
barbarous Russia was to be destroyed.

The first Russian revolution has strongly influenced the ideas of the
workers in Central and Western Europe. Here a new development of
capitalism had set in that made felt the need of new and more powerful
methods of fight, for defense and for attack. Economic prosperity, which
began in the nineties and lasted till the First World War, brought an
unprecedented increase of production and wealth. Industry expanded,
especially iron and steel industry, new markets were opened, railways
and factories were built in foreign countries and other continents; now
for the first time capitalism spread all over the earth. America and
Germany were the scenes of the most rapid industrial development. Wages
increased, unemployment nearly disappeared, the trade unions grew into
mass organizations. The workers were filled with hopes of continual
progress in prosperity and influence, and visions loomed up of a coming
age of industrial democracy.

But then, at the other side of society, they saw another image. Big
capital concentrated production and finance, wealth and power, in a few
hands and built up strong industrial concerns and capitalist
associations. Its need for expansion, for the disposal over foreign
markets and raw materials, inaugurated the policy of imperialism, a
policy of stronger ties to old, and conquest of new colonies, a policy
of growing antagonism between the capitalist classes of different
countries, and of increasing armaments. The old peaceful free-trade
ideals of the "little Englanders" were ridiculed and gave way to new
ideals of national greatness and power. Wars broke out in all
continents, in the Transvaal, in China, Cuba, and the Philippines, in
the Balkans; England consolidated its Empire, and Germany, claiming its
share in world power, prepared for world war. Big capital in its growing
power ever more determined the character and opinions of the entire
bourgeoisie, filling it with its anti-democratic spirit of violence.
Though sometimes it tried to lure the workers by the prospect of a share
in the spoils, there was on the whole less inclination than in previous
times to make concessions to labor. Every strike for better wages,
engaged in order to catch up with rising prices, met with stiffer
resistance. Reactionary and aristocratic tendencies got hold of the
ruling class, it spoke not of extension but of restriction of popular
rights, and threats were heard, especially in continental countries, of
suppressing the workers' discontent by violent means.

Thus circumstances had changed and were changing ever more. The power of
the working class had increased through its organization and its
political action. But the power of the capitalist class had increased
still more. This means that heavier clashes between the two classes
might be expected. So the workers had to look for other and stronger
methods of fight. What were they to do if regularly even the most
justifiable strikes are met by big lock-outs, or if their parliamentary
rights are reduced or circumvented, or if capitalist government will
make war notwithstanding their urgent protests?

It is easily seen that under such conditions there was among the
foremost elements of the working class much thought and discussion on
mass action and the political strike, and that the general strike was
propagated as a means against the outbreak of war. Studying the examples
of such actions as the Belgian and the Russian strikes, they had to
consider the conditions, the possibilities, and the consequences of
mass-actions and political strikes in the most highly developed
capitalist countries with strong governments and powerful capitalist
classes. It was clear that strong odds were against them. What could not
have happened in Belgium and Russia would be the immediate result here:
the annihilation of their organizations. If the combined trade unions,
Socialist or Labor Parties should proclaim a general strike, Government,
sure of the support of the entire ruling and middle class, doubtless
would be able to imprison the leaders, persecute the organizations as
endangering the safety of the State, suppress their papers, by a state
of siege prevent all mutual contact of the strikers and by mobilizing
military forces, assert its undisputed public power. Against this
display of power the workers, isolated, exposed to the threats and
calumnies, disheartened by distorted information from the press, would
have no chance. Their organizations would be dissolved and break down.
And the organizations lost, the fruits of years of devoted struggle, all
is lost.

Thus the political and labor leaders asserted. Indeed, to them, with
their outlook entirely limited within the confines of present forms of
organization, it must appear so. So they are fundamentally opposed to
political strikes. This means that in this form, as premeditated and
well decided actions of the existing organizations, directed by their
leaders, such political strikes are not possible. As little as a
thunderstorm in a placid atmosphere. It may be true that, for special
aims entirely within the capitalist system, a political strike remains
entirely within the bounds of legal order, so that after it is over
capitalism resumes its ordinary course. But this truth does not prevent
the ruling class from being angrily aroused against every display of
workers' power, nor political strikes from having consequences far
beyond their immediate aims. When social conditions become intolerable
for the workers, when social or political crises are threatening them
with ruin, it is inevitable that mass-actions and gigantic strikes break
forth spontaneously, as the natural form of fight, notwithstanding all
objections and resistance of the existing unions, irresistibly, like
thunderstorms out of a heavy electric tension in the atmosphere. And
again the workers face the question whether they have any chance against
the power of State and capital.

It is not true that with a forcible suppression of their organizations
all is lost. These are only the outer form of what in essence lives
within. To think that by such Government measures the workers suddenly
should change into the selfish, narrow-minded, isolated individuals of
olden times! In their hearts all the powers of solidarity, of
comradeship, of devotion to the class remain living, are growing even
more intense through the adverse conditions; and they will assert
themselves in other forms. If these powers are strong enough no force
from above can break the unity of the strikers. Where they suffer defeat
it is mainly due to discouragement. No government power can compel them
to work; it can only prohibit active deeds; it can do no more than
threaten and try to intimidate them, try by fear to dissolve their
unity. It depends on the inner strength of the workers, on the spirit of
organization within them, whether that can be successful. Certainly thus
the highest demands are made on social and moral qualities; but just for
this reason these qualities will be strained to the highest possible
pitch and will be hardened as steel in the fire.

This is not the affair of one action, one strike. In every such contest
the force of the workers is put to the test, whether their unity is
strong enough to resist the attempts of the ruling powers to break it.
Every contest arouses new strenuous efforts to strengthen it so as not
to be broken. And when, actually, the workers remain steadfast, when
notwithstanding all acts of intimidation, of suppression, of isolation,
they hold out, when there is no yielding of any group, then it is on the
other side that the effects of the strike become manifest. Society is
paralyzed, production and traffic are stopped, or reduced to a minimum,
the functioning of all public life is hampered, the middle classes are
alarmed and may begin to advise concessions. The authority of
Government, unable to restore the old order, is shaken. Its power always
consisted in the solid organization of all officials and services,
directed by unity of purpose embodied in one self-sure will, all of them
accustomed by duty and conviction to follow the intentions and
instructions of the central authorities. When, however, it stands
against the mass of the people, it feels itself ever more what it really
is, a ruling minority, inspiring awe only as long as it seemed
all-powerful, powerful only as long as it was undisputed, as long as it
was the only solidly organized body in an ocean of unorganized
individuals. But now the majority also is solidly organized, not in
outward forms but in inner unity. Standing before the impossible task of
imposing its will upon a rebellious population, Government grows
uncertain, divided, nervous, trying different ways. Moreover, the strike
impedes the intercommunication of the authorities all over the country,
isolates the local ones, and throws them back upon their own resources.
Thus the organization of State power begins to lose its inner strength
and solidity. Neither can the use of armed forces help otherwise than by
more violent threatening. Finally the army consists either of workers
too, in different dress and under the menace of stricter law, but not
intended to be used against their comrades; or it is a minority over
against the entire people. If put to the strain of being commanded to
fire at unarmed citizens and comrades, the imposed discipline in the
long run must give way. And then State power, besides its moral
authority, would have lost its strongest material weapon to keep the
masses in obedience.

Such considerations of the important consequences of mass strikes, once
that great social crises stir up the masses to a desperate fight, could
mean of course no more than the view of a possible future. For the
moment, under the mollifying effects of industrial prosperity, there
were no forces strong enough to drive the workers into such actions.
Against the threatening war their unions and parties restricted
themselves to professing their pacifism and international feelings,
without the will and the daring to call upon the masses for a desperate
resistance. So the ruling class could force the workers into its
capitalist mass-action, into world war. It was the collapse of the
appearances and illusions of self-satisfied power of the working class
at the time, now disclosed as inner weakness and insufficiency.

One of the elements of weakness was the lack of a distinct goal. There
was not, and could not be, any clear idea of what had to come after
successful mass-actions. The effects of mass strikes so far appeared
destructive only, not constructive. This was not true, to be sure;
decisive inner qualities, the basis of a new society, develop out of the
fights. But the outer forms in which they had to take shape were
unknown; nobody in the capitalist world at the time had heard of
workers' councils. Political strikes can only be a temporary form of
battle; after the strike constructive labor has to provide for
permanency.

### 2.5: The Russian Revolution

The Russian revolution was an important episode in the development of
the working class movement. Firstly, as already mentioned, by the
display of new forms of political strike, instruments of revolution.
Moreover, in a higher degree, by the first appearance of new forms of
self-organization of the fighting workers, known as soviets, i.e.,
councils. In 1905 they were hardly noticed as a special phenomenon and
they disappeared with the revolutionary activity itself. In 1917 they
reappeared with greater power; now their importance was grasped by the
workers of Western Europe, and they played a role here in the class
struggles after the First World War.

The soviets, essentially, were simply strike committees, such as always
arise in wild strikes. Since the strikes in Russia broke out in large
factories, and rapidly expanded over towns and districts, the workers
had to keep in continual touch. In the shops the workers assembled and
discussed regularly after the close of the work, or in times of tension
even continually, the entire day. They sent their delegates to other
factories and to the central committees, where information was
interchanged, difficulties discussed, decisions taken, and new tasks
considered.

But here the tasks proved more encompassing than in ordinary strikes.
The workers had to throw off the heavy oppression of Czarism; they felt
that by their action Russian society was changing in its foundations.
They had to consider not only wages and labor conditions in their shops,
but all questions related to society at large. They had to find their
own way in these realms and to take decisions on political matters. When
the strike flared up, extended over the entire country, stopped all
industry and traffic and paralyzed the functions of government, the
soviets were confronted with new problems. They had to regulate public
life, they had to take care of public security and order, they had to
provide for the indispensable public utilities and services. They had to
perform governmental functions; what they decided was executed by the
workers, whereas Government and police stood aloof, conscious of their
impotence against the rebellious masses. Then the delegates of other
groups, of intellectuals, of peasants, of soldiers, who came to join the
central soviets, took part in the discussions and decisions. But all
this power was like a flash of lightning, like a meteor passing. When at
last the Czarist government mustered its military forces and beat down
the movement the soviets disappeared.

Thus it was in 1905. In 1917 the war had weakened government through the
defeats at the front and the hunger in the towns, and now the soldiers,
mostly peasants, took part in the action. Besides the workers' councils
in the town soldiers' councils were formed in the army; the officers
were shot when they did not acquiesce in the soviets taking all power
into their hands to prevent entire anarchy. After half a year of vain
attempts on the part of politicians and military commanders to impose
new governments, the soviets, supported by the socialist parties, were
master of society.

Now the soviets stood before a new task. From organs of revolution they
had to become organs of reconstruction. The masses were master and of
course began to build up production according to their needs and life
interests. What they wanted and did was not determined, as always in
such cases, by inculcated doctrines, but by their own class character,
by their conditions of life. What were these conditions? Russia was a
primitive agrarian country with only the beginning of industrial
development. The masses of the people were uncivilized and ignorant
peasants, spiritually dominated by a gold glittering church, and even
the industrial workers were strongly connected with their old villages.
The village soviets arising everywhere were self-governing peasant
committees. They seized the large estates of the former great landowners
and divided them up. The development went in the direction of small
freeholders with private property, and presented already the
distinctions between larger and smaller properties, between influential
wealthy and more humble poor farmers.

In the towns, on the other hand, there could be no development to
private capitalist industry because there was no bourgeoisie of any
significance. The workers wanted some form of socialist production, the
only one possible under these conditions. But their minds and character,
only superficially touched by the beginnings of capitalism, were hardly
adequate to the task of themselves regulating production. So their
foremost and leading elements, the socialists of the Bolshevist Party,
organized and hardened by years of devoted fight, their leaders in the
revolution became the leaders in the reconstruction. Moreover, were
these working class tendencies not to be drowned by the flood of
aspirations for private property coming from the land, a strong central
government had to be formed, able to restrain the peasants' tendencies.
In this heavy task of organizing industry, of organizing the defensive
war against counter-revolutionary attacks, of subduing the resistance of
capitalist tendencies among the peasants, and of educating them to
modern scientific ideas instead of their old beliefs, all the capable
elements among the workers and intellectuals, supplemented by such of
the former officials and officers as were willing to co-operate, had to
combine into the Bolshevist Party as the leading body. It formed the new
government. The soviets gradually were eliminated as organs of
self-rule, and reduced to subordinate organs of the government
apparatus. The name of Soviet Republic, however, was preserved as a
camouflage, and the ruling party retained the name of Communist Party.

The system of production developed in Russia is State socialism. It is
organized production, with the State as universal employer, master of
the entire production apparatus. The workers are master of the means of
production no more than under Western capitalism. They receive their
wages and are exploited by the State as the only mammoth capitalist. So
the name State capitalism can be applied with precisely the same
meaning. The entirety of the ruling and leading bureaucracy of officials
is the actual owner of the factories, the possessing class. Not
separately, everyone for a part, but together, collectively, they are
possessors of the whole. Theirs the function and the task to do what the
bourgeoisie did in Western Europe and America: develop industry and the
productivity of labor. They had to change Russia from a primitive
barbarous country of peasants into a modern, civilized country of great
industry. And before long, in often cruelly waged class war between the
peasants and the rulers, State-controlled big agrarian enterprises
replaced the backward small farms.

The revolution, therefore, has not, as deceptive propaganda pretends,
made Russia a land where the workers are master and communism reigns.
Yet it meant progress of enormous significance. It may be compared with
the great French revolution: it destroyed the power of monarch and
feudal landowners, it began by giving the land to the peasants, and it
made the masters of industry rulers of the State. Just as then in France
the masses from despised "canaille" became free citizens, recognized
even in poverty and economic dependence as personalities with the
possibility to rise, so now in Russia the masses rose from unevolving
barbarism into the stream of world progress, where they may act as
personalities. Political dictatorship as form of government can no more
prevent this development once it has started than the military
dictatorship of Napoleon hampered it in France. Just as then in France
from among the citizens and peasants came up the capitalists and the
military commanders, in an upward struggle of mutual competition, by
good and by bad means, by energy and talent, by jobbery and deceit -- so
now in Russia. All the good brains among the workers, and peasants'
children rushed into the technical and farming schools, became
engineers, officers, technical and military leaders. The future was
opened to them and aroused immense tensions of energy; by study and
exertion, by cunning and intrigue they worked to assert their places in
the new ruling class -- ruling, here again, over a miserable exploited
class of proletarians. And just as at that time in France a strong
nationalism sprang up proclaiming the new freedom to be brought to all
Europe, a brief dream of everlasting glory -- so now Russia proudly
proclaimed its mission, by world revolution to free all peoples from
capitalism.

For the working class the significance of the Russian revolution must be
looked for in quite different directions. Russia showed to the European
and American workers, confined within reformist ideas and practice,
first how an industrial working class by a gigantic mass action of wild
strikes is able to undermine and destroy an obsolete State power; and
second, how in such actions the strike committees develop into workers'
councils, organs of fight and of self-management, acquiring political
tasks and functions. In order to see the influence of the Russian
example upon the ideas and actions of the working class after the First
World War, we have to go a step backward.

The outbreak of the war in 1914 meant an unexpected breakdown of the
labor movement all over capitalist Europe. The obedient compliance of
the workers under the military powers, the eager affiliation, in all
countries, of the union and socialist party leaders to their
governments, as accomplices in the suppression of the workers, the
absence of any significant protest, had brought a deep disappointment to
all who before put their hopes of liberation on proletarian socialism.
But gradually among the foremost of the workers came the insight that
what had broken down was chiefly the illusion of an easy liberation by
parliamentary reform. They saw the bleeding and exploited masses growing
rebellious under the sufferings of oppression and butchery, and, in
alliance with the Russian revolutionaries, they expected the
world-revolution to destroy capitalism as an outcome of the chaos of the
war. They rejected the disgraced name of socialism and called themselves
communists, the old title of working class revolutionaries.

Then as a bright star in the dark sky the Russian revolution flared up
and shone over the earth. And everywhere the masses were filled with
anticipation and became restive, listening to its call for the finishing
of the war, for brotherhood of the workers of all countries, for world
revolution against capitalism. Still clinging to their old socialist
doctrines and organizations the masses, uncertain under the flood of
calumnies in the press, stood waiting, hesitating, whether the tale
might still come true. Smaller groups, especially among the young
workers, everywhere assembled in a growing communist movement. They were
the advance guard in the movements that after the end of the war broke
out in all countries, most strongly in defeated and exhausted Central
Europe.

It was a new doctrine, a new system of ideas, a new tactic of fight,
this communism that with the then new powerful means of government
propaganda was propagated from Russia. It referred to Marx's theory of
destroying capitalism by means of the workers' class fight. It was a
call for fight against world capital, mainly concentrated in England and
America, that exploited all peoples and all continents. It summoned not
only the industrial workers of Europe and America but also the subjected
peoples of Asia and Africa to rise in common fight against capitalism.
Like every war, this war could only be won by organization, by
concentration of powers, and good discipline. In the communist parties,
comprising the most gallant and able fighters, kernel and staff were
present already: they have to take the lead, and at their call the
masses must rise and attack the capitalist governments. In the political
and economic crisis of the world we cannot wait until by patient
teaching the masses have all become communists. Nor is this necessary;
if they are convinced that only communism is salvation, if they put
their trust in the Communist Party, follow its directions, bring it to
power, then the Party as the new government will establish the new
order. So it did in Russia, and this example must be followed
everywhere. But then in response to the heavy task and the devotion of
the leaders, strict obedience and discipline of the masses are
imperative, of the masses towards the Party, of the party members
towards the leaders. What Marx had called the dictatorship of the
proletariat can be realized only as the dictatorship of the Communist
Party. In the Party the working class is embodied, the Party is its
representative.

In this form of communist doctrine the Russian origin was clearly
visible. In Russia, with its small industry and undeveloped working
class, only a rotten Asiatic despotism had to be overthrown. In Europe
and America a numerous and highly developed working class, trained by a
powerful industry, stands over against a powerful capitalist class
disposing of all the resources of the world. Hence the doctrine of party
dictatorship and blind obedience found strong opposition here. If in
Germany the revolutionary movements after the close of the war had led
to a victory of the working class and it had joined Russia, then the
influence of this class, product of the highest capitalist and
industrial development, would soon have outweighed the Russian
character. It would have strongly influenced the English and the
American workers, and it would have carried away Russia itself along new
roads. But in Germany the revolution failed; the masses were kept aloof
by their socialist and union leaders, by means of atrocity stories and
promises of well-ordered socialist happiness, whilst their advance
guards were exterminated and their best spokesmen murdered by the
military forces under the protection of the socialist government. So the
opposing groups of German communists could not carry weight; they were
expelled from the party. In their place discontented socialist groups
were induced to join the Moscow International, attracted by its new
opportunist policy of parliamentarism, with which it hoped to win power
in capitalist countries.

Thus world revolution from a war cry became a phrase. The Russian
leaders imagined world revolution as a big scale extension and imitation
of the Russian revolution. They knew capitalism only in its Russian
form, as a foreign exploiting power impoverishing the inhabitants,
carrying all the profits out of the country. They did not know
capitalism as the great organizing power, by its richness producing the
basis of a still richer new world. As became clear from their writings,
they did not know the enormous power of the bourgeoisie, against which
all the capabilities of devoted leaders and a disciplined party are
insufficient. They did not know the sources of strength that lie hidden
in the modern working class. Hence the primitive forms of noisy
propaganda and party terrorism not only spiritual, but also physical,
against dissenting views. It was an anachronism that Russia, newly
entering the industrial era out of its primitive barbarism, should take
command over the working class of Europe and America, that stood before
the task of transforming a highly developed industrial capitalism into a
still higher form of organization.

Old Russia essentially, in its economic structure, had been an Asiatic
country. All over Asia lived millions of peasants, in primitive small
scale agriculture, restricted to their village, under despotic far
distant rulers, whom they had no connection with but by the paying of
taxes. In modern times these taxes became ever more a heavy tribute to
Western capitalism. The Russian revolution, with its repudiation of
Czarist debts, was the liberation of the Russian peasants from this form
of exploitation by Western capital. So it called upon all the suppressed
and exploited Eastern peoples to follow its example, to join the fight
and throw off the yoke of their despots, tools of the rapacious world
capital. And far and wide, in China and Persia, in India and Africa the
call was heard. Communist parties were formed, consisting of radical
intellectuals, of peasants revolting against feudal landowners, of
hard-pressed urban coolies and artisans, bringing to the hundreds of
millions the message of liberation. As in Russia it meant for all these
peoples the opening of the road to modern industrial development,
sometimes, as in China, in alliance with a modernizing national
bourgeoisie. In this way the Moscow International even more than a
European became an Asiatic institution. This accentuated its middle
class character, and worked to revive in the European followers the old
traditions of middle class revolutions, with the preponderance of great
leaders, of sounding catchwords, of conspiracies, plots, and military
revolts.

The consolidation of State capitalism in Russia itself was the
determining basis for the character of the Communist Party. Whilst in
its foreign propaganda it continued to speak of communism and world
revolution, decried capitalism, called upon the workers to join in the
fight for freedom, the workers in Russia were a subjected and exploited
class, living mostly in miserable working conditions, under a strong and
oppressive dictatorial rule, without freedom of speech, of press, of
association, more strongly enslaved than their brethren under Western
capitalism. Thus an inherent falsehood must pervade politics and
teachings of that party. Though a tool of the Russian government in its
foreign politics, it succeeded by its revolutionary talk to take hold of
all the rebellious impulses generated in enthusiastic young people in
the crisis-ridden Western world. But only to spill them in abortive
sham-actions or in opportunist politics -- now against the socialist
parties styled as traitors or social fascists, then seeking their
alliance in a so-called red front or a people's front -- causing its
best adherents to leave in disgust. The doctrine it taught under the
name of Marxism was not the theory of the overthrow of highly developed
capitalism by a highly developed working class, but its caricature,
product of a world of barbarous primitivity, where fight against
religious superstitions is spiritual, and modernized industrialism is
economic progress -- with atheism as philosophy, party-rule the aim,
obedience to dictatorship as highest commandment. The Communist Party
did not intend to make the workers independent fighters capable by their
force of insight themselves to build their new world, but to make them
obedient followers ready to put the party into power.

So the light darkened that had illuminated the world; the masses that
had hailed it were left in blacker night, either in discouragement
turning away from the fight, or struggling along to find new and better
ways. The Russian revolution first had given a mighty impulse to the
fight of the working class, by its mass direct actions and by its new
council forms of organization -- this was expressed in the widespread
rise of the communist movement all over the world. But when then the
revolution settled into a new order, a new class rule, a new form of
government, State capitalism under dictatorship of a new exploiting
class, the Communist Party needs must assume an ambiguous character.
Thus in the course of ensuing events it became most ruinous to the
working class fight, that can only live and grow in the purity of clear
thought, plain deeds and fair dealings. By its idle talk of world
revolution it hampered the badly needed new orientation of means and
aims. By fostering and teaching under the name of discipline the vice of
submissiveness, the chief vice the workers must shake off, by
suppressing each trace of independent critical thought, it prevented the
growth of any real power of the working class. By usurping the name
communism for its system of workers' exploitation and its policy of
often cruel persecution of adversaries, it made this name, till then
expression of lofty ideals, a byword, an object of aversion and hatred
even among workers. In Germany, where the political and economic crises
had brought the class antagonisms to the highest pitch, it reduced the
hard class fight to a puerile skirmish of armed youths against similar
nationalist bands. And when then the tide of nationalism ran high and
proved strongest, large parts of them, only educated to beat down their
leaders' adversaries, simply changed colours. Thus the Communist Party
by its theory and practice largely contributed to prepare the victory of
fascism.

### 2.6: The workers' revolution

The revolution by which the working class will win mastery and freedom,
is not a single event of limited duration. It is a process of
organization, of self-education, in which the workers gradually, now in
progressing rise, then in steps and leaps, develop the force to vanquish
the bourgeoisie, to destroy capitalism, and to build up their new system
of collective production. This process will fill up an epoch in history
of unknown length, on the verge of which we are now standing. Though the
details of its course cannot be foreseen, some of its conditions and
circumstances may be a subject of discussion now.

This fight cannot be compared with a regular war between similar
antagonistic powers. The workers' forces are like an army that assembles
during the battle! They must grow by the fight itself, they cannot be
ascertained beforehand, and they can only put forward and attain partial
aims. Looking back on history we discern a series of actions that as
attempts to seize power seem to be so many failures: from Chartism,
along 1848, along the Paris Commune, up to the revolutions in Russia and
Germany in 1917-1918. But there is a line of progress; every next
attempt shows a higher stage of consciousness and force. Looking back on
the history of labor we see, moreover, that in the continuous struggle
of the working class there are ups and downs, mostly connected with
changes in industrial prosperity. In the first rise of industry every
crisis brought misery and rebellious movements; the revolution of 1848
on the continent was the sequel of a heavy business depression combined
with bad crops. The industrial depression about 1867 brought a revival
of political action in England; the long crisis of the 1880's, with its
heavy unemployment, excited mass actions, the rise of social-democracy
on the continent and the "new unionism" in England. But in the years of
industrial prosperity in between, as 1850-70, and 1895-1914, all this
spirit of rebellion disappeared. When capitalism flourishes and in
feverish activity expands its realm, when there is abundant employment,
and trade union action is able to raise the wages, the workers do not
think of any change in the social system. The capitalist class growing
in wealth and power is full of self-confidence, prevails over the
workers and succeeds in imbuing them with its spirit of nationalism.
Formally the workers may then stick to the old revolutionary catchwords;
but in their subconscious they are content with capitalism, their vision
is narrowed; hence, though their numbers are growing, their power
declines. Till a new crisis finds them unprepared and has to rouse them
anew.

Thus the question poses itself, whether, if previously won fighting
power again and again crumbles in the contentment of a new prosperity,
society and the working class ever will be ripe for revolution. To
answer this question the development of capitalism must be more closely
examined.

The alternation of depression and prosperity in industry is not a simple
swinging to and fro. Every next swing was accompanied by an expansion.
After each breakdown in a crisis capitalism was able to come up again by
expanding its realm, its markets, its mass of production and product. As
long as capitalism is able to expand farther over the world and to
increase its volume, it can give employment to the mass of the
population. As long as thus it can meet the first demand of a system of
production, to procure a living to its members, it will be able to
maintain itself, because no dire necessity compels the workers to make
an end of it. If it could go on prospering at its highest stage of
extension, revolution would be impossible as well as unnecessary; then
there were only the hope that a gradual increase of general culture
could reform its deficiencies.

Capitalism, however, is not a normal, in any case not a stable system of
production. European, and afterwards American capitalism could increase
production so continuously and rapidly, because it was surrounded by a
wide non-capitalist outer world of small-scale production, source of raw
materials and markets for the products. An artificial state of things,
this separation between an active capitalist core and a dependent
passive surrounding. But the core ever expanding. The essence of
capitalist economy is growth, activity, expansion; every standstill
means collapse and crisis. The reason is that profits accumulate
continuously into new capital that seeks for investment to bring new
profit, thus the mass of capital and the mass of products increase ever
more rapidly and markets are sought for feverishly. So capitalism is the
great revolutionizing power, subverting old conditions everywhere and
changing the aspect of the earth. Ever new millions of people from their
secluded, self-sufficient home production that reproduced itself during
long centuries without notable change, are drawn into the whirl of world
commerce. Capitalism itself, industrial exploitation, is introduced
there, and soon from customers they become competitors. In the 19th
century from England it progressed over France, Germany, America, Japan,
then in the 20th it pervades the large Asiatic territories. And first as
competing individuals, then organized in national States the capitalists
take up the fight for markets, colonies, world power. So they are driven
on, revolutionizing ever wider domains.

But the earth is a globe, of limited extent. The discovery of its finite
size accompanied the rise of capitalism four centuries ago, the
realization of its finite size now marks the end of capitalism. The
population to be subjected is limited. The hundreds of millions crowding
the fertile plains of China and India once drawn within the confines of
capitalism, its chief work is accomplished. Then no large human masses
remain as objects for subjection. Surely there remain vast wild areas to
be converted into realms of human culture; but their exploitation
demands conscious collaboration of organized humanity; the rough rapine
methods of capitalism -- the fertility -- destroying "rape of the earth"
-- are of no avail there. Then its further expansion is checked. Not as
a sudden impediment, but gradually, as a growing difficulty of selling
products and investing capital. Then the pace of development slackens,
production slows up, unemployment waxes a sneaking disease. Then the
mutual fight of the capitalists for world domination becomes fiercer,
with new world wars impending.

So there can hardly be any doubt that an unlimited expansion of
capitalism offering lasting life possibilities for the population, is
excluded by its inner economic character. And that the time will come
that the evil of depression, the calamities of unemployment, the terrors
of war, grow ever stronger. Then the working class, if not yet
revolting, must rise and fight. Then the workers must choose between
inertly succumbing and actively fighting to win freedom. Then they will
have to take up their task of creating a better world out of the chaos
of decaying capitalism.

Will they fight? Human history is an endless series of fights; and
Clausewitz, the well-known German theorist on war, concluded from
history that man is in his inner nature a warlike being. But others,
skeptics as well as fiery revolutionists, seeing the timidity, the
submissiveness, the indifference of the masses, often despair of the
future. So we will have to look somewhat more thoroughly into
psychological forces and effects.

The dominant and deepest impulse in man as in every living being is his
instinct of self-preservation. It compels him to defend his life with
all his powers. Fear and submissiveness also are the effect of this
instinct, when against powerful masters they afford the best chances for
preservation. Among the various dispositions in man those which are most
adapted to secure life in the existing circumstances will prevail and
develop. In the daily life of capitalism it is unpractical, even
dangerous for a worker to nurture his feelings of independence and
pride; the more he suppresses them and tacitly obeys, the less
difficulty he will encounter in finding and keeping his job. The morals
taught by the ministers of the ruling class enhance this disposition.
And only few and independent spirits defy these tendencies and are ready
to encounter the incumbent difficulties.

When, however, in times of social crisis and danger all this
submissivity, this virtuousness, is of no avail to secure life, when
only fighting can help, then it gives way to its contrary, to
rebelliousness and courage. Then the bold set the example and the timid
discover with surprise of what deeds of heroism they are capable. Then
self-reliance and high-spiritedness awake in them and grow, because on
their growth depend their chances of life and happiness. And at once, by
instinct and by experience, they know that only collaboration and union
can give strength to their masses. When then they perceive what forces
are present in themselves and in their comrades, when they feel the
happiness of this awakening of proud self-respect and devoted
brotherhood, when they anticipate a future of victory, when they see
rising before them the image of the new society they help to build, then
enthusiasm and ardor grow to irresistible power. Then the working class
begins to be ripe for revolution. Then capitalism begins to be ripe for
collapse.

Thus a new mankind is arising. Historians often wonder when they see the
rapid changes in the character of people in revolutionary times. It
seems a miracle; but it simply shows how many traits lay hidden in them,
suppressed because they were of no use. Now they break forth, perhaps
only temporarily; but if their utility is lasting, they develop into
dominant qualities, transforming man, fitting him for the new
circumstances and demands.

The first and paramount change is the growth of community-feeling. Its
first traces came up with capitalism itself, out of the common work and
the common fight. It is strengthened by the consciousness and the
experience that, single, the worker is powerless against capital, and
that only firm solidarity can secure tolerable life conditions. When the
fight grows larger and fiercer, and widens into a fight for dominance
over labor and society, on which life and future depend, solidarity must
grow into indissoluble all-pervading unity. The new community-feeling,
extending over the entire working class, suppresses the old selfishness
of the capitalist world.

It is not entirely new. In primeval times, in the tribe with its simple
mostly communistic forms of labor the community-feeling was dominant.
Man was completely bound up with the tribe; separate from it he was
nothing; in all his actions the individual felt as nothing compared with
the welfare and the honor of the community. Inextricably one as he was
with the tribe primitive man had not yet developed into a personality.
When afterwards men separated and became independent small-scale
producers, community-feeling waned and gave way to individualism, that
makes the own person the centre of all interests and all feelings. In
the many centuries of middle class rising, of commodity production and
capitalism, the individual personality-feeling awoke and ever more
strongly grew into a new character. It is an acquisition that can no
more be lost. To be sure, also in this time man was a social being;
society dominated, and in critical moments, of revolution and war, the
community-feeling temporarily imposed itself as an unwanted moral duty.
But in ordinary life it lay suppressed under the proud fancy of personal
independence.

What is now developing in the working class is not a reverse change, as
little as life conditions are a return to bygone forms. It is the
coalescence of individualism and community-feeling into a higher unity.
It is the conscious subordination of all personal forces in the service
of the community. In their management of the mighty productive forces
the workers as their mightier masters will develop their personality to
a yet higher stage. The consciousness of its intimate connection with
society unites personality-feeling with the all-powerful social feeling
into a new life-apprehension based on the realization of society as the
source of man's entire being.

Community-feeling from the first is the main force in the progress of
revolution. This progress is the growth of the solidarity, of the mutual
connection, of the unity of the workers. Their organization, their new
growing power, is a new character acquired through fight, is a change in
their inner being, is a new morality. What military authors say about
ordinary war, namely, that moral forces therein play a dominant role, is
even more true in the war of the classes. Higher issues are at stake
here. Wars always were contests of similar competing powers, and the
deepest structure of society remained the same, whether one won or the
other. Contests of classes are fights for new principles, and the
victory of the rising class transfers the society to a higher stage of
development. Hence, compared with real war, the moral forces are of a
superior kind: voluntary devoted collaboration instead of blind
obedience, faith to ideals instead of fidelity to commanders, love for
the class companions, for humanity, instead of patriotism. Their
essential practice is not armed violence, not killing, but standing
steadfast, enduring, persevering, persuading, organizing; their aim is
not to smash the skulls but to open the brains. Surely, armed action
will also play a role in the fight of the classes; the armed violence of
the masters cannot be overcome in Tolstoyan fashion by patient
suffering. It must be beaten down by force; but, by force animated by a
deep moral conviction.

There have been wars that showed something of this character. Such wars
as were a kind of revolution or formed part of revolutions, in the fight
for freedom of the middle class. Where rising burgherdom fought for
dominance against the home and the foreign feudal powers of monarchy and
landowner-ship -- as in Greece in antiquity, in Italy and Flanders in
the Middle Ages, in Holland, England, France in later centuries --
idealism and enthusiasm, arising out of deep feelings of the
class-necessities, called forth great deeds of heroism and
self-sacrifice. These episodes, such as in modern times we meet with in
the French revolution, or in Italy's liberation by Garibaldi's
followers, count among the most beautiful pages in human history.
Historians have glorified and poets have sung them as epochs of
greatness, gone for ever. Because the sequel of the liberation, the
practice of the new society, the rule of capital, the contrast of
impudent luxury and miserable poverty, the avarice and greed of the
business men, the job-hunting of officials, all this pageant of low
selfishness fell as a chilling disappointment upon the next generation.
In middle-class revolutions egotism and ambition in strong personalities
play an important role; as a rule the idealists are sacrificed and the
base characters come to wealth and power. In the bourgeoisie everybody
must try to raise himself by treading down the others. The virtues of
community-feeling were a temporary necessity only, to gain dominance for
their class, once this aim attained, they give way to the pitiless
competitive strife of all against all.

Here we have the fundamental difference between the former middle-class
revolutions and the now approaching workers' revolution. For the workers
the strong community-feeling arising out of their fight for power and
freedom is at the same time the basis of their new society. The virtues
of solidarity and devotion, the impulse to common action in firm unity,
generated in the social struggle, are the foundations of the new
economic system of common labor, and will be perpetuated and intensified
by its practice. The fight shapes the new mankind needed for the new
labor system. The strong individualism in man now finds a better way of
asserting itself than in the craving for personal power over others. In
applying its full force to the liberation of the class it will unfold
itself more fully and more nobly than in pursuing personal aims.

Community-feeling and organization do not suffice to defeat capitalism.
In keeping the working class in submission, the spiritual dominance of
the bourgeoisie has the same importance as has its physical power.
Ignorance is an impediment to freedom. Old thoughts and traditions press
heavily upon the brains, even when touched already by new ideas. Then
the aims are seen at their narrowest, well-sounding catchwords are
accepted without criticism, illusions about easy successes, half-hearted
measures and false promises lead astray. Thus the importance of
intellectual power for the workers is shown. Knowledge and insight are
an essential factor in the rise of the working class.

The workers' revolution is not the outcome of rough physical power; it
is a victory of the mind. It will be the product of the mass power of
the workers, certainly; but this power is spiritual power in the first
place. The workers will not win because they have strong fists; fists
are easily directed by cunning brains, even against their own cause.
Neither will they win because they are the majority; ignorant and
unorganized majorities regularly were kept down, powerless, by
well-instructed organized minorities. Majority now will win only because
strong moral and intellectual forces cause it to rise above the power of
their masters. Revolutions in history could succeed because new
spiritual forces had been awakened in the masses. Brute stupid physical
force can do nothing but destroy. Revolutions, however, are the
constructive epochs in the evolution of mankind. And more than any
former the revolution that is to render the workers master of the world
demands the highest moral and intellectual qualities.

Can the workers respond to these demands? How can they acquire the
knowledge needed? Not from the schools, where the children are imbibed
with all the false ideas about society which the ruling class wishes
them to have. Not from the papers, owned and edited by the capitalists,
or by groups striving for leadership. Not from the pulpit that always
preaches servility and where John Balls are extremely rare. Not from the
radio, where -- unlike the public discussions in former times, for the
citizens a powerful means of training their minds on public affairs --
one-sided allocations tend to stultify the passive listeners, and by
their never-easing obtrusive noise allow of no reposed thinking. Not
from the film that -- unlike the theatre, in early days for the rising
burgher class a means of instruction and sometimes even of fight --
appeals only to visual impression, never to thinking or intelligence.
They all are powerful instruments of the ruling class to keep the
working class in spiritual bondage. With instinctive cunning and
conscious deliberation they are all used for the purpose. And the
working masses unsuspectingly submit to their influence. They let
themselves be fooled by artful words and outside appearances. Even those
who know of class and fight leave the affairs to leaders and statesmen,
and applaud them when they speak dear old words of tradition. The masses
spend their free time in pursuing puerile pleasures unaware of the great
social problems on which their and their children's existence depends.
It seems an insolvable problem, how a workers' revolution is ever to
come and to succeed, when by the sagaciousness of the rulers and the
indifference of the ruled its spiritual conditions remain lacking.

But the forces of capitalism are working in the depths of society,
stirring old conditions and pushing people forward even when unwilling.
Their inciting effects are suppressed as long as possible, to save the
old possibilities of going on living; stored in the subconscious they
only intensify the inner strains. Till at last, in crisis, at the
highest pitch of necessity they snap and give way in action, in revolt.
The action is not the result of deliberate intention; it comes as a
spontaneous deed, irresistibly. In such spontaneous action man reveals
to himself of what he is capable, a surprise to himself. And because the
action is always collective action, it reveals to each that the forces
dimly felt in himself, are present in all. Confidence and courage are
raised by the discovery of the strong class forces of common will, and
they stir and carry away ever wider masses.

Actions break out spontaneously, enforced by capitalism upon the
unwilling workers. They are not so much the result as the starting point
of their spiritual development. Once the fight is taken up the workers
must go on in attack and defense; they must exert all their forces to
the utmost. Now falls away the indifference that was only a form of
resistance to demands they felt themselves unequal to respond to. Now a
time of intense mental exertion sets in. Standing over against the
mighty forces of capitalism they see that only by the utmost efforts, by
developing all their powers can they hope to win. What in every fight
appears in its first traces now broadly unfolds; all the forces hidden
in the masses are roused and set in motion. This is the creative work of
revolution. Now the necessity of firm unity is hammered into their
consciousness, now the necessity of knowledge is felt at every moment.
Every kind of ignorance, every illusion about the character and force of
the foe, every weakness in resisting his tricks, every incapacity of
refuting his arguments and calumnies, is revenged in failure and defeat.
Active desire, by strong impulses from within, now incites the workers
to use their brains. The new hopes, the new visions of the future
inspire the mind, making it a living active power, that shuns no pains
to seek for truth, to acquire knowledge.

Where will the workers find the knowledge they need? The sources are
abundant; an extensive scientific literature of books and pamphlets,
explaining the basic facts and theories of society and labor already
exists and more will follow. But they exhibit the greatest diversity of
opinion as to what is to be done; and the workers themselves have to
choose and to distinguish what is true and right. They have to use their
own brains in hard thinking and intent discussion. For they face new
problems, ever again, to which the old books can give no solution. These
can supply only general knowledge about society and capital, they
present principles and theories, comprehending former experience. The
application in ever new situations is our own task.

The insight needed can not be obtained as instruction of an ignorant
mass by learned teachers, possessors of science, as the pouring of
knowledge into passive pupils. It can only be acquired by
self-education, by the strenuous self-activity that strains the brain in
full desire to understand the world. It would be very easy for the
working class if it had only to accept established truth from those who
know it. But the truth they need does not exist anywhere in the world
outside them; they must build it up within themselves. Also what is
given here does not pretend to be established final truth to be learned
by heart. It is a system of ideas won by attentive experience of society
and the workers' movement, formulated to induce others to think over and
to discuss the problems of work and its organization. There are hundreds
of thinkers to open new viewpoints, there are thousands of intelligent
workers who, once they give their attention to them, are able, from
their intimate knowledge, to conceive better and in more detail the
organization of their fight and the organization of their work. What is
said here may be the spark that kindles the fire in their minds.

There are groups and parties pretending to be in the exclusive
possession of truth, who try to win the workers by their propaganda
under the exclusion of all other opinions. By moral and, where they have
the power, also by physical constraint, they try to impose their views
upon the masses. It must be clear that one-sided teaching of one system
of doctrines can only serve, and indeed should serve, to breed obedient
followers, hence to uphold old or prepare new domination.
Self-liberation of the working masses implies self-thinking,
self-knowing, recognizing truth and error by their own mental exertion.
Exerting the brains is much more difficult and fatiguing than exerting
the muscles; but it must be done, because the brains govern the muscles;
if not their own, then foreign brains.

So unlimited freedom of discussion, of expressing opinions is the
breathing air of the workers' fight. It is more than a century ago that
against a despotic government, Shelley, England's greatest poet of the
19th century, "the friend of the friendless poor," vindicated for
everybody the right of free expression of his opinion. "A man has the
right to unrestricted liberty of discussion." "A man has not only the
right to express his thoughts, but it is his duty to do so" ... "nor can
any acts of legislature destroy that right." Shelley proceeded from
philosophy proclaiming the natural rights of man. For us it is owing to
its necessity for the liberation of the working class that freedom of
speech and press is proclaimed. To restrict the freedom of discussion is
to prevent the workers from acquiring the knowledge they need. Every old
despotism, every modern dictatorship began by persecuting or forbidding
freedom of press; every restriction of this freedom is the first step to
bring the workers under the domination of some kind of rulers. Must not,
then, the masses be protected against the falsehoods, the
misrepresentations, the beguiling propaganda of their enemies? As little
as in education careful withholding of evil influences can develop the
faculty to resist and vanquish them, as little can the working class be
educated to freedom by spiritual guardianship. Where the enemies present
themselves in the guise of friends, and in the diversity of opinions
every party is inclined to consider the others as a danger for the
class, who shall decide? The workers, certainly; they must fight their
way in this realm also. But the workers of to-day might in honest
conviction condemn as obnoxious opinions that afterwards prove to be the
basis of new progress. Only by standing open to all ideas that the rise
of a new world generates in the minds of man, by testing and selecting,
by judging and applying them with its own mental capacities, can the
working class gain the spiritual superiority needed to suppress the
power of capitalism and erect the new society.

Every revolution in history was an epoch of the most fervent spiritual
activity. By hundreds and thousands the political pamphlets and papers
appeared as the agents of intense self-education of the masses. In the
coming proletarian revolution it will not be otherwise. It is an
illusion that, once awakened from submissiveness, the masses will be
directed by one common clear insight and go their way without hesitation
in unanimity of opinion. History shows that in such awakening an
abundance of new thoughts in greatest diversity sprouts in man,
expressions all of the new world, as a roaming search of mankind in the
newly opened land of possibilities, as a blooming richness of spiritual
life. Only in the mutual struggle of all these ideas will crystallize
the guiding principles that are essential for the new tasks. The first
great successes, result of spontaneous united action, by destroying
previous shackles, do no more than fling open the prison gates; the
workers, by their own exertion, must then find the new orientation
towards further progress.

This means that those great times will be full of the noise of party
strife. Those who have the same ideas form groups to discuss them for
their own and to propagate them for their comrades' enlightenment. Such
groups of common opinion may be called parties, though their character
will be entirely different from the political parties of the previous
world. Under parliamentarism these parties were the organs of different
and opposite class interests. In the working class movement they were
organizations taking the lead of the class, acting as its spokesmen and
representatives and aspiring at guidance and dominance. Now their
function will be spiritual fight only. The working class for its
practical action has no use for them; it has created its new organs for
action, the councils. In the shop organization, the council
organization, it is the entirety of the workers itself that acts, that
has to decide what must be done. In the shop assemblies and in the
councils the different and opposite opinions are exposed and defended,
and out of the contest the decision and the unanimous action has to
proceed. Unity of purpose can only be reached by spiritual contest
between the dissenting views. The important function of the parties,
then, is to organize opinion, by their mutual discussion to bring the
new growing ideas into concise forms, to clarify them, to exhibit the
arguments in a comprehensible form, and by their propaganda to bring
them to the notice of all. Only in this way the workers in their
assemblies and councils can judge their truth, their merits, their
practicability in each situation, and take the decision in clear
understanding. Thus the spiritual forces of new ideas, sprouting wildly
in all the heads, are organized and shaped so as to be usable
instruments of the class. This is the great task of party strife in the
workers' fight for freedom, far nobler than the endeavor of the old
parties to win dominance for themselves.

The transition of supremacy from one class to another, which as in all
former revolutions is the essence of the workers' revolution, does not
depend on the haphazard chances of accidental events. Though its
details, its ups and downs depend on the chance of various conditions
and happenings that we cannot foresee, viewed at large there is a
definite progressive course, which may be an object of consideration in
advance. It is the increase of social power of the rising class, the
loss of social power of the declining class. The rapid visible changes
in power form the essential character of social revolutions. So we have
to consider somewhat more closely the elements, the factors constituting
the power of each of the contending classes.

The power of the capitalist class in the first place consists in the
possession of capital. It is master of all the factories, the machines,
the mines, master of the entire productive apparatus of society; so
mankind depends on that class to work and to live. With its money-power
it can buy not only servants for personal attendance, when threatened it
can buy in unlimited number sturdy young men to defend its domination,
it can organize them into well-armed fighting groups and give them a
social standing. It can buy, by assuring them honorable places and good
salaries, artists, writers and intellectuals, not only to amuse and to
serve the masters, but also to praise them and glorify their rule, and
by cunning and learning to defend their domination against criticism.

Yet the spiritual power of the capitalist class has deeper roots than
the intellect it can buy. The middle class, out of which the capitalists
rose as its upper layer, always was an enlightened class, self-reliant
through its broad world conception, basing itself, its work, its
production system, upon culture and knowledge. Its principles of
personal ownership and responsibility, of self-help and individual
energy pervade the entire society. These ideas the workers have brought
with them, from their origin out of impoverished middle-class layers;
and all the spiritual and physical means available are set to work to
preserve and intensify the middle-class ideas in the masses. Thus the
domination of the capitalist class is firmly rooted in the thinking and
feeling of the dominated majority itself.

The strongest power factor of the capitalist class, however, is its
political organization, State-power. Only by firm organization can a
minority rule over a majority. The unity and continuity of plan and will
in the central government, the discipline of the bureaucracy of
officials pervading society as the nervous system pervades the body, and
animated and directed by one common spirit, the disposal, moreover, when
necessary, over an armed force, assure its unquestioned dominance over
the population. Just as the strength of the fortress consolidates the
physical forces of the garrison into an indomitable power over the
country, so State power consolidates the physical and spiritual forces
of the ruling class into unassailable strength. The respect paid to the
authorities by the citizens, by the feeling of necessity, by custom and
education, regularly assure the smooth running of the apparatus. And
should discontent make people rebellious, what can they do, unarmed and
unorganized against the firmly organized and disciplined armed forces of
the Government? With the development of capitalism, when the power from
a numerous middle class ever more concentrated in a smaller number of
big capitalists, the State also concentrated its power and through its
increasing functions took ever more hold of society.

What has the working class to oppose to these formidable factors of
power?

Ever more the working class constitutes the majority, in the most
advanced countries the large majority of the population, concentrated
here in large and giant industrial enterprises. Not legally but actually
it has the machines, the productive apparatus of society in its hands.
The capitalists are owners and masters, surely; but they can do no more
than command. If the working class disregards their commands they cannot
run the machines. The workers can. The workers are the direct actual
masters of the machines; however determined, by obedience or by
self-will, they can run them and stop them. Theirs is the most important
economic function; their labor bears society.

This economical power is a sleeping power as long as the workers are
captivated in middle class thinking. It grows into actual power by class
consciousness. By the practice of life and labor they discover that they
are a special class, exploited by capital, that they have to fight to
free themselves from exploitation. Their fight compels them to
understand the structure of the economic system, to acquire knowledge of
society. Notwithstanding all propaganda to the contrary this new
knowledge dispels the inherited middle-class ideas in their heads,
because it is based on the truth of daily experienced reality, whereas
the old ideas express the past realities of a bygone world.

Economic and spiritual power are made an active power through
organization. It binds all the different wills to unity of purpose and
combines the single forces into a mighty unity of action. Its outer
forms may differ and change as to circumstances, its essence is its new
moral character, the solidarity, the strong community-feeling, the
devotion and spirit of sacrifice, the self-imposed discipline.
Organization is the life principle of the working class, the condition
of liberation. A minority ruling by its strong organization can be
vanquished only, and certainly will be vanquished, by organization of
the majority.

Thus the elements constituting the power of the contending classes stand
over against one another. Those of the bourgeoisie stand great and
mighty, as existing and dominating forces, whereas those of the working
class must develop, from small beginnings, as new life growing up.
Number and economic importance grow automatically by capitalism; but the
other factors, insight and organization, depend on the efforts of the
workers themselves. Because they are the conditions of efficient fight
they are the results of fight; every setback strains nerves and brains
to repair it, every success swells the hearts into new zealous
confidence. The awakening of class-consciousness, the growing knowledge
of society and its development, means the liberation from spiritual
bondage, the awakening from dullness to spiritual force, the ascension
of the masses to true humanity. Their uniting for a common fight,
fundamentally, means already social liberation; the workers, bound into
the servitude of capital resume their liberty of action. It is the
awakening from submissiveness to independence, collectively, in
organized union challenging the masters. Progress of the working class
means progress in these factors of power. What can be won in improvement
of working and living conditions depends on the power the workers have
acquired; when, either by insufficiency of their actions, by lack of
insight or effort, or by inevitable social changes their power, compared
with the capitalist power, declines, it will be felt in their working
conditions. Here is the criterion for every form of action, for tactics
and methods of fight, for forms of organization; do they enhance the
power of the workers? For the present, but, still more essential, for
the future, for the supreme goal of annihilating capitalism? In the past
trade unionism has given shape to the feelings of solidarity and unity,
and strengthened their fighting power by efficient organization. When,
however, in later times it had to suppress the fighting spirit, and it
put up the demand of discipline towards leaders against the impulse of
class solidarity the growth of power was impeded. Socialist party work
in the past highly contributed to raise the insight and the political
interest of the masses; when, however, it tried to restrict their
activity within the confines of parliamentarism and the illusions of
political democracy it became a source of weakness.

Out of these temporary weaknesses the working class has to lift its
power in the actions of the coming times. Though we must expect an epoch
of crisis and fight this may be alternated with more quiet times of
relapse or consolidation. Then traditions and illusions may act
temporarily as weakening influences. But then also, making them times of
preparation, the new ideas of self-rule and council organization by
steady propaganda may take a broader hold on the workers. Then, just as
now, there is a task for every worker once he is seized by the vision of
freedom for his class, to propagate these thoughts among his comrades,
to rouse them from indifference, to open their eyes. Such propaganda is
essential for the future. Practical realization of an idea is not
possible as long as it has not penetrated the minds of the masses at
large.

Fight, however, is always the fresh source of power in a rising class.
We cannot foresee now what forms this fight of the workers for their
freedom will assume. At times and places it may take the harsh form of
civil war, so common in former revolutions when it had to give the
decisions. There heavy odds may seem to be against the workers, since
Government and the capitalists, by money and authority, can raise armed
forces in unlimited numbers. Indeed the strength of the working class is
not situated here, in the bloody contest of massacring and killing.
Their real strength rests in the domain of labor, in their productive
work, and in their superiority in mind and character. Nevertheless, even
in armed contest capitalist superiority is not unquestioned. The
production of arms is in the hands of the workers; the armed bands
depend on their labor. If restricted in number, such bands, when the
entire working class, united and unafraid, stands against them, will be
powerless, overwhelmed by sheer number. And if numerous, these bands
consist of recruited workers too, accessible to the call of class
solidarity.

The working class has to find out and to develop the forms of fight
adapted to its needs. Fight means that it goes its own way according to
its free choice, directed by its class interests, independent of, hence
opposed to the former masters. In fight its creative faculties assert
themselves in finding ways and means. Just as in the past it devised and
practiced spontaneously its forms of action: the strike, the ballot, the
street demonstration, the mass meeting, the leaflet propaganda, the
political strike, so it will do in future. Whatever the forms may be,
character, purpose and effect will be the same for all: to raise the own
elements of power, to weaken and dissolve the power of the foe. So far
as experience goes mass political strikes have the strongest effects;
and in future they may be still more powerful. In these strikes, born
out of acute crises and strong strains, the impulses are too fierce, the
issues go too deep to be directed by unions or parties, committees or
boards of officials. They bear the character of direct actions of the
masses. The workers do not go into strike individually, but shopwise, as
personnel collectively deciding their action. Immediately strike
committees are installed, where delegates of all the enterprises meet,
assuming already the character of workers' councils. They have to bring
unity in action, unity also, as much as possible, in ideas and methods,
by continual interaction between the fighting impulses of the
shop-assemblies and the discussions in the council meetings. Thus the
workers create their own organs opposing the organs of the ruling class.

Such a political strike is a kind of rebellion, though in legal form,
against the Government, by paralyzing production and traffic trying to
exert such a pressure upon the government that it yields to the demands
of the workers. Government, from its side, by means of political
measures, by prohibiting meetings, by suspending the freedom of press,
by calling up armed forces, hence by transforming its legal authority
into arbitrary though actual power, tries to break the determination of
the strikers. It is assisted by the ruling class itself, that by its
press monopoly dictates public opinion and carries on a strong
propaganda of calumny to isolate and discourage the strikers. It
supplies volunteers not only for somehow maintaining traffic and
services, but also for armed bands to terrorize the workers and to try
to convert the strike into a form of civil war, more congenial to the
bourgeoisie. Because a strike cannot last indefinitely, one of the
parties, with the lesser inner solidity, must give way.

Mass actions and universal strikes are the struggle of two classes, of
two organizations, each by its own solidity trying to curb and finally
to break the other. This cannot be decided in one action; it demands a
series of struggles that constitute an epoch of social revolution. For
each of the contending classes disposes of deeper sources of power that
allow it to restore itself after defeat. Though the workers at a time
may be defeated and discouraged, their organizations destroyed, their
rights abolished, yet the stirring forces of capitalism, their own inner
forces, and the indestructible will to live, once more puts them on
their feet. Neither can capitalism be destroyed at one stroke; when its
fortress, State Power, is shattered, demolished, the class itself still
disposes of a great deal of its physical and spiritual power. History
has instances how governments, entirely disabled and prostrate by war
and revolution, were regenerated by the economic power, the money, the
intellectual capacity, the patient skill, the class-consciousness -- in
the form of ardent national feeling -- of the bourgeoisie. But finally
the class that forms the majority of the people, that supports society
by its labor, that has the direct disposal over the productive
apparatus, must win. In such a way that the firm organization of the
majority class dissolves and crumbles State power, the strongest
organization of the capitalist class.

Where the action of the workers is so powerful that the very organs of
Government are paralyzed the councils have to fulfill political
functions. Now the workers have to provide for public order and
security, they have to take care that social life can proceed, and in
this the councils are their organs. What is decided in the councils the
workers perform. So the councils grow into organs of social revolution;
and with the progress of revolution their tasks become ever more
all-embracing. At the same time that the classes are struggling for
supremacy, each by the solidity of its organization trying to break that
of the other class, society must go on to live. Though in the tension of
critical moments it can live on the stores of provisions, production
cannot stop for a long time. This is why the workers, if their inner
forces of organization fall short, are compelled by hunger to return
under the old yoke. This is why, if strong enough, if they have defied,
repelled, shattered State Power, if they have repulsed its violence, if
they are master in the shops, they immediately must take care of the
production. Mastery in the shops means at the same time organization of
production. The organization for fight, the councils, is at the same
time organization for reconstruction.

Of the Jews in olden times building the walls of Jerusalem it is said
that they fought sword in one, trowel in the other hand. Here,
differently, sword and trowel are one. Establishing the organization of
production is the strongest, nay, the only lasting weapon to destroy
capitalism. Wherever the workers have fought their way into the shops
and taken possession of the machines, they immediately start organizing
the work. Where capitalist command has disappeared from the shop,
disregarded and powerless, the workers build up production on the new
basis. In their practical action they establish new right and new Law.
They cannot wait till everywhere the fight is over; the new order has to
grow from below, from the shops, work and fight at the same time.

Then at the same time the organs of capitalism and Government decline
into the role of unessential foreign and superfluous things. They may
still be powerful to harm, but they have lost the authority of useful
and necessary institutions. Now the roles, more and more manifestly to
everybody, are reverted. Now the working class, with its organs, the
councils, is the power of order; life and prosperity of the entire
people rests on its labor, its organization. The measures and
regulations decided in the councils, executed and followed by the
working masses, are acknowledged and respected as legitimate authority.
On the other hand the old governmental bodies dwindle to outside forces
that merely try to prevent the stabilization of the new order. The armed
bands of the bourgeoisie, even when still powerful, get ever more the
character of unlawful disturbers of obnoxious destroyers in the rising
world of labor. As agents of disorder they will be subdued and
dissolved.

This is, in so far as we now can foresee, the way by which State Power
will disappear, together with the disappearance of capitalism itself. In
past times different ideas about future social revolution prevailed.
First the working class had to conquer the political power, by the
ballot winning a majority in Parliament, helped eventually by armed
contests or political strikes. Then the new Government consisting of the
spokesmen, leaders, and politicians, by its acts, by new Law, had to
expropriate the capitalist class and to organize production. So the
workers themselves had only to do half the work, the less essential
part; the real work, the reconstruction of society, the organizing of
labor, had to be done by the socialist politicians and officials. This
conception reflects the weakness of the working class at that time, poor
and miserable, without economic power, it had to be led into the
promised land of abundance by others, by able leaders, by a benignant
Government. And then, of course, to remain subjects; for freedom cannot
be given, it can only be conquered. This easy illusion has been
dispelled by the growth of capitalist power. The workers now have to
realize that only by raising their own power to the highest height can
they hope to win liberty; that political dominance, mastery over society
must be based upon economic power, mastery over labor.

The conquest of political power by the workers, the abolition of
capitalism, the establishment of new Law, the appropriation of the
enterprises, the reconstruction of society, the building of a new system
of production are not different consecutive occurrences. They are
contemporary, concurrent in a process of social events and
transformations. Or, more precisely, they are identical. They are the
different sides, indicated with different names, of one great social
revolution: the organization of labor by working humanity.

## 3: The foe

### 3.1: The English bourgeoisie

Knowledge of the foe, knowledge of his resources, of his forces and his
weaknesses, is the first demand in every fight. The first requisite to
protect us, when seeing his superior powers, against discouragement;
after partial success, against illusions. Hence it is necessary to
consider how, with the evolution of society, the present ruling class
has developed.

This development was different in different countries. The workers of
each country are exploited and dominated by their own bourgeoisie \[the
property owning and capitalist class\]; it is the foe they have to deal
with. So it might seem sufficient to study its character only. But at
present we see that the capitalist classes of all countries and all
continents grow together into one world class, albeit in the form of two
fiercely fighting coalitions. So the workers cannot restrict their
attention to their direct masters. Already in the past, when taking up
their fight, they themselves immediately felt an international
brotherhood. Now the capitalist classes of the entire world are their
opponents, and so they must know and understand them all.

Old capitalism is best seen in England. There for the first time it came
to power; from there it spread over the world. There it developed most
of the institutions and the principles imitated and followed afterwards
in other countries. Yet it shows a special character different from the
others.

The English revolution, of the time of Pym and Cromwell, was not a
conquest of power by the capitalist class, won from a previously ruling
feudal class of landowners. Just as earlier in Holland, it was the
repulse of the attempts of a king to establish absolute monarchical
power. In other countries, by means of their standing armies and of the
officials and judges appointed by them and obeying them, the kings
subdued the independent nobility as well as the privileged town
governments. Making use of the money power of rising capitalism, they
could establish strong central governments and turn the tumultuous
nobles into obedient courtiers and military officers, securing them
their feudal rights and properties, and at the same time protecting
commerce and industry, the source of the taxes from the business people.
Their power was based on a kind of equilibrium between the rising power
of capital and the declining power of land ownership. In England,
however, in consequence of the local self-rule of the counties, of the
traditional coalition of landowners and town citizens in the House of
Commons, and of the lack of a standing army, the Stuart kings failed in
their striving for absolute monarchy. Though it broke out in defense of
the medieval rights and privileges, the revolutionary fight, convulsing
the depth of society, to a great extent modernized institutions. It made
Parliament, especially the House of Commons, the ruling power of the
land.

The middle class, thus becoming the ruling class in England, consisted
chiefly of the numerous class of squires, independent landowners, the
gentry, forming the lower nobility; they were associated with the
influential merchants of London, and with the wealthy citizens ruling in
the smaller towns. By means of local self-government, embodied in their
office of Justices of the Peace, they dominated the countryside. The
House of Commons was their organ, by means of which they determined the
home and foreign policy of the country. Government itself they left
mostly to the nobility and the kings, who were now their instruments and
steadily controlled by Parliament. Because England as an island was
protected by her fleet, there was hardly any army: the ruling class
having learnt to hate and fear it as an instrument of governmental
despotism, jealously kept it insignificant. Neither was there a police
to restrain personal liberty.

Thus the government had no means to keep down by force new rising
powers. In other countries this keeping down of course could only be
temporary, till at last a violent revolution broke out and swept away
the entire old system of domination. In England, on the contrary, when
after long resistance the ruling class in public opinion and social
action felt the irresistible force of a rising class, it had no choice
but to yield. Thus by necessity originated the policy grown into an
English tradition, of resisting rising forces as long as it is possible,
in the end to yield before the breaking point is reached. The governing
class then retained its power by sharing it with the new class,
accepting its leading figures into its midst, often by knighting them.
The old forms remained, even though the contents changed. No revolution,
as a cleansing thunderstorm, did away with the old traditions and the
old wigs, with the meaningless ceremonials and the antiquated forms of
thinking. Respectfully the English people look up to the aristocratic
families ruling with such sensible policy. Conservatism permeates all
forms of social life. Not the contents; by the unlimited personal
liberty labor and life develop freely according to practical needs.

The industrial revolution broke into the careless life of old England of
the 18th century, an irresistible new development and a destructive
catastrophe. Factories were built, provided with the newly invented
spinning machines, driven by water, and then by steam power, soon to be
followed by weaving, and then by machine factories. The new class of
factory owners arose and grew rich by the exploitation of the new class
of miserable workers, formed out of the impoverished artisans beaten
down by the superiority of the new machines. Under the indifference of
the old authorities that were entirely inactive and incapable of coping
with the new situation, industrial capitalism grew up in a chaos of free
competition, of the most horrible working conditions, of utter neglect
of the simplest exigencies of health and careless waste of the nation's
vigor.

A fierce struggle ensued, in a complicated triangular way. Repeatedly
the workers broke out into revolts against the miserable working
conditions combined with cruel oppression from the old political
institutions, against the employers, as well as against the governing
landowner class. And at the same time the new industrial bourgeoisie
growing in wealth and social influence, vindicating its share in
government, organized itself ever more strongly. Under this double
pressure the landowners were forced to yield; in the Reform Act of 1832
modernizing the constituencies, the capitalist class of factory owners
got their representation in Parliament. And in 1846, by a special repeal
of the corn laws that raised the price of wheat by import duties, they
succeeded in throwing off the heavy tribute to the landowners. Thus the
way was free for producing and accumulating capital in unlimited
quantity. The working class, however, stormed in vain against the
ramparts of the State stronghold, now fortified by an additional
garrison of defenders. The rulers had, it is true, no forces to suppress
the working class movement by violence. Capitalist society resisted by
its inner toughness, by its deep seated solidity, instinctively felt by
the entire middle class to be a rising form of production destined to
conquer the world. It yielded by steps, by granting such reforms as were
unavoidable; so in ever new fights the workers obtained the right of
association, the ten hour day, and finally, gradually, the franchise.

The English bourgeoisie was undisputed master; its Parliament was the
sovereign power of the realm. The first and strongest industrial and
capitalist class of the world, it dominated world commerce and world
markets. During the entire 19th century it was master on the seven seas
and powerful in all continents. Riches flowing from all sides, from
industry, from commerce, from the colonies, accumulated in its hands.
The other classes shared in its enormous profits. In the first place the
landowner class, the ruling nobility, from olden times was strongly
affiliated to business and commercial life. It was not feudal at all,
not of mediaeval descent -- the feudal class had exterminated itself in
civil wars -- but of middle class origin, owing its elevation to wealth,
services, to mere favor, the more jealous therefore of the outer
appearances and ceremonies of prerogative. Now in the new system of
unlimited profit-production it coalesced with the industrial capitalists
into one powerful ruling and exploiting class.

Where an aristocracy finds its place in capitalist society, its special
pursuit, besides government offices, is the profession of arms. So the
standing of the landowner class is shown by the power of militarism. In
Prussian Germany the supremacy of the landed nobility was expressed in
the ascendancy of military above civil forms. There, even under modern
capitalism, civilians were despised as second rate, and the highest
ambition for a wealthy business man or a deserving scientist was to don
the uniform of reserve officer, "the king's coat." In England, with its
small and chiefly colonial army, the same process took place in the
navy. For continental wars there was an army recruited from the lowest
classes, called "scum of the earth" by their honored chief, the Duke of
Wellington; fighting in the stiff linear tactics of hirelings at a time
when in France and Germany enthusiastic popular armies practiced the
free skirmishing method of fighting; only as late as 1873 flogging of
the soldiers was abolished. Military office was not esteemed, and the
spirit of militarism was entirely absent. Civilian life was supreme
above military forms; when the professional daily duties were absolved,
the English officer put on civilian dress, to be simply a gentleman --
the word expressing a civilian code of honor not known in other
countries. Thus the absence of continental militarism is an indication
of how completely the landowning aristocracy in England is absorbed into
the entirety of the capitalist class.

The working class also got its part. Not all of course; only its most
influential groups, "skilled labor," that by its trade unions was able
to display fighting power. From its profits secured by world monopoly
the capitalist class could grant them a share sufficient to turn them
into contented adherents of the existing order. They separated from the
miserable unskilled masses that filled the slums. Every thought that
another system of production might be possible or necessary,
disappeared. So capitalism was entirely secure; the solidity of a system
of exploitation depends on the lack of capacity of the exploited class
to discern its exploitation. Among the workers the middle class doctrine
prevailed that everybody is master of his own fate. They took over all
middle class ideas and traditions, even the reverence paid to the upper
classes and their ceremonies.

During the long years of exploitation and gradual development capital in
private hands could increase along with the need for larger
installations, brought about by the progress of technics. There was no
need for organization of capital; banking operations found sufficient
scope in interchanging and lending money for facilitating intercourse.
There was also little organization of the industrial enterprises into
large combines; the employers, themselves disposing of sufficient
capital, remained independent owners of their shops. Hence a willful
individualism was the salient character of the English bourgeoisie.
Hence also little concentration in the realm of production; numerous
independent small shops kept up alongside of the large factories. Thus
in the coal industry the demands of security and health put up by the
workers and by the Sankey Commission, ever again were frustrated by the
small mine owners not having the means to modernize their backward
installations.

Entire freedom in social life allows every new idea to be tried out and
to be put into practice, every impulse of will; whereas the lack of this
liberty causes the impeded wishes and inapplicable ideas to develop into
consistent theoretical systems. So, contrasted to the broadly worked-out
theoretical character of science and activity on the continent, the
English became men of practical deeds. For every problem or difficulty
an immediate practical solution was sought without regard to further
consequences, in technics as well as in politics. Science played a small
part in the progress of technics. This is also a cause of much
backwardness in English business life.

In this way England in the 19th century became the model country of old
capitalism with its free competition, careless and improvident, full of
hard egoism against the weak, persons as well as peoples, full of
obsolete institutions and senseless old forms, full of downtrodden
misery viewed with indifference alongside the display of luxury. Already
such books as William Booth's "Darkest England" and Robert Blatchford's
"Dismal England" indicate a state of dirty neglect not tolerated in
other civilized countries, entirely left to the individual initiative of
single philanthropists. In the later years only, and in the new century,
social reforms began to play a noticeable role; and, especially after
the first world war, a stronger concentration of capital set in.

In this way at the same time, however, the English bourgeoisie developed
that master character that was the envy of all capitalists of other
countries, who in vain tried to imitate it. For many centuries it has
been living in a state of complete freedom and unchallenged power.
Through its monopoly of industry and commerce in the 19th century it
felt itself master of the world, the only cosmopolitans, at home in
every continent and on every ocean. It never learnt to fear; never was
it faced by a superior foe attacking from outside or a revolution
threatening from within, suggesting the idea of mortality. With
unlimited self-assurance it confronts every new difficulty, sure to
overcome it, by force if it can, by concessions if it must. In foreign
politics, in the founding and defense of its world power, the English
ruling class showed the capacity of ever again adapting itself to new
situations, of defying its most solemn proclamations of yesterday by the
opposite practice of to-morrow, of "shaking hands with murderers" where
it was necessary, and, in seeming generosity, of making allies of
vanquished opponents of whom it feels that they cannot be permanently
kept down. All this not by a wide knowledge and foresight; on the
contrary, it is a class rather ignorant, narrow-minded and conservative
-- hence much blundering before finally the new arrangement is found --
but it has the self-sure instinct of power. The same instinctive
sagacity to solve its problems by practical conduct was used in home
politics to keep the working class in spiritual and actual dependence;
here with equal success.

Modern development, certainly, caused the English bourgeoisie to lose a
good deal of its exceptional position in the world; but ever again it
new how to resign and to adapt itself to the rise of other equal powers.
Already in the latter part of the 19th century German industry made its
appearance as a serious competitor in the world market, whilst
afterwards Japan came to oust the products of British industry.
Britain's financial supremacy was lost to America in the first world
war. But its main character, acquired in an unchallenged rule of so many
centuries was unshaken. In home politics also it knew how to adapt its
rule to the demands of the working class, by introducing a system of
social reforms and provisions. The English bourgeoisie had the good luck
that the formation of the Labour Party, transferring all workers' votes
from Liberal politicians to Labour leaders entirely filled with middle
class ideas, rendered the working class an active agent in consolidating
capitalist rule though it had to pay for it the price of a modernizing
reform of some of the worst abominations of capitalism. In leaders of
the Labour Party it found able Cabinet Ministers, entirely devoted to
the maintenance of the capitalist system, therein representing, when
these temporarily had to prevail, the pacifist tendencies.

This character of the English bourgeoisie is essential in determining
the forms of the prospective rise of the working class. What must be
overcome, the power of the bourgeoisie, the weakness of the workers, is
not physical force but spiritual dependence. Doubtless physical force
may play its role, too, at critical moments; English capitalism, in
defense of its existence, will be able to bring up, when necessary,
strong powers of violence and restraint. But the weakness of the English
working class consists chiefly in its being entirely dominated by middle
class ideas. Self-centered individualism, the conviction that everybody
has to forge his own fate, respect for traditional social relations,
conservatism of thought, are firmly rooted in it by the unchallenged
power of capitalism, at home and all over the world. Strong shocks will
be needed to stir the petrified brains; and capitalist development is at
work already. When political catastrophes or the irresistible rise of
mighty competitors undermine the world power of the English bourgeoisie,
when the privileged position of the English workers has gone, when their
very existence is endangered, then also for them the only way will be
the fight for power over production.

The fundamental ideas of council organization are not entirely foreign
to the English workers. At the end of the first world war the shop
steward movement arose, establishing a direct contact of shop
representatives in preparing fighting actions, independent of the
unions. Already earlier "guild socialism" presented many cognate
conceptions; and "industrial unionism" put up the demand of control of
production by the workers, linked, though, with the ideas of the unions
as the ruling bodies. The character of the English bourgeoisie and the
freedom of all social relations make it probable that practical
momentary solutions of the conflicts will be sought for, rather than
fundamental decisions. So as an instance, we might conceive that as a
temporary compromise, freedom of speech and discussion in the shop is
established, and the capitalist's old right of hiring and firing is
restricted by the workers' right to decide on the membership of the
personnel; this would keep the road open to further progress. In such a
course of development, when at last the partial concessions should
amount to an important loss of power, attempts of the capitalist class
to regain supremacy by serious decisive class war cannot be avoided. Yet
it seems possible that, if anywhere, in England the mastery of the
workers over production may be won by successive steps along
intermediary forms of divided rule; each step unsatisfactory, and urging
further steps until complete freedom is reached.

### 3.2: The French bourgeoisie

The development in France took place along quite different lines. In a
great political revolution the bourgeoisie, combined with the farmers,
overthrew the absolute monarchy with all its mediaeval forms, and
deprived the nobility and the church of its landed property. In explicit
acts and laws the Revolution abolished all feudal privileges, proclaimed
the "rights of man," with private property as their main foundation, and
asserted legal equality of all citizens. Constrained to a pitched
revolutionary fight the bourgeoisie made a sharp division between
itself, garbed as the third estate, as the entire people, and the
defeated feudal classes, now completely excluded from political power.
It had to do the governing work entirely by itself. There was a clear
consciousness of the middle class character of its institutions,
formulated in precise paragraphs; the rights of Parliament, differently
from English custom, were exactly circumscribed. These formulations of
Parliamentary constitution then served as a model for other countries.
Political freedom, in England a practical fact, in France was conscious
theory. The need of explaining and formulating it created a wealth of
political literature, in books and speeches, full of lucid expression of
principles. But what was lacking was the immediate feeling of complete
mastership. Practice at the same time was imperfect; the French
bourgeoisie had first to suffer military despotism, and then, in gradual
steps, in a series of smaller political revolutions, in 1830, 1848,
1870, had to win complete power over the State.

In these revolutions, fought chiefly by the popular classes, the petty
burghers, the artisans, the workers, these learnt to distinguish their
own class interests, as contrasted to capitalist interests. The workers
aspired to a further revolution that should break the new class power of
capitalism, but in the armed conflicts, in 1848 and 1871, they were
defeated and butchered; partly by their own class fellows, hired by the
bourgeoisie, partly by the aid of the petty burgherdom, shopkeepers,
farmers, who all came to the rescue as defenders of private property.
Thus it was shown that the bourgeoisie had a firm grip on society, that
the working class was not yet ripe for mastery, and that a further
development of capitalism was needed.

Though in these fierce class fights the bourgeoisie had been victorious,
it did not come out without injury. It had lost its self-confidence. It
knew that ever it would have to defend itself against the growing power
from beneath, that ever its rule would be threatened by the working
class. So it sought for protection by a strong State Power. The
centralization of all political power in the government at Paris,
introduced already by the Convention and by Napoleon, was intensified in
the 19th century. Together with the absence of a ruling aristocracy it
gave a political aspect to France quite different from England.

Moreover, economic development took a different course. After a strong
growth about the middle of the century industrial development slackened.
The countryside gave no strong surplus of population flowing to the
towns to provide labor power for a growing industry. The savings of
small business men, collected in the banks, were not used as industrial
capital in founding new enterprises, but mostly invested in government
loans. Certainly in regions with rich coal and ore deposits a strong
iron and steel industry developed, with powerful capitalists at the
head, often in family relation with the landed aristocracy. Besides, in
the big towns, especially in Paris, as the centre of fashion for the
entire European bourgeoisie, the old small-scale industry of luxuries,
founded on personal skill and taste of a numerous class of wage-earning
artisans, strongly developed. But the chief character of French
capitalism, especially after 1870, ever more became the prevalence of
financial capital as supreme power.

The banks, under the lead of the central "Banque de France," collected
the money of small capitalists, shareholders and farmers into a huge
mass of bank capital. Wherever governments in Europe or other continents
wanted loans they were procured by the French banks; the bonds and
shares were recommended and urged upon the clients as a good investment.
Thus the small-property-class in France consists mainly of rentiers,
stock-holders, living upon the exploitation of foreign peoples,
receiving their income from the taxes squeezed by foreign governments
out of their subjects. The loans of these governments usually had to
serve for buying war materials or building railways. So bank capital
worked in close collaboration with the lords of the steel industry,
usually imposing the condition that the money was to be spent in the
affiliated French steel works. Thus the savings of the French rentiers
went to the coffers of the steel capitalists, and the interest for the
rentiers was provided by foreign taxpayers.

This predominant character of French capital determined French politics,
foreign, as well as home. Foreign politics served to protect the
interests of bank capital and the rentiers, by alliances fortifying its
international power and its influence over smaller backward countries.
By military power when necessary, it secured the payments from unwilling
debtor-governments; or it converted some barbarian chieftain into a
dependent prince, providing him with European arms to subjugate and
exploit the formerly free tribes; which was called bringing order and
civilization.

The problem of home politics in big capitalism is always how to make
parliaments chosen by universal suffrage, hence dependent on the votes
of small business men, of farmers and of workers, instruments of the
interests of big capital. In countries with a rapid industrial
development this is not difficult. The entire bourgeoisie is carried
away, its business prospers through the fervent economic action, and the
workers, too, fully occupied as they are, and able to win good wages,
are conciliated. Big capital, with assured self-confidence, proclaims
its interests to be the common interests of society at large. It is
quite different, however, with bank capital. Its exploitation of foreign
peoples and capturing of the savings of their own people, through
violence and deceit, bears the character of usury and robbery. Its
interests must be served behind the scenes, by secret arrangements with
influential politicians. For its purposes cabinet ministers must be
installed or deposed, party leaders must be won over, members of
parliament must be manipulated, papers must be bribed, all dirty
intrigues that cannot bear the light of day. The politicians, mostly
lawyers or other intellectuals, forced by the party-machines upon the
farmers and citizens as their representatives, consider politics as
business, aiming at high and remunerative offices as their share in the
spoils. Parliamentarianism everywhere in modern times is degenerating
because it has to put up the semblance of the common good while serving
capitalist interests. But where financial capital rules, it must
deteriorate into sheer corruption. For financial capital, as represented
by the French banks, has no direct connection with labor. Its politics,
not founded on the actual fight of a class in command of production,
must live on false slogans, on deceitful promises and sounding rhetoric.

Because in Paris during most of the 19th century small scale enterprises
were dominant, the working class, not sharply separated from the mass of
the small independent artisans and employers, could not develop a
clear-cut class consciousness, though it was filled with an ardent
republican and democratic fighting spirit. Seeing the capitalists rise
by the protection of government, by using the political power for
shameless personal enrichment, whereas they themselves were forcibly
kept down, the workers considered State Power as the chief cause of
their exploitation and their misery. So their feelings of free
individuality, inheritance of the Great Revolution developed into some
kind of anarchism, the doctrine that only by complete abolition of the
State and its constraining power mankind can be free as an agglomeration
of independent collaborating individuals.

When, in later years, with the gradual development and concentration of
industry, trade unions arose, these, just as in England, took the
central place in the social ideas of the working class. Not so much as
practical means of participating in prosperity, but rather, French
capitalism lacking industrial and commercial world power, as the
theoretical basis of a better society. So towards the end of the century
syndicalism became the theory of social reconstruction occupying the
minds of the workers not only in France, but spreading over Spain, Italy
and other countries also. _Syndicats_ is simply the French name for
trade unions. In the doctrine of syndicalism, "labor the basis of the
new world," means that the _syndicat_, the union will be its
organization unit. The union, it says, is the free creation of the
workers, their field of self-government, whereas in the State the
officials and politicians, and in the political parties the
intellectuals dominate. A political revolution that should make the
State master of production would mean a more oppressive slavery for the
workers. Liberation of the workers by revolution is only possible as a
destruction of State and Government. It must be brought about by a
universal strike, a common action of all its workers. In its place shall
come the free association of all the unions; the unions will be the
bodies to organize and direct production.

These principles clearly expound their dependence on the forms of French
capitalism. Since the contents of politics stood at a wide distance from
the productive work of society with its struggle of real class interest,
the working class held itself at a wide distance from politics. Since
politics was a dirty business of personal intrigue, the workers
disdained to get mixed up with politics. Their practice, proclaimed as
class war, theoretically for abolishing exploitation, practically for
better working conditions, was comprised entirely within the field of
production, where it acted by means of the syndicats. Syndicalism did
not intend to yield or to submit to bank capital; in the syndicalist
slogans of anti-patriotism, anti-militarism, and universal strike, it
expressed its refusal to be carried away in the militaristic policy of
bank capital. But this was only a negative form of opposition, not a
positive form of fight; it underrated the powerful hold of capital
through the power of nationalistic ideas. In the principle: that every
member of the syndicat may individually take part in politics by voting
"according to his philosophic or political ideas" is expressed the
primitive helplessness of a class that contents itself with trying to
exclude from its immediate struggle differences of opinion on society at
large. The insight was lacking that against big capital in industry
solid big organizations needs must arise, involving a bureaucracy of
leading officials. And that production directed by the syndicats means
production under the direction of union leaders and not by
self-management of the workers.

Practically syndicalism went down when at the outbreak of the first
world war its leaders joined their Government and submitted to their
capitalist class. This prepared the transition to overt reformist policy
after the war, when in international collaboration the differences in
theory between the English, German and French unions receded behind
their common practice. In these later years also the differences in
character of capitalism in different countries, strongly emphasized
before, became less marked in the growth of industry everywhere, in the
merging of financial and industrial capital, in their common imperialist
policy of subduing foreign peoples and of preparing for future wars for
world supremacy.

The power of the French bourgeoisie consists, as everywhere, in its
economic and financial power, its spiritual power and its State power.
Different from the English bourgeoisie, its economic power is not in the
first place mastery over industry and world commerce, but money power;
with this money it buys propaganda and armed force, and dominates
politics. The spiritual power of French capitalism is based on the
tradition of the Great Revolution and the social institutions created by
it. The proud feeling of having thrown off despotism and, an example for
others, established legal freedom and equality, lives as a strong
tradition in the entire people. Only by nursing these feelings, by
acknowledging the democratic forms, by respecting the freedom in public
opinion, can capital rule over the masses who take the outer appearances
for reality. And should they become rebellious, they find a strong
centralized State Power over them. The basic weakness of the French
working class, notwithstanding its gallant fights in the past, rests on
the slowness of modern economic development, the masses of the farmers,
the citizens, the workers being dispersed over numerous petty
enterprises. French capitalism lagged behind the old power of English
and the rising power of German and American capitalism: no fresh stream
of impulses pushed the classes into strong action and energetic fight.

### 3.3: The German bourgeoisie

At the end of the Middle Ages a proud, free and martial burgherdom, rich
through its commerce from Italy and the East to Northern and Western
Europe, filled the flourishing German towns. Then by the discovery of
America and India world trade shifted to the shores of the Atlantic. The
economic decline found its sequel in internecine wars and invasions by
foreign powers, ransacking and murdering, entirely destroying the old
wealth. The Thirty-Years War left Germany a devastated and impoverished
country, without commerce and industry, cut off from the economic
development of the West, divided into a hundred small independent States
under petty princes, powerless outside their domain, arbitrary despots
at home. The largest among them, the rising Prussian monarchy, was
dominated completely by the landed aristocracy, the "Junkers," who kept
the miserable farmers in servitude, masters of the army as an instrument
of conquest. The French Revolution and the rise of the English industry
gave a first impulse to the German poets and philosophers, exponents of
the nascent aspirations of burgherdom. Through the Napoleonic domination
the rise of nationalism had a reactionary character finding its
theoretical expression in the solemn confession of servility: the French
revolution proclaimed the rights of man, we proclaim the duties of man.

Towards the middle of the 19th century industry began to develop, and
with it a first spirit of freedom, of criticism against the
narrow-minded suppression by absolutism and police arbitrariness. The
rising bourgeoisie prepared to extort political rights from the Prussian
monarchy, which meant a revolution by the help of the working masses.
But then, in 1848, it saw the working class proclaim its radical
demands, and even fight the propertied classes in a fierce class
struggle, at the Paris barricades. So it shrank back; the way of
revolution, of winning freedom and power for itself by winning political
freedom for the masses, was barred. When in the following years industry
developed ever more, the German bourgeoisie alongside of itself saw the
working class organizing into an independent power. So it was pinched
between an old ruling power above, monarchy, aristocracy and army, and a
rising new power beneath, workers already talking communism. Because it
wanted police protection in every strike, because it felt the working
class to be its genuine economic antagonist, it could not venture a
serious fight against State Power. And should it eventually talk of
revolution, then the aristocratic rulers would not hesitate to rouse the
workers against their employers by promising social laws restricting the
arbitrariness in the factory, and by even hinting at a "social
monarchy," protecting the working class against capitalism.

So the German bourgeoisie learnt fear. Fear for the power above, fear
for the power beneath determined its social character. Never it knew
that proud feeling that only self-won freedom can waken in a social
class.

Other causes aided to develop this character. Unlike France and England
that many centuries ago already had acquired their national unity,
Germany was still divided in several dozens of insignificant Statelets.
It was an annoying and cumbersome impediment to the development of
industry and commerce; so many different governments and laws and rules,
different systems of taxes and coinage, custom duties at the several
frontiers, every petty government plaguing business through stupid
officials, and powerless to protect it on foreign markets. The German
bourgeoisie deeply resented the lack of a powerful united State. A free
and united Germany had been its hope at the outset of 1848; but the
courage had failed to join in the fight of the people. And now it
perceived that there was another way to acquire, not freedom, but unity:
by means of Prussian militarism. The Prussian aristocracy had made its
army an excellent instrument of conquest. In a series of wars, a
revolution from above, the surrounding Powers were defeated or overawed,
and the small German States were subjected and combined into a powerful
German Empire. And now the bourgeoisie changed its policy, left its
parliamentary spokesmen alone to make speeches against militarism, and
enthusiastically hailed the "iron chancellor" and the Prussian king as
its heroes.

"Despotism under Bismarck," wrote the English historian Trevelyan, "had
become an active principle in the van of progress; it was no longer
timidly hostile to the mercantile class, to the press, education and
science but harnessed them all to the car of government." Formerly, in
other countries, progress -- i.e., the development of capitalism -- was
always linked with increasing freedom -- i.e., mastery of the
bourgeoisie over government. Now, here, on the contrary, despotic
government became the instrument for the development of capitalism. The
constitution of the newly created Empire was animated by a modern daring
spirit, and its policy by brutal energy, adequate to a strongly
developing capitalism. Social reform laws and universal suffrage for the
Diet secured participation of the masses in its world politics, and the
adaptation to changing conditions. At the same time the separate States
remained, with their obsolete constitutions, with their narrow-minded
officialdom covering the field of administration, of home affairs, of
police and education, keeping the masses subjected and continually
supervised.

Thus a strong State power was put into the service of rising capitalism
without giving political supremacy to the capitalists themselves. The
Prussian landowning aristocracy remained master of modern Germany; but
only by serving the demands of capitalism. It took its share of the
increasing mass of surplus value, not only occupying the lucrative
ruling posts in government, but also using its political power to
increase -- by corn laws -- the money produce of its landed property.
The bourgeoisie remained a class of obedient subjects, socially
influential by its money, but regarded as second class citizens, content
to conduct their business and respectfully glorifying monarchy and
nobility. In contrast to England and France, parliament had no power
over government; it could not by its vote enforce the dismissal of a
cabinet. If a parliamentary majority had tried such a thing by using its
right of control of the budget, the bourgeoisie would have forsaken and
discarded it; rather than be dependent on a parliament elected by the
masses it preferred to be ruled from above.

Now the way was open for capitalist development without political
freedom. Whereas the working class, continually struggling for breathing
and fighting space, was kept down by a strong hand, Germany as a mighty
new power played its role in European politics. Industry and commerce
developed with a marvellous rapidity, overtaking all other European
countries, equalled only by the United States of America.

This was not only the fresh energy of a people, kept back through years
of adverse political conditions. In Germany industry came up half a
century later than in England, at a time of more highly developed
technics. It had to begin at the outset by introducing big machines and
expensive installations requiring science and capital. Science it had;
long before already its scientists had taken an honorable part in
international research. Just because technical application had been
restricted better theoretical foundations could be laid, that now were
the basis, at a rapidly growing number of universities and technical
schools, of a thorough scientific training for the needs of industry.
Personal wealth, however, great capital, such as the factory owners in
England had accumulated out of the profits of half a century, was
lacking in Germany. There the capital needed for big enterprises had to
be provided by carefully collecting all small bits of savings from the
separate small capitalists. This was the function of the banks.

Thus German industry acquired a special character. To increase the
profits for a rapid accumulation of capital the productivity was raised
by conscious amelioration of its scientific basis. So from a number of
markets German competition was able to oust the English, confident in
their tried and proved methods. At the same time the close connection of
banks and industry created new forms of organization. The bank,
interested in the success of enterprises because it provided them with
capital, supervised and advised their policy and brought them into
connection. This led to mutual assistance and favorite treatment between
such enterprises, to an intertwining of interests, often to the
formation of cartels, in every case to organization. The
interpenetration of the directions of the banks and big industries
created a conscious common policy of continuously extending their power
over new branches. By investing capital here, by enlarging existing
business there, by the well-planned founding of new enterprises, the
banks, a few groups of fiercely competing financial powers, organized
industry in a systematical way, increasing profits and still more their
own share in it. Thus what first appeared as a weakness, the lack of
private capital, turned into strength. Against the self-willing
independence of English business-men, confident in their traditional
wealth and clientele, German industry rapidly rose to power through its
purposeful organization. With restless energy and fresh ambition the
German bourgeoisie forced its way up in production and world commerce,
began to export capital to colonies and foreign continents, and prepared
to conquer its share in world power.

In England militarism never got a footing in society. In Germany the
forms and spirit of militarism pervaded and dominated society; its code
of honor, coarse and touchy, was aped by the middle class youth at the
universities; and to the caste of officers the business man was the
despised civilian. The middle class German looked up with deep
veneration at the army, its refuge and its instrument of power, and
equally worshipped the masters of the army, the monarch and his
officers. In German constitution, parliament, the Diet, had no power
over the army, it had solely to provide the money. This militarism
embodied the submissiveness of the German bourgeoisie, its lack of
personal pride, its feeling of inferiority, often camouflaged as rough
brutality. The German bourgeoisie never knew freedom. Entirely foreign
to them is the proud feeling of independence, as personal freedom
pervading all classes in the Western countries.

This, however, made the German bourgeoisie better adapted to the
exigencies of big capitalism. Organization of capitalism, based as it is
on subordination under a stronger power, came easier to the German than
to a capitalist class accustomed to personal independence. The same
disposition enabled the German bourgeoisie twice to engage in the fight
for world power with an unequalled, well nigh irresistible war machine,
the efficiency of which was based on carefully prepared military and
capitalist organization, technically as well as spiritually. So that its
opponent, the world-commanding English bourgeoisie, careless and
unprepared, staggering under the fierce assault, had to put up its
defense by summoning all the deepest forces of its inner nature.

The American entomologist Howard, in his "Man and Insect," makes a
comparison of Nature's two most successful adaptations to the "struggle
for life" in animal structure: the insects covering all their weak parts
by an unassailable hard and flexible skin, the mammals supporting them
by a skeleton within; and their contest over the domination of the
world, the author says, is not yet decided. This image fits for a
comparison of the two contending capitalist classes; the German
bourgeoisie covering its inner softness by an outer steel armor and
assailing with the sharpest arms the apparently unprotected foe; but the
English bourgeoisie has bones in its body.

This character of the German bourgeoisie at an early date brought the
German workers to political independence. Left alone in their struggle
against the oppressive police State, they were not attached to the
middle class by the tradition of a common fight for political freedom.
Whereas in other countries the hard industrial boss commanded respect by
seizing power over the State and modernizing it, in Germany the gruff
master in the shop proved the submissive coward in politics, giving
examples in servility only. The German workers stood directly over
against the allied classes of land owners and capitalists; they had to
fight on the political at the same time as on the economic field.
Concentrated by the rapid development of industry in large numbers in
the factories and the towns, they had to build their organizations and
find their own way, independent of middle class influences and
traditions.

The rapid rise of social democracy demonstrated this political
independence. Its name expresses the basic idea that socialist
production must be won by means of democracy, by the masses conquering
power over the State. Its propaganda of class struggle aroused the
increasing numbers of workers to devoted fight, its papers and pamphlets
educated them to knowledge of society and its development. It was the
energy and rapidity of capitalist development that aroused the energy of
the German working class and soon made them the foremost and directing
power in the international workers' movement. It was the submissive
politics of the German capitalist class, in placing them directly over
against the entire ruling class, that rendered them class-conscious,
that forced them by theory to deepen their insight in social forces, and
that made them the teachers of the workers of all countries. Just as in
France the sharp opposition between middle class and nobility had given
origin to an extensive literature on political theory, so in Germany the
sharp opposition between working class and bourgeoisie gave origin to an
extensive literature on social theory, mostly based on the scientific
work of Marx. This intellectual superiority, together with the gallant
fight against oppression and despotism, alone against the mighty rulers,
attracted all progressive and idealistic elements among the other
classes and collected around them all who longed for liberty and hated
the degrading Prussian militarism. In Germany a deep gap, social as well
as spiritual, separated two worlds, one of insolent power and wealth,
where servility glorified oppression and violence, the other of idealism
and rebelliousness, embodied in the workers' class struggle for
liberation of humanity.

The infiltration with idealistic middle class and intellectual elements
tended to call up ideas of peaceful petty capitalist reform and
democracy, though they were entirely at variance with the actual big
capitalist conditions. Other influences went in the same direction. The
increased power of the workers politically, by finally, in 1912,
mustering one-third of all the vote, economically by the rapid growth of
the trade unions to giant organizations -- awakened the desire for
direct progress in social reform. Though traditional program and theory
spoke of revolution as the goal of all activity, the real outcome was to
ascertain to the workers their place in capitalism, acknowledged not
officially, but actually, and only at the cost of continual fight. So
reformist tendencies got an increasing hold on the workers. At the
deepest root of reformist mood lay, of course, the economic prosperity
that in the twenty years before the first world war enormously swelled
German capitalism. All this meant a strong influence of capitalist and
middle class ideas upon the workers.

The spiritual power of the German bourgeoisie over the working masses
was not due to its political, but to its economic achievements. Leaving
politics and government to others, concentrating all its attention on
industry and commerce, the capitalist class here unfolded such
capacities and energy as to push German economy in an unrivalled tempo
to the forefront of world development. This vigor commanded respect in
the workers and carried them along in the feeling of participating in a
mighty world process. They felt the enormous and enormously increasing
power and brunt of capital, against which their organizations appeared
insufficient and against which even their own ideals seemed to fade. So,
in their sub-consciousness, they were to a certain extent dragged on in
the middle class stream of nationalism, in the desire for national
greatness and world power that burst out in the first world war.

In the Western countries the early political ascendency of the
bourgeoisie kept the workers in political dependence; the economic
forces and crises had to awaken them to class consciousness and class
fight. In Germany the late, therefore more thorough economic ascendency
of the bourgeoisie bound the workers into spiritual dependence; here the
political forces drove them into fight and awakened their class
consciousness. Opposed to a bourgeoisie entirely addicted to despotism
and violence the German workers will have to win their freedom along the
difficult way of political crises and catastrophes.

### 3.4: Nationalism

Nationalism is the essential creed of the bourgeoisie. What for this
class stands above the individuality of separate man is the community
indicated, with small differences of meaning, by the different names of
nation, people, fatherland or State.

Nation and national feeling came up and developed along with the
bourgeoisie. Original peasant life knew only the community of the
village and of the larger tribe or county or canton; for the rising
burgher class the town was their community. Their common interests did
not stretch beyond these small realms. The spoken languages varied over
larger regions; their similarity over limited regions facilitated their
connection under the domination of one prince. But usually such
domination, by conquest and inheritance, extended over countries with
entirely different speech. For the farmers it hardly mattered what
prince reigned far away and over what other people.

This changed with the rise of commercial, and still more with that of
industrial capital. The merchant trading over wide countries and seas
needs a strong Power that protects him, fights his competitors and
subdues backward tribes; if this is lacking he himself founds a town
federation. The industrialist needs security on the roads, unity of law,
protection by a power mightier than a town. Where by insular isolation,
as in England, or by conquests of princes, as with France, larger realms
had been joined, they need only be consolidated and strengthened from
within. In other cases, as with Italy and Germany, strong States had to
be built in modern times, through wars and revolutions, through the
force of the nationalist feeling of the bourgeoisie.

This does not mean that State and nation are identical or coincide. The
State is a power structure, provided with physical means of coercion and
suppression; the nation is a community bound by inner forces. So the
State has the greatest inner solidity when it coincides with the nation.
But States to increase their power try to include regions and peoples as
much as possible, though they may belong to other nations, mixed up one
with another by chance migrations in olden times. So Denmark formerly
included Germans, Germany later included Danes and Poles, Hungary
included Roumanians, Slavs and Germans, Roumania afterwards included
Hungarians and Germans. The Austrian Monarchy comprised seven different
nationalities, never grown together. In such cases the growth of
national feeling, accompanying the rise of a modern bourgeoisie, acts as
a destructive force. In cases of a seaport town with a hinterland of
different race and language (as Fiume or Dantzig) the economic interests
demanding political unity are impaired by national enmity.

A common language, as the instrument of understanding, is the strongest
force to connect people into one State and one nation. This does not
mean, however that nations are simply communities of speech. The Swiss,
in their majority, speak German; yet they are a separate nation,
different from the Germans. The English and the American nations speak
the same language. The Swiss people during five centuries already has
gone its own way, different from the way of other German-speaking
people. They lived under their special institutions, ruling themselves
as free peasants in a primitive democracy, whilst the Germans were
oppressed under the yoke of some hundred small tyrants. The Swiss all
experienced the same historical happenings, that molded their mind in
the same way; in continual actual and spiritual intercourse they grew
together into a similarity of character and ideas, different from those
on the other side of the frontier. It is not only the passive qualities
acquired in this way, but much more the active will, the mutual feeling
of belonging together in a community of life, that connects and
separates mankind into nations. It is the same with the English and the
Americans: their separate history in different continents each following
its own fate, often in sharp hostility of capitalist interests, made
them different nations. And within each nation the community of fate,
the subjection to the same historical influences impressed a common
stamp upon all; the common fight for common interest, for common
freedom, welded them into a firm unity. It produced a community of ideas
embodied in and strengthened by literature, by art, by the daily papers
constituting national culture, itself an important factor in developing
the sense of nationality. Even the bitter struggle of the classes takes
place on this common ground of common experience in the ups and downs of
mutual fight as direct face-to-face opponents.

So a nation is not a community of State, not a community of language,
but a community of lot \[of destiny arising out of their common
social-economic practice\]. Of course, these different types of
community are mutually strongly dependent. Language is a strong
nation-building agent. Nationality is the strongest State building
power. On the reverse political State power strongly reacts in making
and unmaking nations, by uniting and separating the peoples, by
establishing or destroying lot-community \[a feeling of common
destiny\]. In the Middle Ages Northern and Southern France, differing in
language as much as France and Spain, were united by conquest; during
the rise of the bourgeoisie they formed one country, and as a unity they
experienced later revolutions. Simultaneously with the Swiss
mountaineers the Low Countries bordering the ocean separated politically
from the large German body. A dozen of rich merchant towns, protecting
themselves on the land side by a chain of allied provinces, they formed
an independent State, raising the Holland dialect into a separate
language with its own literature and culture; and by their special
history becoming a separate nation. The Flemish, though speaking the
same language as the Dutch, by their entirely separate and different
history cannot be considered to belong to the same nation, whereas their
political unity with the Wallons is thwarted by difference of language.
Political measures, dictated by economic interests gradually melted the
Scots with the English into one nation, whereas by such measures the
Irish were driven into the consciousness of being a separate and hostile
nation.

Thus nation is a product of history. All the happenings in the past,
experienced in common, determining character, feelings, culture, have
settled in the form of nationality. Nationality is congealed history,
perpetuated outcome of the past as a living force.

National character and still more national feeling, thus spontaneously
growing out of society, constitute the inner strength of national
States. They are needed by the bourgeoisie, praised as patriotism, and
furthered by special measures. The differences within the boundaries are
effaced as much as possible, the differences with the outside world are
emphasized and enhanced. One common language, necessary for intercourse,
is taught all over the realm, suppressing the old dialects and even
minority languages -- as Gaelic in Wales, Provencal in Southern France
-- that only remain as curiosities and in remote villages. And a vast
literature in this common language is at work, from first childhood
onward, to impress identical ideas and identical feelings upon the
entire population. An intentional propaganda works to intensify the
mutual feelings of connection, and to render the antagonism to anything
foreign more conscious. The doctrine of class struggle that draws a
cleavage through national community is denounced as a danger and even
persecuted as a crime against national unity. What as a spontaneous
living product of society develops and changes with society itself,
nationalism proclaims to be an eternal fact of nature and a duty of man.

Nationality is congealed history -- but history goes on, adding
continuously to the former deposit. New economic developments, growth of
capital, wars and conquests produce new interests, change frontiers,
awaken new directions of will and feeling, combine or separate peoples,
break old communities and engender new ones. So nationality, together
with its deeper generating forces, is fluctuating, in extent and
content, and shows a variety of aspects.

Just as petty trade remains within big capitalism, provincialisms,
remnants of old customs and ideas, persist, and they sometimes extend
across the State frontiers. In the time of ascending capitalism with its
free trade reaching all over the world, feelings of cosmopolitanism, of
international brotherhood of all mankind gained ground in the
bourgeoisie. Afterwards, when competition became fierce and the ensuing
fight for world power deepened nationalism, this was ridiculed and
suppressed as a childish illusion. In such parts of the world where
capitalism is just beginning to take a footing, where it begins to
undermine primitive economy and to overthrow worn-out despotisms, we see
nations in the making. Besides profit-hungry business men, gambling
adventurers, agents of foreign capital and rapacious politicians,
forming the beginning of a bourgeoisie, it is chiefly the intellectuals,
educated by European sciences and ideas, who come forward as the
spokesmen of nationalism. On the Balkans the chance results of war often
decided what adjacent valleys with cognate dialects would be included
into the Serbian or into the Bulgarian nation. In China the class of
merchants and landowners, spiritually united already by an old culture,
assisted by a Western educated class of intellectuals, gradually
develops into a modern bourgeoisie, animated by a growing spirit of
nationalism. In India such growth, though rooted in native capitalist
industry, is severely hampered by an obsolete diversity of religions. In
all colonies with no bourgeoisie as yet, nationalism propagated by small
groups of intellectuals, is the first theoretical form of rebellion
against foreign exploitation. Where, on the other hand, in groups of a
single million speaking a separate dialect nationalism arises, as wish
or only whim of intellectuals it may work as a disruptive force in the
coherence of greater units.

In the countries of modern capitalism nationalism has gone through
different forms, corresponding to the development of the bourgeoisie.
When burgherdom in its first rise becomes master in its town or realm it
is freedom for which it fights. It not only breaks the power of
nobility, of land ownership in its domain, it has also to beat foreign
powers that suppress or threaten its freedom. The rise of the
bourgeoisie as a ruling class is connected with war against foreign
feudal or absolutistic or previously dominant capitalistic powers. Such
wars are wars of liberation, are a kind of revolution; all enthusiasm,
all devotion nascent from the establishment of a higher system of
production manifests itself as national passion and exalts nationalism
to lofty idealism. Thus it was with Holland in the 16th century freeing
itself from the Spanish King, with the English at the same time fighting
against Spanish world power, with America 1776 against England, with the
French in the Great Revolution against Europe led by England, with the
Italians in the 19th century against Austria; and even the German war
against France 1870 had some traits of it. Such wars of liberation and
consolidation, establishing its independence and power, in all later
years are exalted by the bourgeoisie as the sublime summits of national
history.

But then, gradually, the image changes. Capitalism is exploitation, is
domination of an exploited class by a ruling class. The bourgeoisie,
liberating itself from domination by land ownership, establishes new
suppression. Throwing off the yoke of foreign oppression it soon begins
to lay its yoke upon weaker peoples, adjacent or in far away colonies.
Specially with the development of big capitalism. And always under the
same slogans of nationalism. But now nationalism has another color. Not
the freedom but the greatness of the nation is its slogan. It appeals to
the feelings of pride, to the instincts of power, in all the other
classes who have to serve the bourgeoisie as its helpers and underlings,
as spokesmen, as military and civil officers, and who take part in its
power. Now the own people is proclaimed the chosen people, superior in
force and virtue, the "grande nation," the "Herrenvolk," the "finest
race among mankind," destined to lead or to dominate other nations. As
the contest for world power, the fight for supremacy in the world
between the capitalist classes becomes fiercer, nationalism grows into a
feverish passion, often carrying away the entire population in a common
struggle for existence.

Nationalism is not simply an artificial doctrine imposed by the rulers
upon the masses. Like every system of thoughts and feelings it arises
out of the depth of society and proceeds from the economic realities and
necessities. For the bourgeoisie the nation is the community to which
its weal and woe is tied; so all the old instincts of community feeling
are put in its service and develop to mighty forces of idealism. More
than the adults the youth, not yet permeated by the spirit of selfish
profit-seeking, is susceptible to enthusiastic response to the call of
the community. For the working masses, as long as they have no
possibility and no thought to fight for themselves against the
bourgeoisie, there is no other way than to follow the bourgeoisie.
Spiritually dependent on the master-class, they have to accept, more or
less willingly, its ideas and its aims. All these influences work as
spiritual forces in the realm of instinctive spontaneity.

But then, added to it, come the deliberate efforts of the bourgeoisie to
intensify the spontaneous feelings by artificial means. The entire
education in the schools and the propaganda in literature and papers are
directed to foster and strengthen the spirit of nationalism. Not of
course by showing its connection with the profit for capital; a clear
consciousness of this connection, as in all ideologies of an exploiting
class, is lacking, and must be carefully withheld from the exploited
masses. So other foundations must be sought for, other usually deceptive
arguments must be found, drawn mostly from existing traditions based on
former social conditions. The love for the birthplace where our cradle
stood, the remembrance of the world of our youth, of villages or town
quarter, small communities of peasant or artisan life, must serve to fix
the adherence to the nationalist State Power, where it fights foreign
Powers, for the profit of capital. History is colored and doctored to
convert the strict objective truth about the past into a brilliant
one-sided image of the nation's life, apt to awaken strong feelings of
inter-community, of enthusiasm, of pride and admiration in young people,
to elate their hearts, to strain their minds, to instigate emulation,
hence to solidify the inner strength of the national community.

To give a still greater solidity to the national ideology, it sometimes
is founded upon a material, physical base, on consanguinity and race.
The races of mankind have been formed in the many thousands of years of
prehistoric times. We meet with them at the dawn of history, and
afterwards in surrounding barbaric countries and continents, as groups
with similar qualities. They have been shaped by migrations, conquests,
exterminations and blendings of primitive groups, when in more quiet
times or in isolated regions the mixture settled to specific types. The
fight for living space and for possession of the sources of life
continued in later civilized history. But now, by the development of new
forms of production, as a fight of States and nations. Though both are
communities of lot \[of common destiny\] and are designated by the same
name of "people," there is a fundamental difference between the original
races and the later nations. The races are groups connected by the ties
of blood, by consanguinity; the nations, formed in the ages of
production of commodities, are groups connected by the spiritual ties of
common consciousness, ideas, experience and culture.

Written history of the great migrations in later times attests how
almost all modern peoples, the nations, have been shaped by a thorough
mixture of different races. And this process of mixing is going on,
though in more quiet forms, under modern industrial conditions. Large
numbers of people migrate from the poor agrarian regions into foreign
industrial towns or districts; such as the Irish into English towns, the
Czechs into Vienna, the Poles into Rhineland, the Europeans into
America. Mostly they assume language and habits from their new
surroundings, as well as the ideas, and so are dissolved and assimilated
into its national community. Only when the migration comprises greater
connected masses, especially when touched already by the consciousness
of fervid national strife, the assimilation ceases.

When a modern nation is claimed to be the pure descendants of one
original race, how can it be decided? The evidence of history, usually
uncertain, points to strong blending. Neither is the community of
language decisive. It is true that peasant communities tenaciously stick
to their language as long as their life and work is not influenced by
other dominant languages. But it is known quite well how often in the
mixing-up of peoples the language of the victors is assumed by the
vanquished or the language of more civilized residents by less civilized
intruders. Community of language later on is a strong force in the
making of nations; but it cannot make certain a community of descent.
There are, further, bodily differences in color, hair, bodily structure
and form of the skull, manifest and large between the main groups,
Europeans, Mongolians, Negroes. But they are small in subordinate
groups. And in all modern peoples these bodily characteristics show the
most embarrassing diversity. Ethnologists, especially in Germany, speak
of a "Nordic" race, dolichocephalic \[with oblong skull\], blonde, and
blue-eyed, of which the Teuton peoples were descendants and
representatives, contrasted to the darker "alpine" race, brachycephalic
\[with round skull\], living in Central Europe. But modern Europe shows
dolichocephaly dominant only in Norway, North-western Germany, Holland,
England, whereas the chief part of Germany is brachycephalic,
increasingly so in the later centuries. The American ethnologist Dixon
pointed out that the inhabitants of the then existing Austrian monarchy
as to bodily characteristics and shape of the skull formed a nearly
homogeneous race, whereas they were divided into some seven fiercely
quarrelling nations, speaking as many different languages, and brought
together by different ancient wanderings and adventures. On the other
hand the French, bodily showing a mixture of most different racial
characteristics, feel and act as one homogeneous consolidated nation.

Race community as the foundation of nationality is only a fantastic
theory, devised and propagated for political purposes. The strength of
German nationalism is not rooted in the blood of the ancient Teutons but
in the needs of modern capitalism. The strong real roots of nationalism
are situated in economy, in the mode of production. So it must be
different for different classes.

On the working class nationalism never got much hold. In the
petty-burgher and farmer classes from which it proceeded national
feeling played no great role; and its own exploitation by capital gave
another direction to the ideas, not towards community, but towards fight
with the bourgeoisie. They perceived nationalism to be the ideology of
their exploiters, often a form of hypocrisy when the most greedy
capitalists used patriotic talk to fill their own pockets. When by
unemployment they were driven to wander they found in other countries
other workers, comrades, exploited like themselves. Practically, by
their fight, and then theoretically, in their consciousness, they drew a
dividing line across the nation. Another community of lot, the
class-community determined their feelings and thoughts, extending over
all countries. The dividing line of the classes crosses that of the
nations. To the nationalist propaganda of the bourgeoisie they opposed
the reality of their life by the statement that the workers have no
fatherland. Socialist propaganda fundamentally opposing capitalism
proclaimed internationalism to be the principle of the working class.

But beneath the conscious thoughts and avowed doctrines there was in the
workers, in their sub-consciousness, still a certain national feeling,
revealing itself at the outbreak of the world war. Practically they had
to acquiesce in the rule of the bourgeoisie and were its subordinates;
practically their fight could do no more than ascertain their place in
capitalism; so in their ideas they could not attain complete
independence. When the workers politically and socially follow the
bourgeoisie they remain middle-class minded. In England they
participated in the profits that world commerce, industrial monopoly and
colonial exploitation bestowed upon the bourgeoisie. In Germany the
energy of the bourgeoisie to win industrial world power carried them
away in the vague feeling that industrial power and prosperity is a
workers' interest, too. So nationalism in the working class was the
companion of reformism, in England as a quiet hardly conscious
conservative tradition, in Germany as an impetuous instinct driven by a
turbulent economic expansion. It must be remarked that working class
nationalism always was pacifistic, rooted in the tradition of
petty-burgher illusions, in contrast to the aggressive violent
nationalism of the bourgeoisie.

When the working class takes up its revolutionary fight, nationalism is
dropped entirely. In the new workers' organization of production there
is no antagonism of interests with other peoples; it extends over the
countries disregarding all former frontiers. In the reconstruction of
society fight is only needed against the capitalist class; in this fight
the workers all over the world have to rely on one another as brothers
in arms; together belonging to one army. They speak different languages,
certainly; but these differences relate only to the outer forms of their
thoughts. The essential contents, their ideas, their feelings, their
culture, determined as they are by the same class struggle, the common
fight as the chief life experience, the common lot, are identical. From
having been subjected to different national influences in previous
history there may remain differences in passive character and culture;
but in active character, in the direction of will, they form one unity.
This new state of thought of the working class cannot well be indicated
by calling it international; it is more and higher than a peaceful
collaboration of free and equal nations. It is the entire absence of
nationality; for the workers the nations do not exist, they see before
them the unity of mankind all over the world, a community of production,
of life, of culture. Over all diversity of bodily qualities and natural
surroundings, of local speech and traditional habits stretches the
interconnection of all mankind as one great community of lot. Thus
nationalism disappears from the earth together with the class that was
its author.

This is of the future. For the time being nationalism exists as a strong
power obstructing the way. For the workers it is necessary not only to
destroy all nationalist tradition in themselves, but also, in order to
avoid illusions, to understand its strength in the hostile class.
Nationalism does not belong to the ideologies that as traditions of the
past times are gradually extinguished under modern conditions. It is a
living ideology, drawing its forces ever anew from a fertile economic
soil, standing in the centre of fight, the flag of the foe. German
history of the last quarter of a century offers an example of how after
the downbreak of her State power the bourgeoisie was able to resuscitate
itself by means of spiritual power, through nationalism, and thus to
build up a new more powerful State.

The outbreak of the first world war in 1914 was the catastrophe of
social democracy and labor movement. The party and union leaders placed
all the power of their organization, its press its moral authority at
the service of the Government; in Germany considered as the foremost
power and example for the working class, and in all other countries. It
was the collapse of all the proud program slogans of class struggle and
of internationalism. The workers having put all their confidence, their
faith into their party, their organization, now were powerless against
the nationalist propaganda, against the combined pressure of the
military and the party apparatus.

Then came 1918 -- the downbreak of the German military power. The
rebellion of the sailors, the strikes and demonstrations in the chief
towns, the formation of workers' and soldiers&#8217; councils carried
the socialist leaders into power. They were the only men to keep the
working class in check and to prevent a real workers' revolution, which
they hated and feared no less than did the generals and the capitalists.
The working masses found the political power fallen into their hands;
but they did not know what to do with it. Again they put their faith
into the party, in their leaders and passively suffered the small
advance groups of revolutionary fighters and spokesmen to be massacred
by military forces at the command of the socialist rulers. They had
always been taught that the party would bring them socialism. Now the
party was ruling, now their leaders were in office; now socialism was to
come.

What they got was capitalism. The socialist leaders did not touch
capitalist property, not even aristocratic land ownership. By convoking
a National Assembly they immediately restored parliamentarism, which had
always been their life element. So the bourgeoisie gained an official
centre of organized power. It was quite content that socialist and
democratic politicians, beguiling the masses with the illusion of power,
occupied the upper places; afterwards they could be turned out gradually
and replaced by liberals and reactionaries. Capitalism acted as it
always acts: it exploited the masses, expropriated the middle classes,
aggravated the economic chaos by gambling with the means of production,
bribed the officials, and threw society into ever new crises of
unemployment. And all discontent and exasperation turned against the new
republic and its parliamentary leaders.

Now the bourgeoisie began to build up its fighting power out of all the
elements that were depressed and embittered by the new conditions: the
middle class youth, flung down from its high hopes for victory and
future greatness; the dismissed military officers, exasperated by
defeat, entirely living in the old conceptions; the young intellectuals,
in despair at seeing the governmental offices once considered as their
monopoly now occupied by despised socialists and Jews. All impoverished
by the devaluation of the money, all filled with bitterness over the
humiliation of their country, all driven by a fierce will to take up
again the fight for world power. Their binding force was an ardent
nationalism, blasted into white heat by the enforced humiliating peace
conditions, animated by hatred against the slack nationality of the meek
rulers no less than against the foreign victorious enemies. They stood
up as the bearers of sublime national ideas, whereas the workers over
against them could show no more than either contentment over the mock
democracy of a worthless republic, or the sham revolutionist talk of
bolshevist party dictatorship. Thus the most active elements among the
upgrowing youth were assembled and drilled into fighting bands, inspired
by fiery nationalist teachings. Big capital provided the means for a
continuous propaganda among the population. Until the world crisis of
1930 raised them to political importance. The impotent socialist leaders
did not even venture to call upon the armed workers for resistance. The
"world-liberating" social democracy ignominiously went to ruin as a worm
eaten wreck. Nationalism, now raised to the highest pitch, easily
annihilated the parliamentary republic, and began to organize all the
forces of the nation for a new war for world power.

### 3.5: American capitalism

The white population of the U.S.A. descends from European immigrants
who, most energetic and independent elements of their peoples, crossed
the ocean to escape oppression, persecution and poverty. From the first
settlements on the Eastern coast, with its commercial towns, they
gradually expanded over the entire continent, exterminating in
continuous fight the Indian natives, clearing the forests, subduing the
wilderness, and converting it into cultivated land. In all these
pioneers, as a necessary character developed a strong individualism, a
daring adventurous spirit, self-reliant, hard, alert, watchful and
relentless in the surrounding dangers, and a love of liberty taking and
making its own right. Not only in the forerunners, the trappers and
farmers, but also in the dealers, the artisans, the business men, who
followed them, populating the new towns and creating a new existence for
themselves. Whereas in old Europe everybody found himself in fixed
conditions, here everything had to be shaped anew. In the hard and
pitiless struggle for life, that left no time for spiritual
concentration, in the creation of great enterprises and fortunes,
respect for success in life and business became the outstanding
character of American society.

Thus conditions for both capital and labor were different from Europe.
To keep the workers from trying their luck as pioneers in the wide
spaces, high wages must be paid, thus furthering the introduction of
labor-saving machines. This privileged position, fixed by craft unions,
could be upheld until modern times. Then in the last decades of the 19th
century, destitute masses of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe
began to pour in and fill the factories and slums of the Eastern towns
with cheap labor power. And in the present century free soil came to an
end.

Capital was the leading power in the 19th century expansion. It had not
to fight a feudal power or class; with the throwing off, in the war of
independence, of the domination of English 18th century commercial
capital, it had won complete mastery. The absence of any feudal
tradition, of all respect for privilege of birth, made respect for
property, for the reality of dollar power paramount. American capital
soon played the chief role in opening up the Western wilds by digging
canals and building railways. Through its friends in Congress it was
rewarded for this service to the nation with big allotments for
exploitation, paying not more than the bribes, the form by which the
politicians got their share of the profits. The timber of the endless
woods, the fertile soil along the railways, the rich ore deposits in the
earth, all became property of the capitalists. And in their wake
colonists from the Eastern States or from Europe populated the West,
farmers and business men finding their villages and towns ready made,
lumber workers and miners ordering their life by the law of the wild,
soon to be substituted by the organs of Government and public law.

The seizure of the natural riches of an immense virgin continent laid
the foundation for the rapid growth of big fortunes. In Europe this
seizure and exploitation had been the task of a large citizen class
during many centuries; thus the profit -- economically a form of rent --
was spread out in the form of moderate wealth for the many, only
exceptionally -- as with the Fugger family in Augsburg -- creating big
fortunes. In America this process in the second half of the 19th century
concentrated within a short time, raising rapidly a small class of
supercapitalists, of multimillionaires.

The big American fortunes have not been formed by regular accumulation
of industrial profit, but in the first instance by the appropriation,
partly through traffic monopolies, partly through political corruption,
of valuable primary materials. In stubborn mutual fight, destroying or
subduing larger and smaller competitors, big monopolies were erected
that laid a heavy tribute upon the entire population and snatched part
of the industrial surplus value from the hands of the industrial
capitalists. More rapidly and more ruthlessly than elsewhere the
supremacy of big capital over the entire bourgeoisie, the power of big
finance over industry, and the concentration of capitalist power in a
small number of big concerns was established. Monopoly of course does
not mean a full hundred per cent control over a branch: if it reaches
only, say, 80 per cent, outsiders are harmless and usually follow the
lead of the monopolists. So there remains a border region for individual
efforts of smaller capitalists to wrestle themselves up to secondary
importance. Neither are all of the profits pocketed by the monopolists
themselves; part of the shares is left to the capitalist public to
gamble with and to enjoy the dividends without thereby having any share
in the leading of the business. In this way at the same time all the
smaller capitalists' property comes at the disposal of the monopolists,
to use it in their strategy of mutual capital warfare, just as in olden
times the kings made use of the combined fighting power of the dependent
barons.

Yet, what remains as income for the monopolists is so enormous that it
cannot be consumed or spent by themselves. With such boundless richness
the motive of securing wealth for luxurious satisfaction of all needs is
absent; many of the monopolist leaders, indeed, live rather frugally.
What drives them is the striving for power, for expansion of their
domination over ever wider domains of economic life -- an automatic
impulse of business instinct swollen to irrationality. The example was
set long ago already by John D. Rockefeller, whose yearly income was
then estimated at nearly a hundred millions of dollars. No luxury,
however crazy, was able to absorb the stream of gold flowing into his
hands; he did not concern himself with the spending, and left it to an
office of secretaries. No young spendthrifts could, as in olden times,
destroy the fortunes collected by their fathers; this property has now
become an unassailable family possession. As a new feudal class
"America's sixty families" hold sway over the sources of life of
society, living in their castles and large estates, sometimes possessors
of almost a whole State, as the Dupont family in Delaware. They are
mightier than the kings of old, who only could try to squeeze their
share out of the profits of the capitalist class; they are the masters
of the very capital power of society, of all the rapidly growing
productive forces of a rapidly developing continent.

Power over production means power over politics, because politics is one
of the basic means to secure power over production. Politics in America
was always different from politics in Europe because here there was no
feudal class to beat down. In its fight against the domination of the
feudal class the European bourgeoisie acquired its sense for the
supremacy of class interests above personal interests, thus in their
pursuit developing idealism and self-sacrifice. So in Europe politics
was a domain where disinterested politicians could work for sublime
principles, for the "public interest." In America there was no need and
no room for such class-politics; interests from the beginning were
personal or group interests. Thus politics was business, a field for
pursuit of personal interests like any other field of activity. Only in
later years, when the working class awoke and began to talk of
socialism, as its counterpart came up some talk of public interests of
society, and the first traces of reform politics.

The result, accepted as inevitable, was that politics often is graft. In
their first rise the monopolists had no other means than direct bribing.
Often the word is quoted as spoken by John D., that everybody can be
bought if you only know his price. A continuous fight on the part of the
smaller capitalists, of competitors, and of spokesmen of public honesty,
before the courts in the legislative bodies tried in vain either to
punish or to redress fraud, or to so much as disclose truth. It was on
such an occasion that a senator friend of the accused millionaire
exclaimed: "We ought to pass a law that no man worth a hundred of
million dollars should be tried for a crime." Indeed, the masters of
capital stand above law; why, then, maintain the troublesome appearance
that they are equal citizens, subject to law?

When the power of big business becomes more firmly rooted and
unassailable these coarse methods gradually became superfluous. Now it
had a large attendance of friends, of clients and agents, of dependent
proxies, all men of standing, put into well-paid honorable offices,
influential in politics as in all public life. They are or they
influence the party leaders, they form the caucuses, they manage
everything behind the scenes at the party congresses and select congress
members, senators and candidates for the presidency. The hundred
thousands of dollars necessary for the noisy election campaigns are paid
by big business; each of the big interests has one of the two great
contending parties as its agent, and some of the largest even pay both.
To fight this "corruption" or at least to expose it by publicity their
adversaries succeeded in enacting that each party had to give public
account of its finances, thus to show the sources of its funds. It was a
blow in the air; it created no sensation and not even surprise; it
appeared that public opinion was entirely prepared to accept the
domination of politics by big business as a self-evident fact of common
knowledge.

The press of course is entirely in the hands of big capital. The big
papers are bought, or an unlimited amount of dollars is spent to have
new papers founded by its retainers. Most important here are the popular
local papers providing the spiritual nurture for the millions of voters.
At the same time the leading papers offer to the educated classes, in
order to direct their opinions, able articles on science, art,
literature, foreign politics, carefully written by good experts. No
independent press of wide circulation is possible. Sometimes a
cross-headed rich idealist founded a paper open to exposure and
criticism of the secret dealings of the capitalists. Attempts were then
made to capture or to undermine it; if they failed, its revelations, its
opinions, its existence even, were never alluded to in the other papers,
in a conspiracy of silence, so that its influence remained entirely
negligible.

This press dominates the spiritual life of the American people. The most
important thing is not even the hiding of all truth about the reign of
big finance. Its aim still more is the education to thoughtlessness.
All attention is directed to coarse sensations, everything is avoided
that could arouse thinking. Papers are not meant to be read -- the small
type is already a hindrance -- but in a rapid survey of the fat
headlines to inform the public on unimportant news items, on family
triflings of the rich, on sexual scandals, on crimes of the underworld,
or boxing matches. The aim of the capitalist press all over the world,
the diverting of the attention of the masses from the reality of social
development, from their own deepest interests nowhere succeeds with such
thoroughness as in America.

Still more than by the papers the masses are influenced by broadcasting
and film. These products of most perfect science, destined at one time
to be the finest educational instruments of mankind, now in the hands of
capitalism have been turned into the strongest means to uphold its rule
by stupefying the minds. Because after nerve-straining fatigue the movie
offers relaxation and distraction by means of simple visual impressions
that make no demand on the intellect, the masses get used to accept
thoughtlessly and willingly all its cunning and shrewd propaganda. It
reflects the ugliest sides of middle-class society. It turns all
attention either to sexual life, in this society -- by the absence of
community feelings and fight for freedom -- the only source of strong
passions, or to brutal violence; masses educated to rough violence
instead of to social knowledge are not dangerous to capitalism.
Broadcasting by its very nature is an organ of rulership for dominating
the masses, through incessant one-sided allocations forcing its ideas,
its view points, its truths and its lies upon the listeners, without
possibility of discussion or protest. As the genuine instruments of
spiritual domination of the millions of separate individuals by an
organized dictatorship it is used by big capital, to assert its power.

Not only to the coarse work of mass propaganda through the papers, but
also to the more subtle influencing of deeper spiritual life the masters
of capital extend their care. Reviews are bought or founded, richly
illustrated Weeklies or Monthlies are edited and composed by able men of
letters and expert collaborators. They are full of instructive and
attractive stuff carefully selected in such a way that the cultured and
intellectual part of the citizens learn to feel and to think just as
monopolist capital wishes them to, namely, that their country is a great
country, and a free country, and a young country, destined to a far
greater future, and -- though there are some defects to be corrected by
deserving citizens -- the best possible of worlds. Here the young
intellectuals find their opportunities; if they should be inclined to
thwarting the mighty, to independent criticism, to sharp opposition they
are ejected, ignored, and silenced, hampered everywhere, perhaps morally
ruined; if docile and ready to serve the masters the way is open to well
remunerated positions and public honors.

Science, too, is subject to the millionaire class. The English tradition
of private endowment not only of churches, hospitals and orphanages, but
also of universities, professorships and libraries, has been followed in
America from the beginning. Enormous sums of money have been spent by
American millionaires -- of course not all of them, and not even the
richest -- on institutes of arts and sciences, on museums, galleries,
universities, laboratories, hospitals, observatories, libraries.
Sometimes from idealistic motives, sometimes in commemoration of a
relative, sometimes for mere pride, always with an instinct of justice
in it: where they had seized for their own the riches that elsewhere
went to society at large, theirs was the duty to provide for such
special, large, cultural expenses not immediately felt as needed but yet
necessary as the basis of society in the long run. Spending in this way
only a small part of their wealth they acquired fame as protectors of
science, as benefactors of mankind. Their names are inscribed in big
golden letters on the fronts of the proud buildings: Field Museum,
McCormick University, Widener Library, Carnegie Institute, Lick
Observatory, Rockefeller Foundation. And this means more than simply the
satisfaction of personal pride. It means that the entire world of
science becomes their adherents and considers their exploitation of the
American people a more desirable condition for the advancement of
science than when in other countries money for science must be extorted
in meagre amounts from uninterested governments. Founding and endowing
universities means controlling them; thus the millionaires, by means of
their agents who act as presidents and overseers, can see to it that no
dangerous elements as teachers may influence the ideas of the students.

The spiritual power that big capital wields in this way hardly requires
any sacrifices on their side. If it left all these expenses to
Government to provide it would have to pay for them in the form of
taxes. Now such foundations are exempt from taxes and often are used as
a means to escape taxation. The donations consist of shares of large
enterprises; what these institutions receive is the dividend, the money
produce for which the capitalists have no other use. The voting power
attached to the shares, however, needed in the manipulation and
financial strategy of the masters, the only thing that concerns them, by
carefully devised statutes is securely kept in the hands of their
agents.

Thus in a firm grip the monopoly capitalists dominate industry, traffic,
production, public life, politics, the church of course, the press, the
reviews, the universities, science and art. It is the most highly
developed form of class domination, of an all powerful small minority
over the entire bourgeoisie, and thus over the entire American people,
"United States incorporated." It is the most perfect form of capitalist
rule, because it is based on democracy. By the democratic forms of life
it is firmly rooted in society; it leaves all the other classes -- the
smaller bourgeoisie, the intellectuals, the farmers, the mass of the
workers -- convinced that they are free men in a free country,
struggling of course against mighty social forces, but still master of
their lot, choosing their own way. It has been built up, gradually and
instinctively, in a shrewdly composed organization of all economic and
spiritual forces. The main part of business, as well as of spiritual
life is interwoven into a system of dependencies, accepted as existing
conditions, camouflaged in an appearance of independent action and free
individuality. Whoever tries opposition is thrown out and destroyed;
whoever collaborates willingly, though obliged to continual struggle
with competitors, finds his place in the system.

Against this domination of the big monopolists the capitalist world has
no means of resistance or redress. Hundreds of times, in the most varied
ways, attempts have been made to break their power, by action before the
courts, by legislation against trusts and combinations, by election
campaigns, by new political parties with new slogans. But it was all in
vain. Of course; for it would have meant return to unorganized small
business, contrary to the essential nature of social development.
Attempts to prepare the way for further development towards collective
production, by means of fundamental criticism, were made in the
propaganda of "technocracy" by a group of intellectuals and engineers,
as well as in the action of the Social-Democratic Party. But their
forces were too weak. The bulk of the intellectual class feels well off
and content with the system. And as long as skilled labor succeeds in
maintaining its position by means of its unions, a powerful
revolutionary class-action of the workers cannot be expected.

The American workers have always felt the hard hand of capital and had
to fight ever again against its pressure. Though simply a fight over
wages and working conditions, it was fought with all the fierceness that
under the wild conditions of unbridled business egotism accompanied all
fight for mere personal interests. What appeared in such conflicts
between labor and capital was first the solidarity of the entire class
of business men with big capital. It was an instinctive
class-consciousness, fanned to white-heat by the press that, entirely in
the hands of capital's servants denounced the strikers for forged
outrages and called them anarchists and criminals. And secondly the
spirit of lawlessness and violence in the same class, inheritance of the
pioneer conditions, especially vivid in the far West. The old methods of
wild warfare against the Indians and of taking law into their own hands
were now used against the new foe, the rebelling class, the strikers.
Armed bands of citizens promoted to civic guards and thus qualified to
any lawless deed of violence, imprisoned and ill-treated the strikers
and applied every form of terrorism. The workers, their old independent
pioneer spirit not yet broken, resisted with all means, so that strikes
often took the character of small civil wars, in which case of course
the workers usually had the worst of it. In the industrial towns of the
East a well organized police force, strong fellows convinced that
strikers are criminals, stand in the service of mayors and town councils
who themselves are installed as its agents by big capital. When in big
plants or in mining districts strikes broke out, troops of rowdies from
the underworld, procured by the Pinkerton office, sworn in by the
authorities as special constables, were let loose upon the workers. Thus
in America only in extreme cases the workers on strike might hope for
the amount of right and order as is the rule, e.g., in England.

All this was no hindrance for the workers to fight. The American labor
movement has shown brilliant examples of fighting spirit, courage and
devotion, though they always acted in separate groups only. From now on,
however, new methods of fight, greater unity, new forms of organization
will gradually be enforced upon them. Conditions are changing; there is
no more open land to be settled by pioneers -- though, more broadly
considered, with better methods the continent might feed many more
millions of inhabitants. Now it will be more difficult to uphold the old
wage standards. Since the stream of immigration has been stopped the
process of Americanization of the old immigrants is equalizing the
working and fighting conditions, and prepares the basis for an all
encompassing unity of class. The further conditions will have to be
created by the further expansion of capitalism.

American capital is now entering upon world politics. Up till now all
its time and force was occupied by organizing and raising itself, by
taking possession of its continent. Then the first world war made it the
paramount financial power. The American supply of war materials to
Europe had to be paid, first with European property of American shares,
and then with gold and obligations. London lost to New York its place as
money-centre of the world. All the European gold assembled in America,
property of the American capitalist class. Its congestion already
brought a world crisis, because there was no market for an industrial
production built upon this abundance of gold.

Such a market, however, can be created. Thronged in the fertile plains
and valleys of Eastern and Southern Asia, many hundreds of millions of
people, nearly half the population of the earth, are living as yet in
home production or small scale craft and tillage. To convert these
intelligent and industrious masses first into buyers of industrial
products and then into industrial and agrarian workers in the service of
capital is the big opportunity that now faces American capitalism. The
supplying of this enormous market will secure an age of rise and
prosperity for American industry. The investment of capital, the
building of railways and factories, the founding of new industries in
those thickly populated countries, promises immense profits from
capitalist exploitation and immense increase of power. It is true that
by the creation of a capitalist China a mighty competitor will be raised
for the future, with the prospect of future world war farther ahead; but
that is of no concern now. For the moment the concern is to secure this
market by ousting other world powers, especially the strongly developed
Japanese capitalism that was at work to found an East-Asiatic Empire
under its lead. World politics means wars; that will introduce
militarism in America, with all its constraint, with its barrack drill,
with its restriction of old liberties, with more violence and heavier
pressure. Camouflaged of course in democratic forms, but still creating
new conditions of life, new feelings and ideas, a new spiritual outlook,
somehow resembling those of old Europe. Then the American workers,
partly participating in the power and prosperity of the rise, partly
pressed down more heavily by more powerful masters, will needs develop
more powerful forms of class fight.

American capitalism built up a power over society and the working class
unequalled over the world. Social and political democracy afford a far
more solid foundation than any dictatorship could give. Its power rests
on its concentrated ownership of all means of production, on its money,
on its unrestricted power over State and Government, on its spiritual
domination over the entire society. Against a rebellious working class
it will be able to bring all the organs of the State into sharper
action, to organize still larger bodies of armed defenders, through its
press monopoly to incite public opinion into a spiritual terrorism; and
when necessary, democracy may even be replaced by open dictatorship. So
the working class also will have to rise to a far greater height of
power then ever before. Against a more powerful foe higher demands of
unity, of insight, of devotion must be satisfied anywhere else in the
world were needed. Their development doubtless requires a long period of
fight and growth. The chief weakness of the American working class is
its middle class mentality, its entire spiritual subjection under middle
class ideas, the spell of democracy. They will be able to throw it off
only by raising their minds to a deeper class consciousness, by binding
themselves together into a stronger class unity, by widening their
insight to a higher class-culture than anywhere else in the world.

The working class in America will have to wage against world capitalism
the most difficult, at the same time the decisive fight for their and
the world's freedom.

### 3.6: Democracy

Democracy was the natural form of organization of the primitive
communities of man. Self-rule and equality of all the tribe members
determined in their assemblies all the common activities. The same was
the case in the first rise of burgherdom, in the towns of Greece in
antiquity, of Italy and Flanders in the Middle Ages. Democracy here was
not the expression of a theoretical conception of equal rights of all
mankind, but a practical need of the economic system; so the journeymen
in the guilds took as little part in it as the slaves in antiquity; and
larger property usually carried larger influence in the assemblies.
Democracy was the form of collaboration and self-rule of free and equal
producers, each master of his own means of production, his soil or his
shop and his tools. In ancient Athens it was the regular citizens'
assemblies that decided on the public affairs, whereas the
administrative functions, held for small periods only, circulated by
lot. In the mediaeval towns the artisans were organized in guilds, and
the town government, when not in the hands of patrician families,
consisted of the leaders of the guilds. When at the end of the middle
ages the mercenaries of the princes got ascendancy over the armed
citizens the freedom and democracy of the towns were suppressed.

With the rise of capitalism the era of middle class democracy begins,
fundamentally though not at once actually. Under capitalism all men are
independent owners of commodities, all having the same right and freedom
to sell them at their will -- the unpropertied proletarians own and sell
their labor power. The revolutions that abolished feudal privileges,
proclaimed freedom, equality and property. Because in this fight the
combined force of all citizens was needed, the promulgated constitutions
bore a strongly democratic character. But the actual constitutions were
different; the industrial capitalists, as yet not very numerous and
powerful, were in fear lest the lower classes whom they trod down by
competition and exploitation, should control legislation. So to these
classes, excluded from the ballot, during the entire 19th century
political democracy is program and goal of their political activities.
They are animated by the idea that through the establishment of
democracy, through universal suffrage, they will win power over
government and in that way be able to restrain or even to abolish
capitalism.

And, to all appearance this campaign succeeds. Gradually the suffrage is
extended, and finally in nearly all countries the equal vote for all men
and women for the election of members of parliament is established. So
this time often is spoken of as the age of democracy. Now it becomes
apparent that democracy is not a danger for capitalism, not weakness but
strength. Capitalism stands on a solid basis; a numerous middle class of
wealthy industrial employers and business men dominates society and the
wage earning workers have found their acknowledged place. It is now
understood that a social order gains in solidity when, all the
grievances, all the misery and discontent, otherwise a source of
rebellion, find a regular and normalized outlet in the form of criticism
and charge, of parliamentary protest and party strife. In capitalist
society there is a perpetual contest of interests between the classes
and groups; in its development, in the continuous changes of structure
and shifting of industries new groups with new interests arise and
demand recognition. With suffrage universal, not artificially limited,
they all find their spokesmen; any new interest, according to its
significance and power, can carry its weight in legislation. Thus
parliamentary democracy is the adequate political form for rising and
developing capitalism.

Yet the fear for the rule of the masses could not do without warrants
against "misuse" of democracy. The exploited masses must have the
conviction that by their ballot they are master of their fate, so that
if they are not content it is their own fault. But the structure of the
political fabric is devised in such a way that government through the
people is not government by the people. Parliamentary democracy is only
partial, not complete democracy.

Only one day in four or five years the people have power over the
delegates; and on election day noisy propaganda and advertising, old
slogans and new promises are so overwhelming that there is hardly any
possibility of critical judgment. The voters have not to designate
trusted spokesmen of their own: candidates are presented and recommended
by the big political parties, selected by the party caucuses; and they
know that every vote on an outsider is practically thrown away. The
workers adapted themselves to the system by forming their own party --
in Germany the Social Democratic Party, in England the Labor Party --
playing an influential role in parliament, sometimes even providing
cabinet ministers. Then, however, its parliamentarians had to play the
game. Besides their special concern, social laws for the workers, most
questions subjected to their decisions relate to capitalist interests,
to problems and difficulties of capitalist society. They get used to be
caretakers of these interests and to deal with these problems in the
scope of existing society. They become skilled politicians, who just
like the politicians of other parties constitute an almost independent
power, above the people.

Moreover, these parliaments chosen by the people have not full power
over the State. Next to them, as a guarantee against too much influence
of the masses, stand other bodies, privileged or aristocratic -- Senate,
House of Lords, First Chamber -- whose consent is necessary for the
laws. Then the ultimate decision is mostly in the hands of princes or
presidents, living entirely in circles of aristocratic and big
capitalist interests. They appoint the State secretaries or cabinet
ministers directing the bureaucracy of officials, that do the real work
of governing. By the separation of the legislative and the executive
part of government the chosen parliamentarians do not themselves govern;
besides law-making they can only indirectly influence the actual
governors, by way of criticism or of refusing money. What is always
given as the characteristic of real democracy: that the people chooses
its rulers, is not realized in parliamentary democracy. Of course not;
for its purpose is to secure the rule of capitalism through the illusion
of the masses that they have to decide their own fate.

So it is idle talk to speak of England, of France, of Holland as
democratic countries -- only for Switzerland this may fit in a way.
Politics is the reflection of the state of feelings and ideas in the
people. In custom and feeling there is the spirit of inequality, the
respect for the "upper" classes, old or new; the worker as a rule stands
cap in hand before the master. It is a remnant of feudalism, not
eradicated by the formal declaration of social and political equality,
adapted to the new conditions of a new class rule. The rising
bourgeoisie did not know how to express its new power otherwise than by
donning the garb of the feudal lords and demanding from the exploited
masses the corresponding professions of respect. Exploitation was made
still more irritating by the arrogance of the capitalist asking
servility also in manners. So in the workers' struggle the indignation
of humiliated self-respect gives a deeper coloring to the fight against
misery.

In America it is just the reverse. In the crossing of the ocean all
remembrances of feudalism are left behind. In the hard struggle for life
on a wild continent every man was valued for his personal worth. As an
inheritance of the independent pioneer spirit a complete democratic
middle class feeling pervades all classes of American society. This
inborn feeling of equality neither knows nor tolerates the arrogance of
birth and rank; the actual power of the man and his dollar is the only
thing that counts. It suffers and tolerates exploitation the more
unsuspectingly and willingly, as this exploitation presents itself in
more democratic social forms. So American democracy was the firmest base
and is still the strongest force of capitalism. The millionaire masters
are fully conscious of this value of democracy for their rule, and all
spiritual powers of the country collaborate to strengthen these
feelings. Even colonial policy is dominated by them. Public opinion in
America abhors the idea that it should subjugate and dominate foreign
peoples and races. It makes them its allies, under their own free
government; then the automatic power of financial supremacy makes them
more dependent than any formal dependence could do. It must be
understood, moreover, that the strong democratic character of social
feelings and customs does not implicate corresponding political
institutions. In American government, just as in Europe, the
constitution is composed in such a way as to secure the rule of a
governing minority. The President of the U.S. may shake hands with the
poorest fellow; but president and Senate have more power than King and
upper houses have in most European governments.

The inner untruthfulness of political democracy is not an artful trick
invented by deceitful politicians. It is the reflection, hence an
instinctive consequence, of the inner contradictions of the capitalist
system. Capitalism is based upon the equality of citizens, private
owners, free to sell their commodities -- the capitalists sell the
products, the workers sell their labor power. By thus acting as free and
equal bargainers they find exploitation and class antagonism as the
result: the capitalist master and exploiter, the worker actually the
slave. Not by violating the principle of juridical equality, but by
acting according to it the result is a situation that actually is its
violation. This is the inner contradiction of capitalist production,
indicating that it can be only a transition system. So it can give no
surprise that the same contradiction appears in its political form.

The workers cannot overcome this capitalist contradiction, their
exploitation and slavery proceeding from their legal liberty, as long as
they do not recognize the political contradiction of middle-class
democracy. Democracy is the ideology they brought along with them from
the former middle-class revolutionary fights; it is dear to their hearts
as an inheritance of youthful illusions. As long as they stick to these
illusions, believe in political democracy and proclaim it their program
they remain captives in its webs, struggling in vain to free themselves.
In the class struggle of today this ideology is the most serious
obstacle to liberation.

When in 1918 in Germany military Government broke down and political
power fell to the workers unrestrained by a State Power above, they were
free to build up their social organization. Everywhere workers' and
soldiers' councils sprang up, partly from intuition of necessities,
partly from the Russian example. But the spontaneous action did not
correspond to the theory in their heads, the democratic theory,
impressed by long years of social-democratic teaching. And this theory
now was urged upon them with vehemence by their political and union
leaders. To these leaders political democracy is the element where they
feel at home, in managing affairs as spokesmen of the working class, in
discussion and fight with opponents in parliament and conference room.
What they aspired at was not the workers master of production instead of
the capitalists, but they themselves at the head of State and society,
instead of the aristocratic and capitalist officials. This for them was
meaning and contents of the German revolution. So they gave out, in
unison with the entire bourgeoisie, the slogan of a "National Assembly"
to establish a new democratic constitution. Against the revolutionary
groups advocating council organization and speaking of dictatorship of
the proletariat they proclaimed legal equality of all citizens as a
simple demand of justice. Moreover, the councils, they said, if the
workers were set on them, could be included into the new constitution
and thereby even get an acknowledged legal status. Thus the mass of the
workers, wavering between the opposite slogans, their heads full of the
ideas of middle-class democracy, offered no resistance. With the
election and meeting of the National Assembly at Weimar the German
bourgeoisie acquired a new foothold, a centre of power, an established
Government. In this way started the course of events that finally led to
the victory of National Socialism.

Something analogous, on a minor scale, was what happened in the civil
war in Spain, 1935-1936. In the industrial town of Barcelona the workers
having at the revolt of the generals stormed the barracks and drawn the
soldiers to their side, were master of the town. Their armed groups
dominated the street, maintained order, took care of the food provision,
and, whilst the chief factories were kept at work under the direction of
their syndicalist unions, waged war upon the fascist troops in adjoining
provinces. Then their leaders entered into the democratic government of
the Catalan republic, consisting of middle-class republicans allied with
socialist and communist politicians. This meant that the workers instead
of fighting for their class had to join and to adjust themselves to the
common cause. Weakened by democratic illusions and inner dissensions
their resistance was crushed by armed troops of the Catalan government.
And soon, as a symbol of restored middle-class order, you could see as
in olden times workers' women, waiting before the bakers shops,
brutalized by mounted police. The working class once more was down, the
first step in the downfall of the republic, that finally led to the
dictatorship of the military leaders.

In social crisis and political revolution, when a government breaks
down, power falls into the hands of the working masses; and for the
propertied class, for capitalism arises the problem how to wrest it out
of their hands. So it was in the past, so it may happen in the future.
Democracy is the means, the appropriate instrument of persuasion. The
arguments of formal and legal equality have to induce the workers to
give up their power and to let their organization be inserted as a
subordinate part into the State structure.

Against this the workers have to carry in them a strong conviction that
council organization is a higher and more perfect form of equality. It
realizes social equality; it is the form of equality adapted to a
society consciously dominating production and life. It might be asked
whether the term democracy fits here, because the ending -- "-cracy" --
indicates domination by force, which here is lacking. Though the
individuals have to conform to the whole there is no government above
the people; people itself is government. Council organization is the
very means by which working mankind, without need of a ruling
government, organizes its vital activities. Adhering, then, to the
emotional value attached of old to the word democracy we may say that
council organization represents the higher form of democracy, the true
democracy of labor. Political democracy, middle-class democracy, at its
best can be no more than a formal democracy; it gives the same legal
rights to everybody, but does not care whether this implies security of
life; because economic life, because production is not concerned. The
worker has his equal right to sell his labor power; but he is not
certain that he will be able to sell it. Council democracy, on the
contrary, is actual democracy since it secures life to all collaborating
producers, free and equal masters of the sources of their life. The
equal right in deciding needs not to be secured by any formal regulating
paragraph; it is realized in that the work, in every part, is regulated
by those who do the work. That parasites taking no part in production
automatically exclude themselves from taking part in the decisions,
cannot be considered as a lack in democracy; not their person but their
function excludes them.

It is often said that in the modern world the point of dispute is
between democracy and dictatorship; and that the working class has to
throw in its full weight for democracy. The real meaning of this
statement of contrast is that capitalist opinion is divided whether
capitalism better maintains its sway with soft deceitful democracy, or
with hard dictatorial constraint. It is the old problem of whether
rebellious slaves are kept down better by kindness or by terror. The
slaves, if asked, of course prefer kind treatment to terror; but if they
let themselves be fooled so as to mistake soft slavery for freedom, it
is pernicious to the cause of their freedom. For the working class in
the present time the real issue is between council organization, the
true democracy of labor, and the apparent, deceitful middle-class
democracy of formal rights. In proclaiming council democracy the workers
transfer the fight from political form to economic contents. Or rather
-- since politics is only form and means for economy -- for the sounding
political slogan they substitute the revolutionizing political deed, the
seizure of the means of production. The slogan of political democracy
serves to detract the attention of the workers from their true goal. It
must be the concern of the workers, by putting up the principle of
council organization, of actual democracy of labor, to give true
expression to the great issue now moving society.

### 3.7: Fascism

Fascism was the response of the capitalist world to the challenge of
socialism. Socialism proclaimed world revolution that was to free the
workers from exploitation and suppression. Capitalism responds with a
national revolution curbing them, powerless, under heavier exploitation.
The socialist working class was confident that it could vanquish the
middle-class order by making use of the very middle-class right and law.
The bourgeoisie responds by snapping its fingers at right and law. The
socialist workers spoke of planned and organized production to make an
end of capitalism. The capitalists respond with an organization of
capitalism that makes it stronger than ever before. All previous years
capitalism was on the defense, only able apparently to slacken the
advance of socialism. In fascism it consciously turns to attack.

The new political ideas and systems, for which from Italy the name
Fascism came into use, are the product of modern economic development.
The growth of big business, the increase in size of the enterprises, the
subjection of small business, the combination into concerns and trusts,
the concentration of bank capital and its domination over industry
brought an increasing power into the hands of a decreasing number of
financial magnates and kings of industry. World economy and society at
large were dominated ever more by small groups of mutually fighting big
capitalists, sometimes successful stock jobbers, sometimes pertinacious
shrewd business tacticians, seldom restricted by moral scruples, always
active sinewy men of energy.

At the end of the 19th century these economic changes brought about a
corresponding change in the ideas. The doctrine of equality of man,
inherited from rising capitalism with its multitude of equal business
men, gives way to the doctrine of inequality. The worship of success and
the admiration for the strong personality -- leading and treading down
the ordinary people -- distorted In Nietzche's "superman" -- reflect the
realities of new capitalism. The lords of capital, risen to power
through success in gambling and swindling, through the ruin of
numberless small existences, are now styled the "grand old men" of their
country. At the same time the "masses" ever more are spoken of with
contempt. In such utterances it is the downtrodden petty bourgeoisie,
dependent, without social power and without aspirations, bent entirely
on silly amusements -- including the congenial working masses without
class consciousness -- that serves as the prototype for the will-less,
spiritless, characterless mass destined to be led and commanded by
strong leaders.

In politics the same line of thought appears in a departure from
democracy. Power over capital implies power over Government; direct
power over Government is vindicated as the natural right of the economic
masters. Parliaments evermore serve to mask, by a flood of oratory, the
rule of big capital behind the semblance of self-determination of the
people. So the cant of the politicians, the lack of inspiring
principles, the petty bargaining behind the scenes, intensifies the
conviction in critical observers not acquainted with the deepest causes
that parliamentarism is a pool of corruption and democracy a chimera.
And that also in politics the strong personality must prevail, as
independent ruler of the State.

Another effect of modern capitalism was the increasing spirit of
violence. Whereas in the rise of capitalism free trade, world peace and
collaboration of the peoples had occupied the minds, reality soon had
brought war between new and old capitalist Powers. The need of expansion
in foreign continents involves big capital into a fierce fight for world
power and colonies. Now forcible subjection, cruel extermination and
barbarous exploitation of colored races are defended by the doctrine of
the superiority of the white race, destined to dominate and to civilize
them and justified in exploiting natural richness wherever it may be.
New ideals of splendor, power, world domination of the own nation
replace the old ideals of freedom, equality and world peace.
Humanitarianism is ridiculed as an obsolete effeminacy; force and
violence bring greatness.

Thus the spiritual elements of a new social and political system had
silently grown up, visible everywhere in moods and opinions of the
ruling class and its spokesmen. To bring them to overt action and
supremacy the strong concussions of the world war with ensuing distress
and chaos were necessary. It is often said that fascism is the genuine
political doctrine of big capitalism. This is not true; America can show
that its undisturbed sway is better secured by political democracy. If,
however, in its upward struggle it falls short against a stronger foe,
or is threatened by a rebellious working class, more forcible and
violent modes of domination are needed. Fascism is the political system
of big capitalism in emergency. It is not created by conscious
premeditation; it sprang up, after much uncertain groping, as a
practical deed, followed afterwards by theory.

In Italy the post-war crisis and depression had brought discontent among
the bourgeoisie, disappointed in its national hopes; and had brought an
impulse to action among the workers, excited by the Russian and the
German revolutions. Strikes gave no relief, owing to soaring prices; the
demand for workers' control, inspired by syndicalist and bolshevist
ideas, led to shop occupation, not hindered by the weak and wavering
government. It looked like a revolution, but it was only a gesture. The
workers, without clear insight or purpose, did not know what to do with
it. They tried, in vain, to produce for the market as a kind of
productive co-operation. After an arrangement of the trade unions with
the employers they peacefully cleared out.

But this was not the end. The bourgeoisie, terror-stricken for a moment,
attained in its deepest feelings, fuming revenge now that disdain
succeeded fear, organized its direct action. Bands of active pugnacious
middle-class youths, fed with strong nationalist teachings, full of
instinctive hatred against the workers, their unions, their
co-operatives, their socialism, encouraged by bourgeoisie and landowners
providing money for arms and uniforms, began a campaign of terrorism.
They destroyed workers' meeting rooms, ill-treated labor leaders, sacked
and burnt co-operatives and newspaper offices, attacked meetings, first
in the smaller places, gradually in the bigger towns. The workers had no
means of efficient response; wont to peaceful organizing work under the
protection of law, addicted to parliamentarism and trade union fight,
they were powerless against the new forms of violence.

Soon the fascist groups combined into stronger organization, the fascist
party, its ranks ever more joined by energetic youths from the
bourgeoisie and the intellectuals. Here, indeed, these classes saw a
rescue from the impending threat of socialism. Now the riots grew into a
systematic destruction and annihilation of everything the workers had
built up, the ill-treatment grew into unpunished murder of prominent
socialists. When at last the liberal ministers made some hesitating
attempts to suppress the outrages they were turned out, on the menace of
civil war, and the leaders of fascism, appointed in their place, became
masters of the State. An active organized minority had imposed its will
upon the passive majority. It was not a revolution; the same ruling
class persisted; but this class had got new managers of its interests,
proclaiming new political principles.

Now fascist theory, too, was formulated. Authority and obedience are the
fundamental ideas. Not the good of the citizens but the good of the
State is the highest aim. The State, embodying the community, stands
above the entirety of the citizens. It is a supreme being, not deriving
its authority from the will of the citizens, but from its own right.
Government, hence, is no democracy, but dictatorship. Above the subjects
stand the bearers of authority, the strong men, and uppermost the --
formally at least -- all-powerful dictator, the Leader.

Only in outer forms does this dictatorship resemble the ancient Asiatic
despotisms over agrarian peoples or the absolutism in Europe some
centuries ago. These primitive monarchial governments, with a minimum of
organization, soon stood powerless over against the rising social power
of capitalism. The new despotism, product of highly developed
capitalism, disposes of all the power of the bourgeoisie, all the
refined methods of modern technics and organization. It is progress, not
regress; it is not return to the old rough barbarism but advance to a
higher more refined barbarism. It looks like regression because
capitalism, that during its ascent evoked the illusion of the dawn of
humanity, now strikes out like a cornered wolf.

A special characteristic of the new political system is the Party as
support and fighting force of dictatorship. Like its predecessor and
example, the Communist Party in Russia, it forms the bodyguard of the
new Government. It came up, independent from and even against
Government, out of the inner forces of society, conquered the State, and
fused with it into one organ of domination. It consists chiefly of
petty-bourgeois elements, with more roughness and less culture and
restraint than the bourgeoisie itself, with full desire to climb to
higher positions, full of nationalism and of class hatred against the
workers. Out of the equable mass of citizens they come to the front as
an organized group of combative fanatical volunteers, ready for any
violence, in military discipline obeying the leaders. When the leaders
are made masters over the State they are made a special organ of
Government, endowed with special rights and privileges. They do what
lies outside the duties of the officials, they do the dirty work of
persecution and vengeance, they are secret police, spies and organ of
propaganda at the same time. As a devoted semi-official power with
undefined competencies they permeate the population; only by their
terrorism dictatorship is possible.

At the same time, as counterpart, the citizens are entirely powerless;
they do not influence government. Parliaments may be convoked, but only
to listen and applaud to speeches and declarations of the leaders, not
to discuss and decide. All decisions are taken in the set assemblies of
party chiefs. Surely this was usually the case under parliamentarism
also; but then secretly, and publicly denied, and always there was
control by party strife and public criticism. These have disappeared
now. Other parties than the One are forbidden, their former leaders have
fled. All newspapers are in the hands of the Party; all publicity is
under its control; free speech is abolished. The former source of power
of Parliament, its financial control of Government by voting or refusing
money, has gone, too. Government disposes at its will over all State
revenues without rendering account; it can spend unknown and unlimited
sums of money for party purposes, for propaganda or anything else.

State power now takes up the care for economic life, making it at the
same time subservient to its own purposes. In a country where capitalism
is still in its development, this means collaboration with big capital,
not as in former times in secret, but as a normal duty. Big enterprise
is furthered by subsidies and orders; public services are actuated for
business life, the old laziness disappears, and foreign tourists in
praise of the new order relate that the trains conform to schedule.
Small enterprise is organized in "corporations" where employers and
directors collaborate with controlling State officials. "Corporatism" is
put up as the character of the new order against parliamentarism;
instead of deceitful talk of incompetent politicians comes the expert
discussion and advice of the practical business man. Thus labor is
acknowledged as the basis of society: capitalist labor, of course.

The fascist State through its regulations strengthens the economic power
of big capital over small business. The economic means of big capital to
impose its will are never entirely adequate; in a free State ever again
small competitors come up, take a stand against the big ones, refuse to
conform to agreements, and disturb the quiet exploitation of customers.
Under fascism, however, they have to submit to the regulations
established in the corporations according to the most influential
interests and given legal validity by decree of government. Thus the
entire economic life is subjected more thoroughly to big capital.

At the same time the working class is made powerless. Class war, of
course, is "abolished." In the shop all are collaborating now as
comrades in the service of the community; the former director, too, has
been turned into a worker and a comrade; but as he is the leader, clad
with authority, his commands must be obeyed by the other workers. Trade
unions, being organs of fight, of course are forbidden. The workers are
not allowed to fight for their interests; State power takes care of
them, and to the State authorities they have to bring forward their
complaints -- usually neutralized by the greater personal influence of
the employers. So a lowering of working conditions and standard of life
was unavoidable. As a compensation the workers, now assembled in fascist
organizations with Party members as designated dictatorial leaders, were
regaled with brilliant speeches on the eminence of labor, now for the
first time acknowledged in its worth. For capital times were good now,
times of strong development and high profits, notwithstanding the often
troublesome control of ignorant fascist officials demanding their share.
Capitalists of other countries visited with troubles and strikes, looked
with envy at the industrial peace in Italy.

More consciously than elsewhere nationalism uprises as the all
dominating ideology, because it affords a basis to theory and practice
of State omnipotence. The State is the embodiment, the organ of the
nation; its aim the greatness of the nation. For the raising of the
power needed in the world fight of capitalism fascism in many points is
superior to other political systems. With all the forces of State-paid
propaganda national feelings and pride are aroused; the ancient Romans
are exalted as the great ancestors, the Emperor Augustus is celebrated
as the great Italian, the Mediterranean is called "our sea," the glory
of ancient Rome has to be restored. At the same time military power is
built up; war industry is promoted and subsidized; for armaments
Government through lack of any public control can secretly spend as much
money as it wants. The Italian Government and bourgeoisie grew boastful
and aggressive. They wanted their country not to be admired as a museum
of ancient art any more, but respected as a modern country of factories
and guns.

For many years Italy was the only European country, besides Russia, that
had a dictatorial government. So it might seem a result of special
chance conditions there. Then, however, other countries followed. In
Portugal, after many bickerings between parties in Parliament and
military officers, the generals seized power, but felt incapable of
solving the many economic difficulties. So they appointed a well known
fascist-minded professor of economy to act as dictator under the name of
prime minister. He introduced corporatism to take the place of
parliamentarism, and was much praised for the undisturbed firmness of
his reign. The petty-capitalist stage of development in this country is
shown in that his most praised reform was economizing in finance by
cutting the government expenses.

It seems a contradiction that fascism, a product of big capitalism,
should happen to rule in backward countries, whereas the countries of
biggest capitalism reject it. The latter fact is easily explained,
because democratic parliamentarism is the best camouflage for its sway.
A system of government is not connected automatically with a system of
economy. The economic system determines the ideas, the wishes, the aims;
and then people with these aims in mind adjust their political system
according to their needs and possibilities. The ideas of dictatorship,
of the sway of some few strong individuals, countered by other strong
social forces in countries where big capital reigns, in distant regions
also strike the minds where big capitalism is no more than aspiration of
future development.

In backward countries, when capitalism begins to come up and to stir the
minds, the political forms of advanced countries are imitated. Thus in
the second part of the 19th century parliamentarism held its triumphal
course through the world, in the Balkans, in Turkey, in the East, in
South America, though sometimes in parody forms. Behind such parliaments
stood no strong bourgeoisie to use them as its organ; the population
consisted in large landowners and small farmers, artisans, petty
dealers, with chiefly local interests. Parliaments were dominated by
jobbers enriching themselves through monopolies, by lawyers and generals
ruling as ministers and bestowing well-paid offices on their friends, by
intellectuals making business out of their membership, by agents of
foreign capital preying upon the riches of timber and ore. A dirty scene
of corruption showing that parliamentarism did not sprout from sound and
natural roots here.

Such new countries cannot repeat the gradual line of development of the
old capitalist countries in first ascent. They can and must introduce
highly developed technics at once; on their pre-capitalist conditions
they must implant big industry directly; acting capital is big capital.
So it is not strange that the political forms generated by petty
capitalism in Europe do not fit here. There parliamentarism was firmly
rooted in the consciousness of the citizens and had time gradually to
adapt itself to the new conditions. Here, at the outskirts, the fascist
ideas of dictatorship could find adherence, since the practice of
politics was already conforming to it. Landowners and tribe chieftains
easily convert their old power into modern dictatorial forms; new
capitalist interests can work better with some few mighty men than with
a host of greedy parliamentarians. So the spiritual influences of big
world capital find a fertile field in the political ideas of rulers and
intellectuals all over the world.

### 3.8: National Socialism

Far more important are the forms of fascism presented by the most
strongly developed country of capitalist Europe. After having lost the
first world war and after being pressed down to entire powerlessness,
Germany through fascism was enabled to prepare for a second, more
formidable attempt at world power.

In the post-war years of misery and humiliation the gradually assembling
nationalist youth felt by instinct that its future depended on
organization of power. Among the many competing organizations the
National Socialist Party crystalized as the group with the greatest
growing faculty, and afterwards absorbed the others. It prevailed by
having an economic program, sharply anti-capitalist -- hence denoted
socialist -- fit to attract the petty bourgeoisie, the farmers and part
of the workers. Directed of course against capital such as these classes
know it as their suppressor, the usury capital, the real estate banks,
the big warehouses, especially against Jewish capital therefore. Its
anti-semitism expressed the feelings of these classes as well as of the
academic circles who felt threatened by Jewish competition now that the
republic had given equal civil rights. Its acute nationalism gave
expression to the feelings of the entire bourgeoisie, by sharply
protesting against Germany's humiliation, by denouncing Versailles, and
by the call to fight for new power, for new national greatness. When
then the great crisis of 1930 reduced the middle class masses to a panic
fright, when these, through their millions of votes, made national
socialism a powerful party, German big capital saw its chance. It gave
money for an overwhelming propaganda that soon beat the wavering liberal
and socialist politicians out of the field, made national socialism the
strongest party and its leader chief of the government.

Unlike other parties in government its first provisions were to make
sure that it never should loose its government power. By excluding the
Communist Party as criminals from the Reichstag and affiliating the
lesser nationalist groups it secured a majority to start with. All
important government and police offices were filled by party members;
the communist fighting groups were suppressed, the nationalist ones were
privileged. Protected by the authorities the latter, by deeds of
violence, with impunity could spread so much terror that every idea of
resistance was quelled in the people. The daily press first was muzzled,
then gradually captured and "equalized" into organs of national
socialism. Socialist and democratic spokesmen had to flee to other
countries; the widely spread socialist and the not less hated pacifist
literature was collected in violent searches and solemnly burned. From
the first days began the persecutions of the Jews, that gradually became
more cruel, and at last proclaimed as their aim the extermination of the
entire Jewish race. As a heavy steel armor the dictatorship of a
resolute, well-organized minority closed around German society, to
enable German capital as a well-armored giant to take up again the fight
for world power.

All political practice and all social ideas of national socialism have
their basis in the character of its economic system. Its foundation is
organization of capitalism. Such among the first adherents who insisted
upon the old anti-capitalist program were of course soon dismissed and
destroyed. The new measures of state control over capital were now
explained as the formerly promised subjection and destruction of
capitalist power. Government decrees restricted capital in its freedom
of action. Central government offices controlled the sale of products as
well as the procuring of raw materials. Government gave prescripts for
the spending of profits, for the amount of dividends allowed, for the
reserves to be made for new investments, and for the share it required
for its own purposes. That all these measures were not directed against
capitalism itself, but only against the arbitrary freedom of capital
dispersed over numerous small holders, is shown by the fact that herein
Government was continually guided by the advice of big capitalists and
bankers outside the Party, as a more resolute sequel of what had been
started already in collaboration with former less daring governments. It
was an organization imposed by the condition of German capitalism, the
only means to restore it to power.

Under capitalism capital is master; capital is money claiming the
surplus value produced by labor. Labor is the basis of society, but
money, gold, is its master. Political economy deals with capital and
money as the directing powers of society. So it had been in Germany, as
anywhere. But German capital was defeated, exhausted, ruined. It was not
lost; it had maintained itself as master of the mines, the factories, of
society, of labor. But the money had gone. The war reparations pressed
as a heavy debt, and prevented rapid accumulation of new capital. German
labor was tributary to the victors, and through them to America. Since
America had secluded itself from the imports of goods it had to be paid
in gold; gold disappeared from Europe and choked America, pushing both
into a world crisis.

The German "revolution" of 1933 -- proudly called so by national
socialism -- was the revolt of German against American capital, against
the rule of gold, against the gold form of capital. It was the
recognition that labor is the basis of capital, that capital is mastery
over labor, and that, hence, gold is not necessary. The real conditions
for capitalism, a numerous intelligent and skilled working class and a
high stage of technics and science, were present. So it repudiated the
tribute, rejected the claims of foreign gold, and organized capitalist
production on the basis of goods and labor. Thus, for the use of
internal propaganda, always again it could speak of fight against
capital and capitalism; for capital was money, was gold that reigned in
America, in England, in France, as it had reigned formerly in Germany.
The separating cleft, in this line of thought, gaped between the
gambling and exploiting usurers and money capitalists on the one side,
and the hard toiling workers and employers on the other side.

Under free capitalism the surplus value growing everywhere out of
production piles up in the banks, looks out for new profits, and is
invested by its owner or by the bank in new or in existing enterprises.
Since in Germany money was scarce State government had to provide the
means for founding new necessary enterprises. That could be done only by
seizing the profits of all enterprises for this purpose, after allowance
of a certain dividend for the shareholders. So it established itself as
the central leader of economy. In the emergency of German capitalism the
spending of capital could not be left to the will and whim of private
capitalists, for luxury, for gambling or foreign investment. With strict
economy all means must be used for reconstruction of the economic
system. Every enterprise now depends on the credit assigned by the State
and stands under continuous control of the State. The State for this
purpose has its economic offices of experts, in which the leaders of the
big enterprises and concerns by their advice are dominating. This means
a complete domination of monopolist capital over the smaller capitalists
in a system of planned economy. Conscious organization has replaced the
automatism of gold.

Germany, though striving after autarchy, could not exist without
importing raw materials from outside, paying for them, because it had no
money, by exports of its own products. Hence commerce could not be left
to the arbitrariness of private dealers, to the wish of the public for
superfluous or foreign fancies. When all sales shall serve the necessary
reconstruction Government has to supervise foreign commerce by rigid
prescripts, or take it in its own hand. It controls and limits every
transfer of money across the frontiers, even tourist travels; all drafts
on foreign debtors must be delivered. The State itself takes up
large-scale commerce, purchase as well as sale. The great difficulty of
the old economic system, the transition of commodities into gold, the
selling of the goods, the primary cause of so much faltering and crisis,
is thereby automatically solved at the same time. The State, as
universal dealer, is able in every purchase contract to stipulate that
the same value of its product shall be bought, so that no money is
needed. Or expressed in another way: in selling its goods it asks to be
paid not in money but in kind, in other goods: German machines against
Hungarian wheat or Roumanian oil. Gold is eliminated from business by
direct barter of goods.

But now barter on a gigantic scale, of the produce and needs of entire
countries at once. Private dealers in the other countries seldom have
such monopolies as are needed here; moreover such big transactions,
especially of materials serviceable to war have political consequences.
Hence the foreign governments have to step in. If they were not yet
adapted to such economic functions they now adapt themselves; they take
in hand the disposal over the products, and in their turn go to
regulating commerce and industry. Thus State control in a big country
leads to state control in other countries. A new system of economy, the
system of direct barter of goods, is introduced into international
commerce. It is especially attractive to the rising countries that are
purveyors of raw materials. They now get their machines and canons,
without in Paris and London contracting heavy loans that would bring
them into financial dependence. Thus German economic expansion is
ousting English and French capital from those countries; and it is
accompanied by political expansion. With the new economic system the
ruling classes there adopt the new political ideas, the fascist system
of government, that increases their power at home and better fits their
needs than an imitation of parliamentarism. Politically they are drawn
nearer to Germany. Thus what at first, according to old economic ideas,
looked a paralyzing weakness, the lack of gold, was now turned into a
source of new force.

German capitalism saw a new road opened towards resurrection and power.
This could not but have an enormous influence upon the ideas and
feelings of the bourgeoisie, especially upon the capitalist and
intellectual youth. It had experienced the poverty and dejection in the
post-war years, the desperation and impotence under the Weimar republic;
now again it saw a future full of hope. When a class, from pressure and
dependence, sees looming up a future of greatness with as yet unlimited
possibilities, enthusiasm and energy are awakened; it clothes the coming
world with the garb of exalted ideologies inspiriting the minds. Thus
national socialism speaks of its conquest of power as a grand social,
political and spiritual revolution, far surpassing all previous ones, a
revolution that ends capitalism, establishes socialism and community,
one destined to renovate society for thousands of years.

What really happened was only a structural change of capitalism, the
transition from free to planned capitalism. Yet this change is important
enough to be felt as the beginning of a new grand epoch. Human progress
always consisted in the replacing of instinctive action, of chance and
custom by deliberate planning. In technics science had already replaced
tradition. Economy, however, the social entirety of production, was left
to the chance of personal guessing of unknown market conditions. Hence
wasted labor, destructive competition, bankruptcy, crisis and
unemployment. Planned economy tries to bring order, to regulate
production according to the needs of consumption. The transition of free
capitalism to capitalism directed by State-dictatorship means,
fundamentally, the end of the pitiless fight of all against all, in
which the weak were succumbing. It means that everybody will have his
place assigned, an assured existence, and that unemployment, the scourge
of the working class, disappears as a stupid spilling of valuable labor
power.

This new condition finds its spiritual expression in the slogan of
community. In the old system everybody had to fight for himself, only
guided by egotism. Now that production is organized into a centrally
directed unity, everybody knows that his work is part of the whole, that
he is working for the national community. Where loss of old liberty
might evoke resentment an intense propaganda accentuates the service of
the community as the high moral principle of the new world. It is
adequate to carry away especially young people into devoted adherence.
Moreover the anti-capitalist fiction of the exclusion of the gold, by
persistent propaganda is hammered into the minds as the new reign of
labor. Community and labor find their common expression in the name
socialism.

This socialism is national socialism. Nationalism, the mightiest
ideology of the bourgeoisie, stands over all other ideas as the master
they have to serve. The community is the nation, it comprises only the
fellow people, labor is service of the own people. This is the new, the
better socialism, entirely opposed to the international socialism of
Jewish Marxism that by its doctrine of class war tore the national unity
asunder. It had made the German people powerless; national socialism
makes the national community a mighty unbreakable unity.

For national socialist doctrine the nations are the entities
constituting mankind. The nations have to fight for their place on
earth, their "living space"; history shows an almost uninterrupted
series of wars in which strong peoples exterminated, drove out or
subjected the weaker ones. Thus it was and thus it will be. War is the
natural condition of mankind, peace is nothing but preparation of future
war. So the first duty of every people is to make itself powerful
against others; it has to choose between victory or downfall.
Internationalism and pacifism are bloodless abstractions, yet dangerous
because they are sapping the strength of the people.

The first aim of national socialism was to make a powerful unity of all
German-speaking people. Through adversity of historical development it
had been divided into a number of separate states, only incompletely
united in Bismarck's former Reich -- the Austrian part remaining an
independent state -- moreover mutilated by the victors of 1918. The call
for national unity met with a wide response in the feelings, even of
such isolated groups as the German settlers in Transylvania or in
America. In consequence of the interlacing of living sites of different
races, as well as by economic connections, the principle of political
unity of course encounters many difficulties. The German-speaking town
of Danzig was the natural harbor for the surrounding Polish hinterland.
The Czecho-slovak State as a Slavonic protrusion separated the Northern
and the Austrian Germans, and included on the inner slopes of the
frontier ridges \[Sudetes\] an industrious German population. Under
capitalism such abnormal cases are not solved by any fair principle of
equable dealing, but by power against power. So they were the direct
motives that gave rise to the present world war.

From the first day preparation for war was the leading thought of
national socialism, the goal of all its measures. For this purpose
industry was supervised and regulated by the State, for this purpose
private profits and dividends were cut down, for this purpose the
investment of capital and the founding of new enterprises was reserved
to Government economic offices. All surplus value beyond a certain
profit rate for the shareholders is taken by the State for its needs;
these needs are the supreme common interest of the entire bourgeoisie.
In old capitalism the State had to procure money for its needs by
taxation, sometimes by the cunning method of unfair indirect taxes; or,
if by direct taxes, conceded grudgingly and under suspicious control by
the propertied citizens, and considered as an unrighteous incursion upon
their personal expenditure. Now this is all changed. The State by its
own right takes what it wants directly at the source, the chief part of
the surplus value, and to the capitalist owners it leaves some remnant
fixed at its own discretion. No more the State has to beg from the
masters of the means of production; it is itself master now and they are
the recipients. An enormous increase of financial power compared with
other States; but indispensable for success in the world fight. And
again national socialism in this way shows off before the people's
masses as the power that curbs capital, by enforcing it to deliver the
main part of its profit to the common weal, to the community.

Moreover the State is direct master of production. In the old
capitalism, when the State had with difficulty extorted money for war
expenses from Parliament, or borrowed it under fat provisions from the
bankers, it had to spend it on the monopolistic private arms industry.
These concerns, internationally connected, though they paraded as
national firms, Krupp in Essen, Schneider in Le Creusot, Armstrong in
England, not only took their big profits, but without conscientious
scruples impartially supplied enemies and allies with the most perfect
and newest inventions. It looked as if war were a puerile play of
politicians to fatten some few armament capitalists. To national
socialism, however, war is the most serious affair, for which an
unlimited part of the entire industrial apparatus can be used.
Government decides what big portion of the total steel and chemical
industry shall serve for armaments. It simply orders the factories to be
built, it organizes science and technics to invent and try new and
better weapons, it combines the functions of military officer, engineer,
and inventor, and makes war science \[Wehrwissenschaft\] the object of
special training. Armored cars, dive bombers, big submarines with ever
more perfect installations, rapid torpedo boats, rockets, all of new
construction, can be built in secret. No information reaches the enemy,
no sensational daily press can publish any notice, no parliament members
can ask information, no criticism has to be encountered. Thus the arms
are heaped up during years of feverish war preparation till the moment
of attack has arrived.

In old capitalism war was a possibility, avoided as long as possible, or
at least disclaimed, a war of defense mostly on the part of the old
satisfied Powers. The new upgrowing powers, aggressive because they have
to conquer their share in the world, have a positive aim that strains
the energy much more intensely than does the negative aim of mere
passive defense of existing conditions. They are "dynamic"; in military
tactics this character is represented in the irresistible impulse of the
well prepared mass offensive.

Thus German capitalism, by installing a national socialist government
completely dominating the entire economic life, provided itself with an
incomparable war machine. The question may be posed, however, whether it
did not shoot past the aim. In striving for power over the world, did it
not lose its mastery at home? Could the German bourgeoisie still be
called the ruling class?

German state control is no state socialism. The State is not, as it is
in Russia, owner of the means of production. In Russia the bureaucracy
of State officials collectively owns the industrial apparatus; it is the
ruling and exploiting class, appropriating the surplus value. In Germany
there is a numerous bourgeoisie, directors of enterprises, free
employers, officials, shareholders; they are the owners of the means of
production living on surplus value. But now the two functions of the
shareholder are separated; the right of disposal is detached from
ownership. Under big capitalism the right of disposal is the most
important function of capitalist ownership; we see it in America in the
holding companies. Then the owner in his character of exploiter only
retains the function of receiving part of the profits. In Germany
Government took for itself the right of disposal, the right to
manipulate with capital, to direct production, to increase the
productivity and to distribute the profits. For the mass of the
bourgeoisie there remained the detailed work of directing their
enterprises and gambling with the shares. Since production and import
both are determined by the State, private dividends could not be spent
in another way than by buying industrial shares, i.e., by returning the
profits as new capital into State-controlled industry.

Thus big capital retained power. Surely its expectation when it put
national socialism at the head of the State, of finding obedient
servants, was disappointed; the old masters of industry and banks had to
share their power with the new masters of the State, who not only
partook in the directing but also in the pocketing. Big capital in
Germany had not yet taken the American form of an unassailable property
of some families; capable men of daring from anywhere could rise to the
leadership of big concerns. Now they had to share their leading power
with other men of daring risen to power by way of politics and party
fight. In the economic offices the leaders of big business meet with the
political leaders in the common task of regulating production. The
dividing line between private Capitalists and State officials disappears
in the coalescing of functions. Together they are master of the State
and of the means of production.

With the deep changes in economic and political conditions a new state
of mind pervaded the German people. The mutual connection and dependence
became stronger, gradations of value and rank were felt, the authority
of leaders, the obedience of the masses imposed themselves;
consciousness of subordination in large entities accompanies planned
economy. And above all, in the entire middle class there is a strained
nationalism, a passionate will to fight for world power. Though growing
spontaneously out of the new conditions this new spirit was not left to
develop freely; for in that case opposite ideas and forces would arise
at the same time. It was the object of an intense one-sided propaganda.
To make these feelings a spiritual force binding the entire nation into
a fighting unity, they were fostered and developed by special means.
Propaganda and education were made the task of a separate State
department, endowed with unlimited financial means. All usable forces of
publicity, of science, literature and art were set to work
systematically to cram the national socialist ideas into all the heads,
with exclusion of all deviating spiritual influences.

This implied a complete spiritual despotism. Whereas under former
systems of despotism the daily press was only muzzled or harassed by a
stupid censorship, often outwitted by the wits of editors, now the
entire press was annexed by the Party and provided with party members as
editors. The national socialist State was not only master of the
material life of man, it was also master of the spiritual life, by means
of the Party. No books or writings expressing deviating opinions could
be published; foreign publications were carefully controlled before
being admitted. Secret printing of independent or opposite opinions was
not only punished severely as capital crime, but also rendered difficult
by State control of all materials. It is intellectual cowardice that
shuns dispute on equal terms and dares to attack and insult the
adversary only after he has been fettered and muzzled. But it was
efficient; the party press was able, without compensation, day by day to
force upon the readers not only its doctrine but also its biased
representation or misrepresentation of facts and happenings, or to omit
them entirely. Notwithstanding all preconceived distrust of one-sided
information, the ever repeated, never contradicted views, so well
confirmed by the facts presented, must in the long run take hold of the
minds. The more so as they were presented as part and result of an
attractive doctrine, the ideology of community and labor: the end of
selfishness and exploitation, the new reign of devotion to the people's
weal, regulated work and prosperity for all, the common exertion for the
greatness and the future of the nation, with severe punishment of course
for all its enemies.

At the same time all verbal intercourse was strictly controlled. The
party everywhere had its members and adherents, in the offices, in the
shops, all inspired with the moral duty to denounce for punishment, as
enemies of the community, all who expressed other opinions, ventured
criticism, or spread rumors. Thus no opposition could form, except in
the extreme secrecy of insignificant groups; everywhere a feeling of
utter powerlessness prevailed.

Thus, compared with the ancient forms of despotic rule, modern
capitalism showed an enormous progress of efficiency in the technics of
suppression. Whether we take the English Tory Government in the
beginning of the 19th century, that had no police force, or the Prussian
absolutism or Russian Czarism in later times, with their primitive
barbarous cruelty, they all present the spectacle of stupid
helplessness, normal for a government living far from the people. In the
English courts editors and authors made a tough fight for reform and
freedom of press, applauded by the people when they went to gaol. The
Czarist gaolers often could not conceal their respect for the
revolutionaries as representatives of superior culture. Repeatedly
Prussian police, trapped by the better organization of the socialist
workers, had to suffer exhibition as simpletons before the courts.

Now that was all over. The new despotism was equipped with all the
engines of the modern State. All force and energy that capitalism evokes
is combined with the most thorough-going tyranny that big capital needs
in order to uphold its supremacy. No tribunal to do justice to the
subject against the State. The judges are Party members, agents of the
State, dismissed if they are soft, bound to no statute book,
administering justice after decrees from above. Law suits are public
only when needed for propaganda, to intimidate others; and then the
papers bring only what the judge deems adequate. The police consist of
strictly organized and disciplined ruffians provided with all weapons
and methods to beat down the "Volksgenossen." Secret police again were
all powerful, were more capable than it was in olden times. No law
secured anybody from being put in gaol, for unlimited time, without
trial. The concentration camp, formerly invented as a War measure
against guerrillas, now was installed as a form of mass-prison with hard
labor, often accompanied by systematic cruelties. No personal dignity
was respected; it did not exist any more. Where petty bourgeois
coarseness, turned into perverse abuse of unlimited power, was provided
with all the inventiveness of modern capitalism, cruelty against the
victims can reach a pitch rivaling the worst barbarousness of former
centuries. Cruelty as a rule is a consequence of fear, experienced in
the past or felt for the future, thus betraying what is hidden in
subconsciousness. But for the moment all adversaries were made
powerless, silenced and intimidated.

Spiritual tyranny was supplemented by incessant propaganda, especially
adapted to the younger generation. The rulers know quite well that they
can win over only very few of the older generation of workers who, grown
up in the nobler ideas of Social Democracy, preserved these as a
precious remembrance, though bereft of practical use. Only for the
younger adults who experienced Social Democracy in its decline, as
ruling party, the propaganda could be effective. But it was in the
upgrowing youth which it did itself educate and shape, that national
socialism placed its hope as material for its new world.

It cannot surprise that it here met with great success. As no party or
group before it concerned itself with youth. National socialism
appointed able leaders well versed in modern psychology, disposing of
ample financial means, who, with entire devotion assembled and educated
the youth in an all-embracing organization. All the innate feelings of
comradeship, of mutual aid, of attachment, of activity, of ambition
could develop in young people. They were filled with the self-confidence
of being an important part of the national community with an important
task of their own. Not to win a good position for oneself, the highest
ideal of the youngsters in capitalist society, but to serve and forward
the national community. The boys had to feel future fighters, preparing
for great deeds, not by learned studies but by vigor, pluck, fighting
capacity and discipline. The girls had to prepare for the future of
being heroic German mothers; increase of population, as rapid as
possible, was a condition for strength in the world fight.

With ardor the children imbibed the new teachings that far outweighed
the spiritual influence of their parents and teachers. Against these
they acted as fervent champions and spokesmen of the new creed,
especially educated for that task. Not simply to extend the propaganda
into home and school, but still more to report to their new leaders home
disputes and controversies. Hence to act as spies and denunciators of
their own parents, who under the threat of severe punishment had to
abstain from any attempt to educate their children in their own spirit.
The children belonged to the State, not to the parents. Thus for the
future war an army of millions was prepared unrivalled for enthusiasm
and devotion. Such an education implies careful protection against any
opposite influence that could evoke doubts, uncertainties and inner
conflicts. Doubts and inner conflicts, to be sure, produce strong
characters, independent thinkers; but for such national socialism had no
use. What it needed, and what it tried to rear by one-sided teaching of
the one sole truth, was blind faith and, based thereon, fanatical
devotion, expedient for irresistible assault.

The strength of national socialism lay in its organization of the
material production, of physical forces. Its weakness lay in its attempt
to uniformize the mentalities, the intellectual forces, in both cases by
brutal constraint. Most of its adherents and spokesmen came from the
lower middle class, rough, ignorant, narrow-minded, desirous to win a
higher position, full of prejudices, easily addicted to brutality. They
came to power not through intellectual but through physical and
organizational superiority, by daring and combativeness. They imposed
their spirit of violence upon the dominated intellectuals and workers.
Thus respect for brute strength, contempt for science and knowledge was
bred in the upgrowing generation; for the ambitious, instead of painful
patient study, an easier way to high positions led through party service
that demanded no knowledge but only sturdy drilling, physical training,
rough force and discipline.

Big capitalism, however, cannot develop without science as the basis of
technical progress, and without an intellectual class with important
functions, economic and social. Furthering and encouragement of science
is a life interest for capital. Its new political system brought it into
contradiction not only with humanity and culture, but also with its own
spiritual basis. To uphold its dominance it suffered to decay what
constituted its force and justification. This will avenge itself when in
the contest of capitalisms for world power the highest perfection in
technics is imperative, and its neglect cannot be made good by physical
constraint. The great scientific and technical capacities of the German
people, of its engineers, its scientists, its workers, who brought it to
the front of industrial progress, now chained to the war chariot of big
capitalism and, enhancing its fighting strength, will be wasted and
spoilt in this bondage.

National socialism, moreover, tried to impose its very theory upon
science, in giving to nationalism the theoretical expression of the
racial doctrine. Always German nationalism had taken the form of worship
of the ancient Teutons whose virtues as a mirror for the effeminate
Romans had been exalted by Tacitus. German authors had exposed the
theory of the "Nordic" race, superior to other races and destined to
dominate them, and nowadays represented by the Germans and some adjacent
peoples. This theory was now blended with anti-semitism. The special
capacities of the Jews for commerce and money dealing, for medicine and
jurisprudence had, half a century ago already, aroused strong
anti-semitic feelings among the petty bourgeoisie and in academic
circles. Neither among the great bourgeoisie, that by its mastery of the
industrial surplus value was without fear of Jewish finance, nor among
the working class had they any importance. Anti-semitism was a sentiment
of the lower middle class; but most adherents of national socialism came
from these very circles. Jewish immigration from the East after the
first world war, introducing its primitive trade methods of barter, and
the appointing of Jews in political offices in the Weimar republic
intensified the hatred and made anti-semitism the main creed of the most
influential new leaders.

Thus racial theory became the central doctrine of national socialism.
Real Germans were not all the German-speaking inhabitants of Germany,
but only the "Aryans" -- the same held good for surrounding peoples as
the Scandinavians and the Dutch; the English were too much corrupted
already by capitalism. The non-Aryan cohabitants, the Jews, have no
rights; the allowance to settle they misused by assembling capital and
by robbing and insolently suppressing the Aryans. So now they were
expropriated and the persecutions gradually increased to rough abuse and
deliberate extermination.

National socialism by means of its political power forced this racial
theory upon science. It appointed the spokesmen of the doctrine as
university professors, and profusely procured funds for publishing books
and periodicals for its vindication. That the amount of scientific truth
in it is extremely meagre could be no hindrance. Capitalism in power
always elevates to official science the doctrines that serve its
purposes; they dominate the universities everywhere; but criticism and
opposite opinions have the possibility to express themselves, albeit not
from official chairs. Under national socialism, however, all critical
discussion of the official doctrine was made impossible. Still more
grotesque was the extension of the racial theory to physics. In physics
Einstein's theory of relativity was considered by almost the entirety of
physicists as a most important progress of science, basis of numerous
new developments. But Einstein was a Jew, and so anti-semitism took a
stand against this theory. When national socialism came to power the
Jewish professors, men of world fame often, were dismissed and expelled;
the anti-semitic opponents of relativity were hailed as the genial
spokesmen of "German physics," the expression of sound and simple Aryan
intelligence, against "Jewish physics," consisting in crooked theories
contrived by Talmudian distortion of thought. It is easily seen that
that "sound Aryan intelligence" is nothing but the simple-mindedness of
petty burgher thought inaccessible to the deeper abstractions of modern
science.

In the fight of German capitalism for world power anti-semitism was not
needed, was rather a disadvantage. But it had no choice. Since the
bourgeoisie had not dared to join the people's fight, 1848, to win
domination, it had to surrender to the lead of other classes. First of
the landed aristocracy with the Kaiser, who, by their stupid diplomacy,
were responsible for the defeat in the first world war. Now of the petty
burgher party and its leaders, who made this fad the basis of a policy
that by evoking scorn and intense hatred all over the world, prepared
for a new defeat.

From the beginning national socialism gave special attention to the
farmers. The platform of any petty burgher party spoke of ridding the
farmers from exploitation by mortgage and banking capital. Moreover, for
the impending war it was imperative that Germany should feed itself and
have sufficient raw materials. So an organization of agriculture, as
essential part of the wholesale organization of production, was
necessary. It was expressed in the national socialist ideology of the
farmer class, inseparably united with the soil, preservers of the racial
strength of the forebears, the true "nobility of blood and soil." It had
to be protected against the dissolving influences of capitalism and
competition, and connected into the whole of planned production.
Conforming to the reactionary forms of thought of the Nazi system was
done by reviving mediaeval customs and forms of bondage abolished by the
French revolution.

Thus mortgage was forbidden; the farmer was not allowed to invest
foreign capital for ameliorations. If he wanted money for his farm he
could go to the State offices, and thus his dependence on the State
increased. In his farming he was subjected to a number of prescripts
restricting his liberty. In the first place as to the products he had to
cultivate; since agriculture had to feed the entire people, a difficult
problem with the dense population, and still more so in war time, an
exact fixation of needs and proceeds was necessary. The sale, too, was
organized. The products had to be delivered to purchase offices, at
prices fixed from above, or to agents visiting the farms. Theirs was the
all-important task and duty: the feeding of the national community. This
truth, however, they had to swallow in the form of complete subjection
to Government measures sometimes even amounting to direct seizure of the
crops. Thus the farmers, formerly free in, for better or worse, fighting
their way through the vicissitudes of capitalism, were turned into serfs
of the State. To meet the emergencies of big capitalism, mediaeval
conditions, under flattering names, were restored for the farmers.

To the workers no less attention, though of a different kind was given.
For the great aim of conquering world power the internationally minded
working class, fighting capitalism, splitting national unity, had first
to be made powerless. So the first work of the revolution of 1933 was to
destroy the social democratic and the communist parties, to imprison or
banish their leaders, to suppress their papers, to burn their books and
to transform the trade unions into national socialist organizations.
Labor was organized not by the workers and for the workers, but by
capital and for capital, through its new governing agents. The
"labor-front," directed by State-appointed leaders, took the place of
the unions where, formally at least, the workers themselves were master.
Its task was not to fight the employers for improvement of working
conditions, but the promotion of production. In the productive
community, the factory, the employer was the leader and must be obeyed,
unconditionally. The national socialist leaders of the labor-front,
often former officials of the unions, treated with the employer and
brought forward complaints; but the latter decided.

It was not the intention of national socialism to make the workers
helpless victims of employers' arbitrariness; the latter also had to
obey the higher dictators. Moreover, for its great aim, the world fight,
national socialism needs the goodwill, the devoted collaboration of all,
as soldiers and as workers; so besides incessant propaganda, good
treatment as far as possible, was serviceable. Where heavy exertions and
extreme hardships were demanded from them the reward was praise of their
performance of duty. Should they be cross and unwilling, hard constraint
would make it clear that they were powerless. Free choice of their
master has no sense any longer, since everywhere the real master is the
same; the workers are transposed from one shop to another at the command
from above. Under national socialism the workers were turned into
bondsmen of State and capital.

How could it happen that a working class, appearing so powerful as the
German one in the high tide of social democracy, almost ready to conquer
the world, did fall into such utter impotence? Even to those who
recognized the decline and inner degeneration of socialism, its easy
surrender in 1933, without any fight, and the complete destruction of
its imposing structure came as a surprise. In a certain way, however,
national socialism may be said to be the regular descendant of social
democracy. National socialism could rise to such power only on the
shoulders of the previous workers' movement. By closer examination of
the inner connection of things we can see that not only communism, by
its example of State-dictatorship, but also social democracy had
prepared the way for national socialism. The slogans, the aims, the
methods contrived by social democracy, for the workers, were taken over
and applied by national socialism, for capital.

First the idea of State socialism, consciously planned organization of
the entire production by the centralized power of the State. Of course
the democratic State was meant, organ of the working people. But
intentions do not count against the power of reality. A body that is
master of production is master of society, master of the producers,
notwithstanding all paragraphs trying to make it a subordinate organ,
and needs develops into a ruling class or group.

Secondly, in social democracy a leading bureaucracy already before the
first world war was acquiring mastery over the workers, consciously
aspiring at it and defending it as the normal social condition.
Doubtless, those leaders just as well would have developed into agents
of big capital; for ordinary times they would have served well, but for
leaders in world war they were too soft. The "Leader-principle" was not
invented by national socialism; it developed in social democracy hidden
under democratic appearances. National socialism proclaimed it openly as
the new basis of social relations and drew all its consequences.

Moreover, much of the programme of social democracy was realized by
national socialism; and that -- an irony of history -- especially such
aims as had been criticized as most repulsive by the middle class of
old. To bring order in the chaos of capitalist production by planned
regulation always had been proclaimed an impossibility and denounced as
an unbearable despotism. Now the State accomplished this organization to
a great extent, thus making the task for a workers' revolution
considerably easier. How often the intention of social democracy to
replace the automatism of market and shop by a consciously organized
distribution has been ridiculed and abhorred: everyone equally
apportioned for normalized wants, fed and clothed by the State, all
alike mere specimens. National socialism went far in the realization of
this bogus. But what was meant in the socialist program as organized
abundance is introduced here as organized want and hunger, as the utmost
restriction of all life necessities in order that as much of productive
force as possible remains for war materials. Thus the socialism the
workers got was parody rather than realization; what in social
democratic ideas bore the character of richness, progress and freedom,
found its caricature in dearth, reaction and suppression.

The chief blame on socialism was the omnipotence of the State, compared
with the personal freedom in capitalist society. This freedom, to be
sure, often was no more than an ambiguous form, but it was something.
National socialism took away even this semblance of liberty. A system of
compulsion, harder than any slanderer ventured to impute to socialism,
was imposed upon mankind by capitalism in its power and emergency. So it
had to disappear; without liberty man cannot live. Liberty, truly, is
only a collective name for different forms and degrees of bondage. Man
by his bodily needs depends on nature; this is the basis of all
dependencies. If life is not possible but by restraining of the free
impulses they must be restrained. If productive labor can only be
secured by submission under a commanding power, then command and
submission are a necessity. Now, however, they are a necessity only for
the succumbing capitalism. To uphold exploitation it imposes upon
mankind a system of hard constraint, that for production itself, for the
life of man, is not required. If a fascist system, instead of being
shattered in world war were able to stabilize in lasting peace, a system
of organized production providing as it pretended an abundance of all
life necessities, even then it could not last. Then by necessity it must
perish through the inner contradiction of freeing mankind from the
constraint of its needs and of yet trying to keep it in social slavery.
Then the fight for freedom, as the only desire left, would be taken up
with irresistible force.

The workers cannot foster the easy illusion that with a defeat in world
war the role of national socialism will be played out. The epoch of big
capitalism is rife with its principles and instigations. The old world
does not come back. Governments, even those styled democratic, will be
compelled to interfere with production ever more. As long as capital has
power and has fear, despotic methods of government will arise as
formidable enemies of the working class. Not always in the open form of
violent middle class or military dictatorships; they may also take the
appearance of labor governments, proceeding from labor fights, perhaps
even in the disguise or under the contradictory name of council
governments. So a consideration, on broad lines, of their place and role
in the development of society does not seem superfluous. A comparison
with the rise of another new class formerly, the middle class, may offer
an analogy, uncertain though, and surely to be used with caution, and
with the reserve that now the pace of social evolution is much quicker,
but has to go farther and deeper, than it was in former centuries.

The rise of the bourgeoisie took place in steps of gradually growing
power. From the powerless burgesses of the early middle ages they lead
to the merchants and guilds ruling their own towns, fighting the
nobility and even vanquishing the knight armies in the open field; an
essential element in the mediaeval world, yet only islands in an ocean
of agrarian power. By means of the money power of the burghers the kings
rise as masters above the other feudal powers, and institute centralized
governments in their kingdoms. Their absolutism often is spoken of as a
state of equilibrium, when the nobility was no longer, the bourgeoisie
not yet strong enough for mastery; so a third power, protecting the
privileges of the one and the trade of the other class, leaning upon
them both, could rule both. Until, after new growth of trade and
industry, the bourgeoisie is so much strengthened as to overthrow this
rule and establish itself master of society.

The rise of the working class in the 19th century was the rise of a
powerless, exploited, miserable mass into a class with acknowledged
rights and with organizations to defend them. Their unions and their
political parties may be compared somehow with the guilds and the town
governments of the burgesses, an essential element in the all-powerful
capitalist world. Whereas, however, the burghers could build up their
money power separately, leaving the nobility with its landed property
alone, the workers now, to build up their economic power, have to take
the means of production from the capitalists, so that immediate fight
cannot be avoided. Just as then in the further rise the old
institutions, the independent town governments were destroyed and the
burghers subjected by the biggest of the feudals, the princes, masters
of the lesser aristocracy, so now the old organizations of labor, unions
and parties, are destroyed or subjected by big capitalism, thus clearing
the way for more modern forms of fight. So there is a certain analogy
between former absolutism and new dictatorship, a third power above the
contending classes. Though we cannot yet speak of their equilibrium, we
see that the new rulers appeal to labor as the basis of their system. It
is conceivable that in a higher stage of the power of labor, camouflaged
dictatorships may come up founded upon the support of labor, transient
attempts to keep the workers in submission before their final victory.

Historical analogy may also be useful to show that development does not
necessarily go along exactly the same lines everywhere. Later middle
class mastery in Holland and England, by a fight against absolutistic
attempts, developed out of the mediaeval urban privileges, without
having lived under absolutism. In the same way now it might be that,
whereas in some countries fascist dictatorships arise, in other
countries the conditions are lacking. Then forms and conditions of the
workers' fight will also be different. It is not well imaginable that in
countries where personal liberty is firmly rooted in all classes, such
as England and America, complete slavery could be established, though
single measures of fascist character are possible. Capitalist domination
there is founded on finer, more spiritual elements of power, more
efficient than rough violence. Then the power of the workers for a long
time will remain poor and unconscious; practical necessities will
enforce partial steps in the direction of council organization, rather
than a great revolutionary fight over fundamentals. The growth of clear
consciousness of class and the organization of production are a far more
extensive and laborious task, when the mind is filled with middle class
ideas and when society is full of unorganized small trade.

In countries with strong fascist dictatorship, on the other hand, the
heaviest part of the workers' task is the direct fight to overthrow it.
There dictatorship has gone far already in clearing away small trade
with its feelings of independence, as well as middle class ideas. The
mind is bent already on organization of industry, the idea of community
is present, though practice is a sham. The hard pressure forcing all
into the same harness of servitude, regulating production, rationing
consumption, uniforming life, evoke resentment and exasperation, only to
be kept down by harder suppression. Because all physical power and an
enormous spiritual power lie in the hands of the rulers, the fight
demands from the workers the highest degree of devotion and courage, of
clear insight, and unity. The same holds good if capitalism should
succeed in establishing one supreme dominating power over the entire
earth.

The object of national socialist dictatorship, however, the conquest of
world power, makes it probable that it will be destroyed in the war it
unloosened. Then it will leave Europe ruined and devastated, chaotic and
impoverished, the production apparatus adapted to war implements,
entirely worn away, soil and man power exhausted, raw materials lacking,
towns and factories in ruins, the economic resources of the continent
squandered and annihilated. Then, unlike in the Germany of 1918,
political power will not automatically fall into the hands of the
working class; the victorious powers will not allow it; all their forces
now will serve to keep it down. Whilst at the same time new rulers and
leaders present themselves with promises and programs of a new and
better order, and the allied armies are liberating the European
continent for the exploitation by American capitalism. Then, in this
economic, social and spiritual chaos it will fall to the workers to find
ways for organizing themselves on class lines, ways for clearing up
their ideas and purposes, ways for first attempts in reconstructing
production. Wherever a nucleus of organization, of fight, of production
is growing, wherever wide embracing connections are tied, wherever minds
are struggling for clear ideas, there foundations are laid and a start
is made for the future. With partial successes won in devoted fight,
through strong unity and insight progressing by gradual steps, the
workers must build their new society.

It is not possible as yet to foresee the coming forms of social strife
and activity in the different countries. But we may say for certain
that, once they understand it, the consciousness of their great task as
a bright star will guide the workers through all the difficulties on
their path. And that the certainty that by their work and fight they
build up the power and unity of the working class, the brotherhood of
mankind, will elate their hearts and brighten their minds. And that the
fight will not end until working mankind has won complete freedom.

## 4: The war

### 4.1: Japanese imperialism

The preceding chapters were composed in the first years of the war,
1941-1942, a summary of what past times of struggle provided in useful
information for the working class, an instrument helpful in their
further fight for freedom. Now, 1944, the war, begun as an attempt of
German capital to wrench world power from the English bourgeoisie, has
extended over the entire world. All the strains created by the growth of
capitalism in different continents, all the antagonisms between new
rising and old powerful bourgeoisies, all the conflicts and excitations
in near and far away countries have coalesced and exploded in this truly
world war. And every day shows how much deeper, more tremendous and more
thorough than in any former war its effects will be, in America and
Asia, as well as in Europe. Mankind in its entirety is involved, and the
neutrals, too, experience its consequences. Every nation is implicated
in the fate of every other nation, however remote. This war is one of
the last convulsions in the irresistible process of unification of
mankind; the class fight that will evolve from the war will make this
unity into a self-directing community.

Besides Europe, its first scene, Eastern Asia has become a second, no
less important, center of the war. In China war with Japan was already
going on for some years when, by the outbreak of the war between America
and Japan, it was included as a subordinate part in the world fight.
This struggle in East Asia will have the same importance for the world's
course as the fight in Europe. Hence its origins, as well as its
tendencies, must be considered here somewhat more attentively.

The dense populations thronged together in the fertile plains of East
and South Asia and the adjacent islands have long resisted the invasion
of capitalism. With their number of nearly a thousand millions they
constituted almost the half of mankind. Hence, as long as they remain in
the condition of small agriculture and small handicraft, capitalism
cannot be said to occupy the world, capitalism is not yet at the end of
its task and its growth. The old powerful monarchies stiffened in their
first contact with the rising capitalism of the 16th and 17th centuries,
they kept off its intrusion and shut out its dissolving effects. Whereas
in India and the Indian islands commercial capital could gradually
establish its sway, China and Japan could maintain themselves as strong
military powers during some centuries. In the 19th century the military
power of modern capitalism broke the resistance. The development of
capitalism, first in Japan, now in China, was the origin, is the content
and will be the outcome of the present world war.

In the 17th, 18th, and the first half of the 19th century Japan was a
feudal-absolutist state separated from the outer world by strict
prohibitional laws. It was governed by some hundred small princes
\[daimyos\], each lord over his own realm, but all strictly subjected
under the sway of the Shogun in the capital, formally the military chief
for the nominal emperor, the Mikado in Kyoto, but practically the real
ruler. The Shoguns, whose office was hereditary in the Tokugawa family,
retained the daimyos in submission and kept internal peace during two
and a half centuries. A strict feudal organization of four orders in
society was maintained; but in the long run it could not prevent an
inner development.

The basis of society was small farming, on lots mostly of only one or
some few acres. Legally half the product had to be delivered to the
prince, in kind (mostly rice), but often more was taken from the
farmers. Above them stood the ruling and exploiting class of warriors,
the samurai, forming the uppermost order ranged in a number of ranks,
from the princes down to the common soldiers. They constituted the
nobility, though their lowest most numerous ranks had only a small
rice-income; they were a kind of knights, living around the castles of
their lords. Since through the cessation of the internal wars of old
their special office, fighting, was no longer needed, they had turned
into a purely parasitic class, living in idleness or occupying
themselves with literature and art -- they were the producers of the
famous Japanese art, afterwards so much admired in Europe. But they had
the right to slay everyone of the lower orders they came across without
being punished. Below the second order, the farmers, stood the lowest
orders, the artisans and the merchants, who worked for the samurai,
their patrons and customers; they earned money and gradually out of them
arose a first species of bourgeoisie.

The basis of the system was heavy exploitation of the farmers; Japanese
authors said the policy of the government consisted in leaving to the
farmers so much that they neither could die nor live. They were kept in
absolute ignorance, they were bound to the soil, which they could not
sell, all ease of life was denied to them. They were slaves of the
State; they were looked upon as machinery for production of the rice the
ruling class needed. Sometimes the famished peasants rose in local
revolt and obtained some redress, because the inept soldiers did not
dare to oppose them. But hunger and misery remained the prevailing
conditions.

Still, although the laws meant to establish a petrified immutability,
conditions gradually changed. The extension of craft and commerce, the
increase of the production of commodities, brought luxury into the
towns. The ruling nobility, to satisfy their new needs, had to borrow
money and became debtors of the merchant class, the highest daimyos, as
well as the common soldiers. The latter, reduced to poverty, sometimes,
notwithstanding the prohibition, escaped into other professions. In the
19th century their growing discontent crystallized into a systematic
hostility to the system of government. Because they formed the most
intellectual class and were influenced by some European ideas trickling
through the narrow chink of Dutch commerce at Deshima, they were able to
formulate their opposition in the nationalist programme of "respect for
the Emperor" as a symbol of national unity. So there were forces for
change from feudal absolutism in the direction of capitalism; but they
would have been too weak for a revolution, had not the big push from
aggressive Western capitalism come to enforce admission.

In its first rise already, in the discovery of the entire earth in the
16th century, capitalism had knocked at the gates of Japan; it kindled
wars between the feudal lords and princes; the spreading of Christendom
over against Buddhism was an expression of the paralyzing disruption of
the empire. A couple of consecutive strong Shoguns averted the danger by
subjecting the rebellious lords to their centralized power; the
foreigners were driven out, and with a booming blow -- prohibition and
extermination of Christendom -- the gate was closed for two centuries
and a half. Then modern capitalism in its world conquest again knocked
at the gate, and with its guns forced it open. American and Russian
men-of-war came in 1853, others followed, treaties for commerce were
made with the Western powers. And now the old worm-eaten system of
government broke down, the Shogunate disappeared, clans hostile to it
got the upper hand, and through the "restoration" of 1868 established a
strongly united state under the government of the Mikado.

This meant the introduction of capitalism. First the juridical basis for
a middle-class society was laid: the four orders were abolished and all
inhabitants became free citizens with equal rights. Freedom of trade, of
living and travel, private property, also of the land, that could be
bought and sold now, were established. Instead of the tiller of the soil
paying half the product in kind, land taxes in money were laid upon the
owner. The samurai lost their feudal privileges, and instead got an
amount of money to buy a lot of land or to start a business; as artisans
and employers they formed part of the rising bourgeoisie. The state
officials, the army and naval officers, the intellectuals in the new
society chiefly came from this samurai class. The upper ranks remained
in power; part of the feudal princes now formed the Secret Council,
which, behind the scenes directed government; their retainers, still
linked together by the old clan ties, became cabinet ministers,
generals, party chiefs and influential politicians.

So in Japan things were different from Europe. Capitalism did not come
because a rising bourgeoisie vanquished the feudal class in a
revolutionary struggle, but because a feudal class transformed itself
into a bourgeoisie, certainly a performance worthy of respect. Thus it
is easily understood that also under capitalism the feudal spirit, with
its prejudices of ranks, its overbearing haughtiness, its servile
respect to the emperor, persisted in the Japanese ruling class. The
middle-class spirit of European capitalism was entirely lacking;
Germany, that most resembles it, differs from Japan by the diversity
there between the land owning nobility and the middle-class
industrialists. Not till some dozens of years later a constitution was
made, after the German model, with a parliament without power over the
administration and the budget. Civil rights hardly existed, even on
paper; government and officials had absolute power over the people. The
peasants remained the deeply subjected, heavily exploited mass of
starvelings; the substitution of capitalist for feudal pressure meant
that they had to pay a lot of money in taxes or rent, that their land
came into the hands of big landowners, that they could be evicted by
withdrawal of the lease, that instead of the former known misery there
came unforeseen ruin through unknown influences of market and prices.
Peasant revolts were numerous after the first years of the Restoration.

Capitalism was introduced from above. Capable young men were sent to
Europe to study science and technics. The government erected factories,
in the first place armament works and shipyards; for military strength
against the other powers was most urgent. Then railways and ships were
built, coal mines constructed, afterwards the textile industry
developed, chiefly silk and cotton, banks were founded. Private business
was encouraged by subsidies, and state industries were turned over to
private hands. In this way the government spent much money, got partly
by taxes, partly by borrowing, or by the issue of paper money, which
rocketted prices. This policy was continued later on; capital was
fattened by government subsidies, especially navigation, with its
ensuing artificial prosperity. The system often developed into sheer
corruption; the new-made capitalist class, through the absence of
inherited business maxims in its dealings, exhibited a brazen lack of
ordinary honesty; plundering public funds for personal enrichment is
considered a common affair. Even the highest officials and politicians
take part in big enterprises and procure orders for them by means of
political influence.

Large numbers of impoverished peasants flowed into the towns, to the
factories, where a heavily exploited proletariat, almost without rights,
accumulated in the slums, ravished through low wages (half a yen per
day), long hours (14-16 hours), and child labor. State officials in the
lower ranks, even intellectuals, engineers, marine officers are paid far
lower wages than in Europe. The working classes in the country, as well
as in the towns, lived in a state of hopeless misery, of squalor and
despair, surpassing the worst conditions in Europe of olden times. In
the textile industry there is a regular slave system; the farmers sell
their daughters for a number of years to the factories, where they live
intern under the most horrible unhygienic conditions; and after the
contract expires they return in part only to their villages, bringing
with them tuberculosis. Thus, Japanese production was cheap, and through
the low prices of its trash could outbid Western products on the Asiatic
market. On the basis of highly developed machine technics --
complemented by extensive primitive home industry and the low standard
of life of the workers -- capitalist industry and commerce shot up
powerfully; every ten years import and export were doubled. Though it
did not equal America, England and Germany, it rose above most other
countries. The number of industrial workers reached two millions in
1929; agriculture occupied less than half the population already. The
workers lived in a state of partial slavery; only in machine industry
and among the sailors was there a bit of organization. Strikes broke
out, but were forcibly beaten down. Socialist and communist ideas,
naturally finding their way under such conditions, were persecuted and
exterminated ferociously. This fitted entirely in the system of police
arbitrariness, of lack of personal rights, of brutal cruelty and lawless
violence against their own, as well as against subjected alien people,
which showed already the character of later fascism.

Imperialism, the big-capitalist politics of conquest, had no need to
develop gradually here; from the first it belongs to the policy of
introduction of capitalism from above. From the beginning militarism was
the chief aim and ideal of the new system, first as a means of defense
against the white powers, then as a means of conquest of markets and
sources of raw materials. All the old fighting instincts, traditions of
discipline and impulses of oppression of the former samurai class could
exhibit themselves and revive in the military spirit of exalted
nationalism. First by defeating in 1895 the moldy Chinese power and
conquering Korea and Formosa, it took its place among the big powers.
Then its victory over the equally moldy power of Russian Czarism in
1904, opened the way into the inner Asiatic realms. Now the Japanese
rulers grew cockier and began to speak of Japan's world mission to lead
East Asia and to free Asia entirely from the white domination.

This policy of conquest is often defended with the argument that the
rapid increase of the population -- a doubling in 35 years -- that
cannot find a sufficient living on the small lots of tillable soil in
these mountainous islands, compels emigration or the increase of
industrial labor for which markets and raw material must be available.
Everywhere the rise of capitalism, with its abolition of old bonds and
its increasing possibilities for living has brought about a rapid
increase of population. Here, on the reverse, this consequence,
considered as a natural phenomenon, is used as an argument for conquest
and subjugation of other peoples. The real reason, however, of this
policy of conquest, first of Manchuria, then of the northern provinces
of China, consists in Japan's lack of iron ore. All industrial and
military power nowadays is based upon the disposal over iron and steel;
hence Japan wants the rich mineral deposits of Jehol and Shansi. At the
same time Japanese capital invaded China and set up factories, chiefly
cotton mills, in Shanghai and other towns. And there a vision loomed of
a future of greatness and power: to make of these 400 millions firstly
customers of its industry, and then to exploit them as workers. So it
was necessary to become the political master and leader of China. And
most experts in Eastern affairs did not doubt that Japan, with its
military power, its big industry, its proud self-reliance, would succeed
in dominating the impotent and divided Chinese empire.

But here the Japanese rulers met with a heavy reverse. First with the
unexpected tenacious resistance of the Chinese people, and then with a
mightier opponent. Mastery over the markets and the future development
of China is a life issue for American capitalism in its present state of
development. Notwithstanding the most careful and extensive preparations
Japan cannot match the colossal industrial resources of America, once
they are transformed into military potency. So its ruling class will
succumb. When the military power of Japan will be destroyed and its
arrogant capitalist barons have been beaten down, then for the first
time the Japanese people will be freed from the feudal forms of
oppression.

For Japan this will be the dawn of a new era. Whether the victorious
allies enforce a more modern form of government, or with the collapse of
the suppressing power a revolution of the peasants and the workers
breaks out, in every case the barbarous backwardness in living standards
and in ideas will have lost its basis. Of course, capitalism does not
disappear then; that will take a good deal yet of internal and world
fight. But the exploitation will assume more modern forms. Then the
Japanese working class will be able, on the same footing as their
American and European class-fellows, to take part in the general fight
for freedom.

### 4.2: The rise of China

China belongs to those densely populated fertile plains watered by great
rivers, where the necessity of a central regulation of the water for
irrigation and for protection by dykes, in the earliest time already
produced unification under a central government. It remained so for
thousands of years. Under a strong and careful government the land
rendered rich produce. But under a weak government, when the officials
neglected their duties, when governors and princes made civil war, the
dykes and canals fell into decay, the silted rivers overflowed the
fields, famine and robbers ravished the people, and "the wrath of
heaven" lay on the land. The population consisted chiefly of hard
toiling peasants, carefully tilling their small lots. Through the
primitive technics and the lack of cattle for ploughing, with the
hardest labor during long days they could produce hardly more than a
bare existence. The slight surplus produce was taken from them by the
ruling class of landowners, intellectuals and officials, the mandarins.
Since usually more even was taken from them, they often stood on the
brink of famine. The plains were open to the north, the Central-Asiatic
steppes, from where warlike nomads came invading and conquering. When
they conquered the land they became the new ruling class, formed a kind
of aristocracy, but were soon assimilated by the higher Chinese
civilization. So came the Mongols in the Middle Ages; so came in the
17th century the Manchus from the north-east, extended their empire in
the 18th century far over Central Asia, but fell into decay in the 19th
century.

In the numerous towns lived a large class of small artisans and dealers
with a proletarian class of coolies below and the wealthy class of
merchants above them. From the seaports, as well as on caravan routes to
the West across deserts and mountains, the precious wares of Chinese
origin: tea, silk and porcelain were exported, even into Europe. So
there was a middle class comparable with the European as to free
initiative in business. But in the Chinese peasants too lived the same
spirit of independence and self-reliance, far stronger than in the
Japanese, deeply curbed as they were under feudalism. If the oppression
of the officials, tax farmers, landlords or usurers became too heavy,
revolts broke out, increasing sometimes to revolutions, against which
the possessing class sought protection from foreign military powers; in
such a way the Manchus came into the country.

In the 19th century Western capitalism begins to attack and invade
China. The strict prohibition of opium import led to a war with Britain,
1840, and to the opening of a number of ports for European commerce.
This number increases in later wars and treaties; European merchants and
missionaries invade the country, and by their use and abuse of their
specially protected position incite the hatred of the population. Cheap
European wares are imported and undermine home handicraft; heavy war
contributions imposed upon China aggravate the tax burden. Thus
revolutionary movements flare up, such as the Taiping insurrection
(1853-1864), having its own emperor in Nanking, and the Boxer revolt,
1899; both were suppressed with the help of European military power,
which showed itself as barbarian destroyers of old Chinese culture. When
the war with Japan lays bare Chinese impotence, all the Western powers,
including Japan, seize parts of it as "concessions," tearing it asunder
in "spheres of influence." Foreign capital builds some few railways and
installs factories in the great harbor towns; Chinese capital, too,
begins to take part. And now the obsolete Manchu dynasty crumbles in
1911, and is replaced in name by a Chinese republic proclaimed in
Nanking, in reality, however, by the rule of provincial governors and
generals, the so-called "war lords," often upstart former bandit chiefs,
who now with their gang of soldiers in continuous wars pillage the
country.

For the rise of a Chinese capitalism the elements were present: a class
of wealthy or even rich merchants in the cities, mostly agents of
foreign capital, which could develop into a modern bourgeoisie; a
numerous class of poor urban proletarians and artisans, with a low
standard of life; and an enormous population as customers. Western
commercial capital, however, was not a driving force towards a
development to higher productivity; it exploited the primitive forms of
home industry for commercial profit, and impoverished the artisans by
its imports. Hence the dominating position of this Western capital, on
the way to make China into a colony, had to be repelled through
organization of the Chinese forces. This work of organization fell as
their task to the young intellectuals who had studied in England,
France, America or Japan, and had imbibed Western science and Western
ideas. One of the first spokesmen was Sun Yat-Sen, formerly a
conspirator persecuted by the Manchu government, a well-known figure in
European socialist circles, then the first President in name of the
Chinese republic. He designed a program of national unity, a mixture of
middle-class democracy and government dictatorship, and after his death
in 1925 he became a kind of saint of the new China. He founded the
Kuomintang, the political organization and leading party of the rising
Chinese bourgeoisie.

A strong impulse came from the Russian revolution. In 1920 students in
Paris and workers (chiefly miners, railway men, typos and municipal
workers) in Shanghai and Canton founded a Chinese Communist Party. Big
strikes broke out against the mostly foreign employers, and by their
exemplary solidarity the workers were able to get many of their demands
conceded by the powerful capital; often, however, the fight led to
bloody reprisals from the war lords. Now also the bourgeoisie took
heart; in the next years the Kuomintang allied itself with the communist
party and with Russia. Of course, the Chinese bourgeoisie did not
profess any inclination to communist ideas; but it felt that such an
alliance offered a lot of advantages. Merely by allowing them to shout
for liberty and communism it gained the service of the most active
groups of workers and enthusiastic young intellectuals for its purposes,
and found skilled Russian organizers from Moscow as "advisers," to lead
its fight and to instruct its cadres. Russia, moreover, gave it exactly
the slogans it needed for its liberation from the grip of the
all-powerful Western imperialism: the doctrine of world revolution
against world capital, especially against its chief exponent, the
English world power. Soon strictly enforced boycott and strike movements
undermined European business and commerce; a sharp anti-foreigner
excitation flooded the country; and from the interior, a terrified
flock, came a stream of white missionaries, dealers and agents, fleeing
to the seaports and the protection of the guns of the men-of-war. From
Canton, 1926, an expedition went to the North, partly military conquest,
partly intense nationalist propaganda campaign, "watering its horses in
the Yang-tse River," chasing the war lords or compelling them to join,
and uniting Central and Southern China into one state, with Nanking as
its capital.

But now the long smoldering and ever again suppressed fight of the
classes broke loose. The workers of the big towns, especially the
industrial workers of Shanghai, the emporium of the East, took communism
in its proletarian sense, as the workers' class fight. Their wages
hardly sufficed to appease direct hunger, their working time was 14 to
16 hours daily; now they tried to raise their miserable conditions by
striking, notwithstanding that Russian propaganda always had taught
coalition with the bourgeoisie. The C.P. of China had been instructed
from Moscow that the Chinese revolution was a middle-class revolution,
that the bourgeoisie had to be the future ruling class, and that the
workers simply had to assist her against feudalism and bring her into
power. The C.P. had followed this lesson, and so had entirely neglected
to organize and to arm the workers and the peasants against the
bourgeoisie. It kept faith with the Kuomintang, even when this party
ordered the generals to beat down the peasant revolts; so the communist
militants were left at a loss, wavering between contradictory class
sentiments and party commands. The mass actions that broke out in Canton
and Shanghai were quenched in blood by the Kuomintang armies of Chiang
Kai-shek, financed for that purpose by the Chinese and international
bankers. A sharp persecution of communism set in, thousands of spokesmen
and militants were slaughtered, the Russian "advisers" were sent home,
the workers' organizations were exterminated, and the most reactionary
parts of the bourgeoisie took the lead in government. These were chiefly
the groups of rich merchants, whose interests as agents of foreign
commercial and banking capital were bound to this capital and to the
preservation of the old conditions.

Communism in the meantime had spread over the countryside. During all
these years of anarchy the condition of the peasants had gone from bad
to worse. By the landlords and tax collectors they were stripped to the
bone; the war lords often demanded taxes for many years to come, and
when they had been driven out by others who demanded the same taxes
again, these were deposed safely in a foreign Shanghai banking house.
Nobody took care of the canals and the dykes; through floods and the
ensuing famine and pestilence uncounted millions perished. For some few
pieces of bread the famished peasants sold their land to full-stocked
hoarders and money lenders, and roamed as beggars or robbers through the
land. Under such conditions communism, in its Russian bolshevist form of
a workers and peasants republic, without capitalists, landlords and
usurers, was hailed and made rapid progress in the most distressed
provinces. At the same time that it was extinguished in the towns,
communism rose in the countryside as a mighty peasant revolt. Where it
won power it began already to drive out the landlords and to divide up
their land among the peasants and to establish Soviet rule. Part of the
armies, consisting chiefly of workers and peasants, joined by their
officers, mostly intellectuals sympathizing with the popular movement,
revolted against the reactionary Kuomintang policy, and formed the
nucleus of a Red Army.

The civil war, thus ensuing was waged by the Kuomintang government as a
campaign against the "communist bandits," who were branded with all
kinds of atrocities -- doubtless the rebellious peasants often were far
from soft against their tormentors -- and which had to be exterminated
before unity of the nation was possible. From the side of the peasants
it was a tenacious and heroic defense of their besieged chief territory
in the south-eastern provinces Kiangsi and Hunan. Every year again from
1930 onward, the war of extermination is resumed with ever larger
armies, and ever again it is frustrated by the superior skill, the
indomitable courage and the self-sacrificing enthusiasm of the red
troops that in careful and intrepid guerilla fighting had to win their
very arms from the routed enemy regiments. Meanwhile, Japan makes use of
this mutual destruction of Chinese military forces by occupying
consecutively Manchuria and the Northern provinces.

What may be the reason that the Chinese bourgeoisie so ferociously made
war upon the peasants and thereby squandered its military and financial
resources? If we speak, for shortness, of a Chinese bourgeoisie, we
should bear in mind that this class differs considerably from the
bourgeoisie of Europe, so that ideas instinctively associated with the
latter class are not all applicable here. In Europe the rising
bourgeoisie, a class of industrial and commercial employers and
capitalists, in a social revolution, assisted by the peasants, had to
break the political dominance of a landpossessing nobility. In China
this antagonism is lacking; the bourgeoisie itself was the
land-possessing class, and from herself came the ruling officials. On
account of the lack of a rapidly rising industry the rich urban
merchants and business men invested their money in land; and rent was as
important a source of their income as profit; on the reverse landowners
went into the town to set up a business. They combined the characters of
two opposite European classes. Thus the peasants' fight found its most
fitting expression in the communist slogan of fight against capitalism.
In its character of landowners subjection and exploitation of the
peasants was a life interest of the Chinese bourgeoisie; its deepest
feelings were affected by the land expropriation of the red soviets. So
the conservative elements of this class, who had first distrusted the
Kuomintang as a disguised red organization, as soon as possible expelled
the communists and made it an instrument of reactionary middle-class
politics. They felt the lack of power on the part of the Chinese
government to bring order into the chaos: so they sought support from
the strongest anti-communist power, from Japan. Japan, aiming at
dominance over the resources, the mineral riches and the labor power of
China, came forward as the protector of the landowning interests against
the rebellious masses. In every next treaty it imposed upon the Chinese
government the duty to exterminate communism.

Against this conservative there was, however, an opposite trend,
especially among the smaller bourgeoisie and the intellectuals. It
anticipated and represented the future; it gave expression not to what
the bourgeoisie had been till now, but to what it would be and should
be. Its spokesmen realized that a wealthy class of peasants with
purchasing power was the chief and necessary condition for a powerful
development of capitalist industry in China. Their middle-class feeling
understood instinctively that all these landowners and usurers
represented a piece of feudalism, barring the way to the future
development of China; and that a free landowning peasantry belongs to
the middle-class world and would form its solid basis. Hence, next to
and opposite to the conservative tendency there was a strong democratic
stream of thought among the rising Chinese bourgeoisie. It was strongly
nationalistic; the Japanese aggression, the seizure of precious
provinces in the North, and the haughty brutalities of Japanese
militarism filled it with indignation. It wished to end the civil war by
concessions to the peasants in order to unite all force in a common
resistance to Japanese imperialism.

Five years the extermination campaign lasted in Kiangsi, and, on a minor
scale, in other provinces, without success. The communist armies were
firmly rooted in the peasant population, among which they made extensive
educational propaganda, and from which ever new forces came to join
them. When at last their position against the besieging superior forces
ably led by German military advisers, became untenable, they broke
through the iron ring and invaded the South-western provinces. Then in
1934 the Red Army began its famous long march, over the highest, nearly
unpassable, mountain passes, across the wildest and most dangerous
rivers, through endless swampy steppes, through the extremes of heat and
cold, always surrounded and attacked by better equipped superior White
forces, until after heavy privations, heroic struggles and severe losses
it arrived, a year later, in the North-western provinces, where in
Shensi a new Soviet government was organized.

But now, in the meantime, tactics and aims had changed. Not against
capitalism and landlords the communist fight was directed in the first
place, but against Japan and Japanese imperialism. Before the start of
their long march already the C.P. of China had proposed, publicly, to
the Kuomintang to cease the civil war in order to fight in common the
Japanese aggression, in which case it would stop the expropriations and
respect the existing property rights, in exchange for social reform and
democratic rights of the people. But this offer had not been regarded.

This change of tactics has been sharply criticized in other countries as
an opportunistic renouncement of communist principles. Such criticism,
however, is based on the false supposition that the C.P. was a party of
industrial workers exploited by big capitalism. The Chinese C.P., and
still more the Red Army, however, consists of rebellious peasants. Not
the name stuck on a label outside, but the class character determines
the real content of thought and action. The party leaders saw quite well
that Japanese military power was the most dangerous threat to the
Chinese peasants, and that a coalition of the Chinese bourgeoisie with
Japan would make their liberation impossible. So it was imperative to
separate them and to direct all military and economic potencies of China
against Japan. To the red leaders the ideal of the future was a
democratic middle-class China, with free peasants as owners, or at least
well-to-do farmers of the soil. Under communist ideas and slogans they
were the heralds and champions of the capitalist development of China.

From these tendencies on both sides arose the new policy, in the
dramatic form of the capture, December, 1936, in Sianfu, of the
generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek by the government's own Manchurian troops,
who wanted to fight the Japanese rather than the Reds. The nationalist
leader, in involuntary discourses with the communist leaders, could make
certain that they were equally nationalist and middle-class minded as
himself, and were ready to put themselves under his command in a war
with Japan. When, then, the civil war ceased and the most reactionary
leaders were turned out of the government, Japan immediately drew the
consequences and began war with a heavy attack on Shanghai. China, with
its undeveloped sleeping resources at first sight might seem no match
for the tremendous, carefully prepared war machinery of Japan. But it
had trained armies now, it was filled with a strong nationalist spirit,
and it got war materials from England and America. To be sure, its
armies had to give way, the government had to retreat to Chunking in the
South-western province of Szechuan, and Japanese troops occupied the
Eastern towns. But behind their back ever new armies of partisans stood
up as guerilla and exhausted their forces. Till, in 1941, after the war
in Europe had gone on for nearly two years, the long foreseen conflict
between America and Japan broke out in consequence of America's
ultimatum that Japan should leave China. Thus the Chinese war became
part of the world war.

This world war means the rise of China as a new capitalist world power.
Not immediately as an independent power on an equal par with its allies,
Russia on the one, America on the other side, though it exceeds both in
population. Its economical and political dependence on America, to which
it is heavily in debt because of its war supplies, will mark the new
future; American capital will then have the lead in building up its
industry. Two great tasks are standing in the forefront; the
construction of railways and roads, combined with the production of
engines and motor cars, to modernize the primitive expensive traffic;
and introduction of mechanical power in agriculture to free the human
beast-of-burden and make its labor efficient. The accomplishment of
these tasks requires a big metal industry. China possesses all the
resources necessary for capitalist development. It has coal, iron and
other minerals, not enough to make it an industrial country for export
as England or Germany, but enough for its own needs. It has a dense
population with all the qualities necessary for capitalism: a strong
individualism, painstaking diligence, capability, spirit of enterprise,
and a low standard of needs. It has, moreover, a fertile soil, capable
of producing an abundance of products, but requiring security by wide
scientific care and regulation of the water, by constructing dykes and
excavating and normalizing the rivers.

The ideals and aims for which the working masses of China are fighting,
will of course not be realized. Landowners, exploitation and poverty
will not disappear; what disappears are the old stagnant, primitive
forms of misery, usury and oppression. The productivity of labor will be
enhanced; the new forms of direct exploitation by industrial capital
will replace the old ones. The problems facing Chinese capitalism will
require central regulations by a powerful government. That means forms
of dictatorship in the central government, perhaps complemented by
democratic forms of autonomy in the small units of district and village.
The introduction of mechanical force into agriculture requires the
conjunction of the small lots into large production units; whether by
gradual expropriation of the small peasants, or by the foundation of
co-operatives or kolchozes after the Russian model, will depend on the
relative power of the contending classes. This development will not go
on without producing deep changes in the economic, and thereby in the
social relations, the spiritual life and the old family structure. The
dimensions, however, of things there, of the country, of the population,
of its misery, of its traditions, of its old cultural life are so
colossal, that an innovation of conditions, even if taken up with the
utmost energy, will take many dozens of years.

The intensity of this development of economic conditions will stir the
energies and stimulate the activity of the classes. Corresponding to
capitalism the fight against capitalism will arise simultaneously. With
the growth of industry the fight of the industrial workers will spring
up. With the strong spirit of organization and great solidarity shown so
often by the Chinese proletarians and artisans, even a rise more rapid
than in Europe of a powerful working class movement may be expected. To
be sure, the industrial workers will remain a minority compared with the
mass of the agrarian population, equally subjected to capitalist
exploitation, though in another way. The mechanization of agriculture,
however, will weave strong ties between them, manifesting itself in the
community of interests and fights. So the character of the fight for
freedom and mastery may take in many regards another aspect in China
than in Western Europe and America.

### 4.3: The colonies

When socialism grew up, half a century ago, the general expectation was
that the liberation of the colonial peoples would take place together
with the liberation of the workers. The colonies there and the workers
here were exploited by the same capitalism; so they were allies in the
fight, against the common foe. It is true that their fight for freedom
did not mean freedom for the entire people; it meant the rise of a new
ruling class. But even then it was commonly accepted, with only
occasional doubts, that the working class in Europe and the rising
bourgeoisie in the colonies should be allies. For the communist party
this was still more self-evident; it meant that the new ruling class of
Russia looked upon the future ruling classes in the colonies as its
natural friends, and tried to help them. Certainly the forces for
colonial liberation were still weak. In India, with its 300 millions of
people, industry and a class of employers gradually developed, giving
the basis for an independence movement, that suffers, however, from the
great diversity of races and religions. The 50 millions population of
Java is well-nigh homogeneous, but entirely agrarian, and the opposition
was till recently restricted to small groups of intellectuals.

These colonial peoples are no savages or barbarians, as the tribes of
central Africa or the inhabitants of remote Indian islands. They live
densely crowded in fertile areas with a highly developed agriculture.
Often they have a thousand years old civilization; there is a separation
between a ruling class of priests and nobility spending their portion of
the total product in often refined artistic and spiritual culture, and
the subjugated masses of heavily exploited peasants. Foreign warlike
peoples invaded India and formed new upper social layers; incessant wars
between larger and smaller princes checked the increase of the
population. Agriculture was the chief occupation; because during many
months agricultural labor had to rest, there was also an important
cottage industry in the villages. This handicraft, artistic and highly
developed, differing according to natural produce, raw materials and
inherited endowments in different regions, produced a large amount of
goods for export. Cotton goods, fine dyed cloths in many designs, silk
wares, goldsmiths' and copper wares, beautifully decorated swords formed
the contents of an extensive trade over Southern and Eastern Asia, and
far to the West, even into Europe. Here the precious colored textile
wares from the East, chiefly from Indian village industry, formed the
main part of medieval traffic, produced the materials for the dress of
princes, nobility and rich bourgeoisie, up to the 18th century, and
brought a continuous flow of gold from Europe to India.

Against the invading European capitalism the Indian countries, mostly
divided into small states, were soon powerless. The armed Western
merchant vessels began to monopolize forcibly the entire trade of the
Indian seas, with its enormous profits. Thereafter direct conquest and
pillage brought the accumulated riches of Eastern treasuries into the
hands of Western officials and adventurers, and contributed in England
in the 18th century to form the capital needed in the industrial
revolution. More important still was regular exploitation by enforced
delivering of precious products -- on the Molucca islands of spices, on
Java of pepper, indigo, sugar -- for which hardly anything was paid, a
few coppers for what in Europe brought hundreds of florins. The
population had to spend a great deal of its time and of its soil in
these products for export, thus leaving not enough for their own food;
famine and revolts were the result. Or heavy taxes were imposed upon the
people of India, to procure high incomes for a parasitical class of
English officials and nabobs. At the same time England employed its
political power to forbid, in the interest of the Lancashire cotton
industry, the export of Indian textile goods. Thus the flourishing
Indian cottage industry was destroyed and the peasants were still more
impoverished. The result was that in the 19th century, and even up to
the present day, for the majority of the villagers life is a continuous
state of hunger. Famines and pestilences, formerly unavoidable local
occurrences, now take place in devastated larger regions and more often.
But also in normal times in the villages and urban slums a state of
misery reigns, worse than at any time in Europe.

The essence of colonial policy is exploitation of foreign countries
while preserving their primitive forms of production or even lowering
their productivity. Here capital is not a revolutionary agent developing
production to higher forms; just the reverse. European capital is here a
dissolving agent, destroying the old modes of work and life without
replacing them by better technics. European capital, like a vampire,
clasps the defenseless tropical peoples and sucks their life blood
without caring whether the victims succumb.

Western science of course demonstrates that the domination of colonies
by the Europeans is based on nature, hence is a necessity. The basis is
formed by the difference of climate. In cool and moderate climes man can
extort his living from nature by continuous exertion only; the
temperature allows of assiduous hard working; and the inconstancy of the
phenomena, the irregular change from storm and rain to sunshine
stimulates the energy into restless activity. Labor and energy became
the gospel of the white race; so it gained its superior knowledge and
technics that made it master of the earth. In the hot tropical and
sub-tropical countries, on the contrary, nature by itself or with slight
labor bears abundant fruit; here the heat makes every continuous
exertion a torment. Here the dictum could originate that to eat his
bread in the sweat of his brow was the worst curse to man. The
monotonous equality of the weather, only interrupted at the change of
seasons, deadens the energy; the white people, too, when staying too
long in the tropics, are subjected to these influences that render
laziness the chief characteristic and Nirvana the highest ideal. These
dicta of science doubtless are true, theoretically. But practically we
see that the Indian and Javanese peasants till their soil and perform
their handicraft with unflagging zeal and painstaking assiduity. Not, of
course, in the nerve-racking tempo of modern factory work; economic
necessity determines the character of their labor.

The Western bourgeoisie considers its rule over the colonies a natural
and lasting state of things, idealizing it into a division of tasks;
profitable to both parties. The energetic intelligent race from the cool
climes, it says, serves as the leaders of production, whereas the lazy,
careless colored races execute under their command the unintelligent
manual labor. Thus the tropical products, indispensable raw materials
and important delicacies are inserted into the world's commerce. And
European capital wins its well deserved profits because by its
government it assures to the fatalistic aborigines life, security, peace
and, by its medical service and hygienic measures, health, too. Suppose
this idyll of a paternal government, honest illusion or deceptive talk
of theorists and officials, to be as true as in reality it is impossible
under capitalist rule, then still it would be faced by an insoluble
dilemma: If by the cessation of wars, epidemics and infant mortality the
population increases, there results a shortage of arable land
notwithstanding all the irrigation and reclaiming that only postpones
the conflict. Industrialization for export, properly speaking an
unnatural way out for the most fertile lands, can give only temporary
relief. Into such a final state every population that, ruled from above,
is left to its own life instincts, must arrive. Every economic system
develops its own system of population increase. If by an autocratic rule
from above the feelings of responsibility are suppressed, then any
active force of self-restraint and self-rule over the conditions of life
is extinguished. The impending clash between increase of population and
restriction of means of subsistence can find its solution only in a
strong display of inner energy and will-power of a people, consequence
of its self-reliance and freedom, or of an active fight for freedom.

In the later part of the 19th century and thereafter it is not the
commercial capital in the first place that exploits the colonies.
Capitalist enterprises come forth in ever greater numbers: partly
agricultural and mining enterprises for cultivating rubber, coffee, tea,
for winning oil, tin and other metals, partly industrial or mixed
enterprises to work the tropical raw materials, such as textile or sugar
factories. It is mostly European capital, drawing high profits from this
exploitation. In India, where in such towns as Bombay lived a class of
rich merchants, these also take part and constitute a first instance of
a modern Indian bourgeoisie. This Indian industry consists well nigh
exclusively of textile factories; and from all the textile goods
consumed in India nearly 60 per cent is imported from England and Japan,
20 per cent comes from the cottage industry, and only 20 per cent is
provided by Indian factories. Yet to exhibit and introduce aspects of
modern work and life is sufficient inspiration to a nationalist
movement, for throwing off the yoke of the Western rulers. Its spokesmen
are the intellectuals, especially the younger generation, who are
acquainted with Western science, and in opposition to it study and
emphasize with strong conviction their own national culture. They feel
deeply hurt by the racial haughtiness of the whites, who admit them in
lower offices only; they come forward as the leaders of the oppressed
masses, involving them into their fight for independence. Since the
impudent riches of the rulers contrasts so sharply with the abject
misery of the masses, this is not difficult. Though as yet the fight can
only be peaceful propaganda, passive resistance, and non-co-operation,
i.e., the refusal of collaboration with the English government, it
alarms public opinion in England, inspiring so much apprehension in the
rulers there that they resort to vague promises of self-government, and
at the same time to sharp persecutions. The movement, of course, is too
weak still to throw off the domination of Western capitalism. With the
capitalist factories a class of industrial workers is coming into being
with extremely low wages and an incredibly low standard of living;
strikes occurred against Indian, as well as against European employers.
But compared with the immense population all this is an insignificant
start, important only as indication of future development.

With the present world war colonial exploitation, as well as the problem
of liberation, acquires a new aspect. Against the enormously increasing
power of capitalism a fight for independence in its old meaning has no
longer any chance. On the other hand, it is probable that from now on
world capital under American hegemony will act as a revolutionary agent.
By a more rational system of exploitation of these hundreds of millions
of people capital will be able to increase its profits considerably; by
following another way than the previous primitive impoverishing methods
of plunder, by raising labor in the colonies to a higher level of
productivity, by better technics, by improvement of traffic, by
investing more capital, by social regulations and progress in education.
All of this is not possible without according a large amount of
independence or at least self-rule to the colonies.

Self-rule of the colonies, of India, and of the Malayan islands, has
already been announced. It means that parliaments in Europe and viceroys
sent from thither can no longer govern them despotically. It does not
mean that politically the working masses will be their own masters, that
as free producers they will dispose of their means of production.
Self-rule relates to the upper classes of these colonies exclusively;
not only will they be inserted into the lower ranks of administration,
but they will occupy the leading places, assisted of course by white
"advisers" and experts, to ensure that capital interests are served in
the right way. Already from the upper classes of India a rather numerous
group of intellectuals has proceeded, quite capable as ruling officials
to modernize political and social life.

To characterize modern capitalist production as a system wherein the
workers by their own free responsibility and will-power are driven to
the utmost exertion, the expression was often used that a free worker is
no coolie. The problem of Asia now is to make the coolie a free worker.
In China the process is taking its course; there the workers of olden
times possessed a strong individualism. In tropical countries it will be
much more difficult to transform the passive downtrodden masses, kept in
deep ignorance and superstition by heavy oppression, into active
well-instructed workers capable of handling the modern productive
apparatus and forces. Thus capital is faced with many problems.
Modernization of the government apparatus through self-rule is
necessary, but more is needed: the possibility of social and spiritual
organization and progress, based on political and social rights and
liberties, on sound general instruction. Whether world capital will be
able and willing to follow this course cannot be foreseen. If it does,
then the working classes of these countries will be capable of
independent fighting for their class interests and for freedom along
with the Western workers.

To all the peoples and tribes living in primitive forms of production in
Africa, in Asia, in Australia, it will, of course, mean an entire change
of the world, when the working class will have annihilated capitalism.
Instead of as hard exploiting masters and cruel tyrants, the white race
will come to them as friends to help them and to teach them how to take
part in the progressing development of humanity.

### 4.4: Russia and Europe

With this war Russia, the Federation of Socialist Soviet Republics, as
it calls itself, has made its entry among the recognized capitalist
powers. In the Western countries an entire change has taken place in
valuation of and attitude towards Russia and bolshevism. Certainly, the
first fear of a communist revolution and the accompanying calumnies had
already died away gradually in the ruling classes. Yet they were not
quite at ease about their workers, and since the talk of the C.P. on
world revolution went on, reports of forged atrocities and real
cruelties were a motive to exclude Russia from the community of
civilized nations. Until they needed Russia as an ally against Germany;
then sentiment made a turn, though at first only in the kind wish that
both dictatorships might devour one another. Then there they met
governing politicians, officials, generals and officers, factory
directors, intellectuals, an entire well-dressed, civilized, well-to-do
class ruling the masses, just as at home. So they were reassured. The
church only kept aloof, because of the bolshevist anti-religious
propaganda.

The similarity of political forms and methods of government in Russia
and Germany strikes the eye at first sight. In both the same
dictatorship of a small group of leaders, assisted by a powerful
well-organized and disciplined party, the same omnipotence of the ruling
bureaucracy, the same absence of personal rights and of free speech, the
same levelling of spiritual life into one doctrine, upheld by terrorism,
the same cruelty towards opposition or even criticism. The economic
basis, however, is different. In Russia it is state capitalism, in
Germany state-directed private capitalism. In Germany there is a
numerous class of owners of the means of production, a bourgeoisie,
which, because of the difficulty of the fight for world power, gave
itself a tyrannical dictatorship; it is augmented by an increasing
bureaucracy of officials. In Russia bureaucracy is master of the means
of production. The conformity in the necessary forms of practical rule
and administration, domination from above, gave them the same system of
dictatorship.

There is similarity also in the character of their propaganda. Both make
use of the ideology of community, because both represent organized
against unorganized capitalism. As in Russia, the antithesis to old
capitalism was expressed in the catchword of communism, so in Germany by
socialism. These are the names under which, in extensive propaganda, the
fight for their own power against the old capitalist powers is urged
upon the masses as a fight against capitalism. Thus they present
themselves as more than a mere nationalism, they proclaim new world
principles, fit for all countries, to be realized by world-revolution
and world war against the exponents of the old order, English and
American capitalism. So they find adherents to their cause, followers of
their party, within the country of their opponents, ready to undermine
from within their power of resistance.

As similar hostile rivals they find a basis for their opposition in
their origin and the consequent traditions. National socialism came to
power as an agent of big capitalism, wiping out the old labor movement,
in conscious sharp antagonism to the "Marxian" trends of
social-democracy and communism. In their own country only it could
proclaim itself a party of the workers and impose by terror-propaganda
this trickery upon uncritical adherents. The Russian ideology proceeded
directly from a revolution made by the workers under the communist
banner, and appealed to Marxian doctrines that had been adapted to its
cause; but in foreign countries only could it find belief that indeed it
represented dictatorship of the workers. Here it could impose upon young
people desirous to fight capitalism and exploitation, whereas
national-socialism was considered everywhere as a genuine enemy of the
workers, and found sympathy only among the upper and lower part of the
bourgeoisie.

The foreign policy of the Russian revolution was a logical consequence
of its basic ideas. Though a socialist community has no wishes but to
live in peace besides other peoples, it is in danger of being attacked
by capitalist states. Hence, it must prepare for war. Moreover, world
revolution, annihilation of capitalism all over the world remains the
supreme aim; only in this way, by liberating the workers elsewhere, the
socialist state can secure its own freedom. So the socialist state arms
and prepares for war, not only for defense, but also for attack. And
with surprise naive idealists perceive that what seemed a haven of peace
reveals itself a power for war. And they ask whether indeed compulsion
by the sword can bring freedom to others.

The contradiction is easily explained. What is named state-socialism
discloses itself as state-capitalism, the rule of a new exploiting
class, bureaucracy, master of the production apparatus, as in other
countries the bourgeoisie. It, too, lives on surplus value. The larger
its realm, its power, the larger its share, its wealth. Thus, for this
bureaucracy war assumes the same significance as for the bourgeoisie. It
takes part in the world contest of powers, on the same footing as other
States, but with the pretension to be the world-champion of the working
class. And though in view of the allied governments it cannot make too
much show of it, and temporarily even silences the Comintern, yet it
knows that in all foreign countries communist parties are working on its
behalf. Thus the role of Russia in and after the war begins to depict
itself. Behind the old now deceitful aims of extending the realm of
communism stands the reality of extending the own international power.
If the German bourgeoisie tries to steer its course in the track of
England and America, the working class, prevented during long years from
finding its own new way, may produce communist parties as agents of
Russian hegemony over the Mid-European regions.

This policy and position among the other capitalist powers has its basis
in an inner change of policy in Russia itself. State capitalism has
consolidated its power in and through the war, the completion of the
preceding development. Since the revolution there was a continual
struggle between the socially important groups. First, State
bureaucracy, with the Communist Party as its organ, being master of the
industrial production, in a hard fight subdued the peasants in its
campaign of founding the kolchoses. Besides them, however, stood the
army officers and the numerous technical experts and officials in the
factories, commonly called the engineers. They had an important function
as technical leaders of the production, they had their own union, and
were mostly non-party men. The well-known trials of engineers on forged
charges of sabotage were an episode in the silent struggle; they were
condemned not because they had committed the imputed crimes, but for
intimidation and to forestall any attempt at independent political
action. In the same way in the trial of General Tukhachevsky and other
officers all elements from whom independent action was feared, were shot
and replaced by others. Thus the political bureaucracy remained master,
but it had to regard the other groups.

The war made a unification of all these forces necessary, and at the
same time possible, on the basis of a strong nationalism aspiring to
expansion. In the preceding years some so-called reforms had been
proclaimed, though by the absence of free speech and free press they had
no meaning for the working masses; they now could afford an opportunity
for non-party men to take part in the governing apparatus. Party rule
and Comintern was pushed into the background. Now under a firmly
consolidated ruling class the masses, as in every capitalist state,
could be led to the front in well-disciplined gigantic armies.

At the same time the war has brought about an increase of the spiritual
influence of bolshevism in Western Europe. Not among the bourgeoisie;
now that organized big capitalism is becoming master of the world it has
not the least inclination to make way for state capitalism. Not very
much among the workers; in the beginning the recognition perforce of the
communist parties by the governments may increase its credit among
workers dominated by nationalism; but its support of government policy,
however masked by a seeming of wild opposition talk, will soon discredit
it among the fighting masses of the working class. Among the Western
intellectuals, however, Russian bolshevism attracts ever more attention.

Under the rule of big capitalism it is the class of intellectuals that
has the technical lead of production, and the spiritual lead of society
in its hands. Now it begins to ask -- in so far as it is not entirely
occupied by its narrow personal job -- why shareholders and stock
jobbers should have the upper command over production. It feels itself
called upon to lead social production as an organized process, to throw
off the dominance of a parasitical bourgeoisie and to rule society. It
is divided, however, in a series of higher and lower ranks, arranged
after usefulness or what else; they form a ladder on which, in mutual
rivalry, one may ascend by ambition, capacities, favor or cunning. The
lower and badly paid ranks among them may join the fight of the working
class against capital. Its higher and leading elements, of course, are
hostile to any idea of mastery by the workers over the process of
production. Their prominent thinkers and learned scholars, often refined
or ingenious spirits, strongly feel their superiority threatened by the
phantom of a general "levelling." The intellectual class feels quite
well that its ideal of social order cannot exist without a strong power
apparatus, to keep down private capital, but chiefly to keep down the
working masses. What they want is a moderate dictatorship, strong enough
to resist attempts to revolution, civilized enough to dominate the
masses spiritually and to assure a rational liberty of speech and
opinion to the civilized; anyhow, without the rough violence that made
national socialism the object of hatred all over Europe. A free road to
the talented, and society led by the intellectual elite, such is the
social ideal rising in this class.

This they see realized to a fair extent, though mixed up with barbarous
remnants, in the Russian system. And the Russians have exerted
themselves to promote such ideas. Soon after the revolution already
scientific congresses were organized where the assembled scholars from
all countries were regally entertained -- though there was dearth in the
land -- and got the most favorable impression of the young enthusiasm
and the fresh energy bestowed by the new-shaped society upon science and
technics. Of the Solovki camps, where the deported peasants and workers
are ill-treated till they perish, of course, nothing was shown to them,
nor did they know of the deadly hard labor of millions of victims in the
icy wilds of Siberia; probably not even the ordinary "black workers" in
the factories did they meet with. Such inspiring experiences could not
but strongly impress the younger Western intellectuals; what trickled
through about atrocities was easily effaced by the splendor of
increasing production figures in the world-wide propaganda of the C.P.
And now the military successes of the Russian armies enhance the image
of Russia as a vigorous civilized modern State.

So we may surmise something about the future of Russia and Bolshevism in
Europe. In its antagonism to the Western powers of private capitalism,
England and America, its ideology may serve as a valuable weapon to
undermine the solid power of their bourgeoisie, by rousing, in case of
need, working class opposition against her. As a recognized respectable
party the C.P. will try to win posts of influence in politics, either in
competition or in collaboration with social democracy; by a seeming show
of sparkling opposition talk it seeks to gather the workers in its fold,
to deter them from taking their own road to freedom. As it does already
now, it will try, by a quasi-scientific propaganda among intellectuals,
to win them over to some bolshevist kind of dictatorial government, and
adorn it, may be, with the mark world-revolution.

More direct and important will be the Russian influence upon Central
Europe. In the wake of the annihilation of military power comes economic
slavery. To impose as much as possible of the burdens on the defeated
foe, through the necessity of restoration and compensation of the
immeasurable wanton destruction and pillages by the German armies, not
only all property, so far as it is left, will be seized, but also all
the peoples in so far as they are left, will be harnessed under the yoke
of hard labor. The victors probably will not, as after the first world
war, leave to the German bourgeoisie the possession of the production
apparatus and the rule of the country.

Before, then, an effective fight for their cause will be possible to the
Central European workers, a deep change in their thinking and willing
must take place. They are faced not only by the formidable physical
power of victorious world capitalism, but they will also encounter
extreme difficulty in resisting the spiritual forces of Bolshevism on
the one side, nationalism on the other side, to find the way clear to
their class task. In this fight they must involve the Russian workers.
Russian State capitalism, as well, has been exhausted and ravaged by the
war; to restore itself it will have to lay a harder pressure upon the
workers. So the Russian workers will be compelled to take up the fight
for freedom, for liberation out of slavery, as a new great task, the
same as the workers all over the world.

### 4.5: In the abyss

The second world war has thrown society into an abyss deeper than any
former catastrophe. In the first world war the contending capitalisms
stood against one another as Powers of old form, waging war in old
forms, only on a larger scale and with improved technics. Now the war
has reversed the inner structures of the States, and new political
structures have arisen; now the war is a "total war," into which all
forces of society are linked up as its subordinate means.

In and through this war society is thrown back to a lower level of
civilization. That is not so much because of the immense sacrifices of
life and blood. During the entire period of civilization -- i.e., the
period of written history and of the division of society into exploiting
and exploited classes, between the primitive tribal life and the future
world unity of mankind -- war was the form of the struggle for
existence. So it is quite natural that the last world fights, before the
final consolidation drawing along all people, should embrace greater
names and be more bloody than any former war.

What makes this retrogressive is first the regress from military and
juridical norms that in the 19th century gave a certain appearance of
humanity to warfare. The enemies were nominally considered as equal
humans and soldiers, political rights of vanquished or occupied
countries were recognized, national sentiments respected; civilians
usually stood outside the fighting. In international treaties on "the
laws of war" these principles were endorsed, and however often violated,
they stood out as international law, that could be appealed to against
the arbitrariness of a victor. Total war tramples on all these scraps of
paper. Not only are all supplies seized and all industry is put into the
service of the conqueror, not only are prisoners of war set to work for
the enemy, but on an ever larger scale all people from occupied regions
are forcibly, in a real slave hunting, dragged off to work in the German
war industry. So, by producing arms for the foe, they are constrained to
aid him against their own nation; at the same time relieving the enemy's
workers for service at the front. Now that war is a matter of industrial
production, slave labor becomes one of the foundations of warfare.

It is natural that in the occupied countries -- half of Europe --
resistance sprang up, and it is natural that it was suppressed severely,
even when it consisted only in tentative first traces. It is not
natural, however, that in the repression such a height of cruelty was
reached, as first applied in the rough mishandling and extermination of
the Jewish citizens and then extended to all national opposition. The
German soldier, himself an unwilling slave of the dictatorial apparatus,
develops into a master and instrument of oppression. As a filthy
contamination the habits of violence and outrage spread over the
continent, wakening an immense hatred against the German occupants.

In former wars occupation of a foreign country was considered a
temporary situation, and international law expressed it in this way,
that the occupant was not allowed to change anything in the fundamental
law of the country, and only took the administration in its hands
insofar as war conditions necessitated it. Now, however, Germany
interfered everywhere in the existing institutions, trying to impose the
national-socialist principles, pretending it was the beginning of a new
era for the entire Europe in which all the other countries as allies,
i.e., vassals, had to follow Germany. Underlings it found in the small
number of foreign adherents to its creed, and the larger number who saw
their chance now; they were made rulers over their compatriots and
exhibited the same spirit of wanton violence. The same spiritual tyranny
as in Germany itself is imposed; and especially in the Western
countries, with their large civil liberties, this arouses an increasing
embitterment, that found expression in underground literature. Neither
the silly fiction of the unity of the Teutonic race nor the argument of
the united continent of Europe made any impression.

The fall into barbarity is due, firstly, to the destructive power of
modern war machinery. More than in any previous time all industrial and
productive power of society, all ingenuity and devotion of men is put
into the service of the war. Germany, as the aggressive party, set the
example; it perfected the air weapon into bombers that destroyed, with
factories of war supplies, the surrounding city quarters. It did not
foresee at the time that the steel production of America many times
surpassed that of Germany, so that the system of destruction, once that
America would have transformed its industrial into military power, would
fall back with multiple vehemence upon Germany itself. In the first
world war much lamenting was heard about Ypres being destroyed and some
French cathedrals damaged; now, first in England and France, and then on
a larger scale in Germany, towns and factory quarters, grand monuments
of architecture, remnants of irretrievable mediaeval beauty, went to
rack and ruin. Week after week the wireless boasted of how many
thousands of tons of explosives were thrown upon German towns. As an
instrument of terror to bring the German population upon its knees, or
to rouse the desire for peace into resistance to the leaders, these
bombardments were a failure. On the contrary, through the exasperation
over the wanton destruction and killings a disheartened population was
bound the firmer to its rulers. They rather gave the impression as if
the Allied rulers, sure about their industrial and military superiority,
wished to prevent a revolution of the German people against the
national-socialist rulers which would have led to milder peace
conditions, preferring to beat down German attempts at world power once
and for all by a downright military victory.

Besides the material, the spiritual devastation perpetrated among
mankind represents no smaller fall into barbarity. The levelling of all
spiritual life, of speech and writing to one prescribed creed, and the
forcible suppression of any different opinion has grown in and through
the war into a complete organization of falsehood and cruelty.

Censoring of the press had already proved necessary in former wars to
prevent sensational news harmful to the warfare of the country. In later
times, when the entire bourgeoisie felt keenly nationalist and closely
bound to the government, the papers felt it their duty to collaborate
with the military authorities in upholding morale by optimistic
statements, in criticizing and abusing the enemy, and in influencing the
neutral press. But censorship became more needed than before to suppress
resistance on the part of the workers, now that the war brought a
heavier pressure of long hours and of shortness of provisions. When
propaganda is needed, artificially to rouse in the people enthusiasm for
war, counter propaganda revealing the capitalist background of the war
cannot be tolerated. So we see in the first world war the press turned
into an organ of the army staff, with the special task to uphold the
submissiveness of the masses, as well as the fighting spirit.

In the present war this may still represent the state of things on the
Allied side; but on the other side it is far surpassed by the adaptation
to war conditions of the already existing department of propaganda, with
its staff of artists, authors and intellectuals. Now its system of
directing opinion, raised to the utmost perfection and extended over
Europe, reveals its full efficiency. By stating its own case as the case
of highest right, truth and morals, by relating every action of the foe
as an act of weakness, or of baseness, or of embarrassment, an
atmosphere of faith and victory is created. It proved itself capable of
transfiguring the most obvious defeat into a brilliant success, and to
represent the beginning of collapse as the dawning of final victory, and
thus to inspire stubborn fighting and to postpone the final collapse.
Not that people accept it all as truth; they are suspicious of anything
they hear; but they see the resolution in the leaders and feel powerless
through lack of organization.

Thus the German masses are the victims of a system growing more violent
and more mendacious as ruin approaches. So the destruction of the power
of German capitalism will be accompanied by the aimless destruction and
new slavery of the German people, not by its rise to a new fight for a
new world of real freedom.

As a destructive catastrophe, the reign of national-socialism passed
over Germany and the surrounding countries. A torrent of organized
cruelty and organized falsehood has flooded Europe. As a poisonous taint
they have infected mind, will and character of the peoples. They are the
mark of new dictatorial capitalism, and their effect will long be felt.
They are not a chance degeneration; they are due to special causes
characteristic of the present times. Whoever recognizes as their deepest
cause the will of big capital to keep and to extend its domination over
mankind, knows that they will not disappear with the end of the war.
Nationalism excited to red heat everywhere, imputing all this to the bad
racial character of the foe, thereby rousing stronger national hatred,
will always be a fertile soil for new violence, material and spiritual.

The fall into barbarity is not a biological atavism to which mankind
might be subjected at any time. The mechanism of how it came to work
lies open to the view. The reign of falsehood does not mean that what is
said and written is all lies. By emphasizing part of the truth and
omitting other parts the total can turn into untruth. Often it is
combined with the conviction of its truth on the part of the speaker.
Doubtless, it holds for everybody that what he says is never the
objective, material, all-sided truth, but always subjective truth, a
colored personal, one-sided image of reality. Where all these
subjective, personal, hence incomplete, partial truths compete, control
and criticize one another, and where most people thereby are compelled
to self-criticism, there arises out of them a more general aspect which
we accept as the nearest approach to objective truth. If, however, this
control is taken away and criticism is made impossible, whilst only one
special opinion is put forward, the possibility of objective truth
entirely vanishes. The reign of falsehood finds its essential basis in
the suppression of free speech.

Cruelty in action often is accompanied by ardent devotion to new
principles, that is, irritated by its failure to make progress rapidly
enough. In normal society there is no other way than patient propaganda
and the thorough self-education in working out arguments. If, however,
dictatorship gives to the few power over the many, then, excited by the
fear of losing this power, it tries to obtain its aims through
increasing violence. The reign of cruelty finds its essential basis in
the dictatorial power of a minority. If we wish that in the coming
times, in the fight of classes and peoples, the downfall into barbarity
be prevented, these are the things we must oppose with all energy;
dictatorial power of a small group or party, and suppression or
limitation of free speech.

The storm now sweeping over the earth has raised new problems and new
solutions. Besides the spiritual devastation it brought spiritual
renovation, new ideas in economic and social organization, most
conspicuous among them ideas on new forms of suppression, dominance and
exploitation. These lessons will not be lost to world capital; its fight
will be more tenacious, its rule stronger by using these new methods. On
the other side in the workers a stronger consciousness will dawn of how
completely their liberation is bound up with the opposite factors. Now
they feel in the body how much the reign of organized falsehood hampers
them in gaining the simplest inkling of the knowledge they need, how
much the reign of organized terror makes their organization impossible.
Stronger than ever before the will and the strength will arise in them
to keep open the gates to knowledge by fighting for freedom of speech
against any attempt to restrict it; to keep open the gate to class
organization by refusing and repelling any attempt at forcible
suppression, in whatever guise of proletarian interest it may present
itself.

In this second world war the workers' movement has fallen much deeper
than in the first. In the first world war its weakness, so sharply in
contrast with former pride and boasting, manifested itself in that it
was dragged along, that deliberately, by its own will, it followed the
bourgeoisie and turned into underlings of nationalism. This character
persisted in the next quarter of a century, with its idle talk and party
intrigue, though gallant fighting in strikes occurred. In the present
war the working class had no will of its own any more to decide on what
to do; it was already incorporated into the entirety of the nation. As
they are shuffled to and fro over factories and shops, uniformed and
drilled, commanded to the fronts, mixed up with the other classes, all
essence of the former working class has disappeared. The workers have
lost their class; they do not exist as a class any more;
class-consciousness has been washed away in the wholesale submission of
all classes under the ideology of big capital. Their special
class-vocabulary: socialism, community has been adopted by capital for
its dissimilar concepts.

This holds good especially for Central Europe, where in former times the
workers' movement looked more powerful than anywhere else. In the
Western countries there remains a sufficient amount of class feeling
soon to find them back on the road to fight in the transformation of war
industry to peace industry. Encumbered, however, with the heavy load of
old forms and traditions, leading to battle in the old forms, it will
have some difficulty to find its way to the new forms of fight. Still,
the practical needs of the struggle for existence and working conditions
will, more or less gradually, compel it to put up and clarify the new
aims of conquering the mastery over production. Where, however,
dictatorship has reigned and has been destroyed by foreign military
power, there under new conditions of oppression and exploitation, a new
working class must first take its rise. There a new generation will grow
up, for whom the old names and catchwords have no meaning any longer.
Certainly, it will be difficult under foreign domination to keep the
class feeling free and pure from nationalism. But with the collapse of
so many old conditions and traditions, the mind will be more open to
direct influence of the new realities. Every doctrine, every device and
catchword will be taken, not at its face value, but at its real content.

More powerful than before, capitalism will tower after the war. But
stronger also the fight of the working masses, sooner or later, will
arise over against it. It is inevitable that in this fight the workers
will aim at mastery over the shops, mastery over production, dominance
over society, over labor, over their own life. The idea of self-rule
through workers' councils will take hold of their minds, the practice of
self-rule and workers' councils will determine their actions. So from
the abyss of weakness they will rise to a new unfolding of power. Thus a
new world will be built up. A new era is coming after the war, not of
tranquility and peace, but of constructive class fight.

## 5: The peace

### 5.1: Towards new war

Hardly had Berlin fallen, hardly had the German power been annihilated,
when in the American press well nigh unanimously a new war cry arose,
proclaiming Russia the new enemy. With all the armies still in the
field, a panic of new war spread over the exhausted tormented world. The
new weapon, the atomic bomb, that had turned into dust two big
industrial towns and killed at one stroke a hundred thousand people,
struck terror into the hearts of civilized mankind and made the
Americans realize their own insecurity. "There is no secret, and there
is no defense," was the verdict of the atomic physicists who had
constructed the bomb; in a couple of years every government can have
them made, and they can be carried across the oceans or easily smuggled
into America. An intensive campaign in the "Security Council of the
United Nations" for eliminating the threat was started. America proposed
to establish an international, supernational board or authority, sole
master of dangerous material all over the world, qualified to inspect
manufacture in every country. The Russian Government refused to admit
such a committee with such powers into its territory and demanded that
first America should destroy all its atomic bombs and give up its
supremacy.

Why could not the Russian Government agree to an international control?
Russian scientists, speaking for their rulers, said that Russia, the
only country free from capitalism, must keep strictly to its
sovereignty, cannot take part in a capitalist world unity, cannot suffer
its socialism to be corrupted by capitalist-minded inspecting
authorities. One would say that to open up their happier and progressive
way of life to the view of the rest of the world should only propagate
their economic system. So the Russian rulers' true reason for shunning a
close contact of their subjects with the peoples of freer private
capitalism must be that there is, besides war secrets, too much to
conceal. During and after the war so many more details have come to
light about conditions in Russia: the general low standard of living of
the masses, the wide divergence between low wages of the workers and
high salaries of the political and technical leaders, the concentration
camps, where ten or more millions of people are starved and worked to
death under the most horrible working conditions. The existence of this
immense army of slave-laborers testifies that besides the much praised
highly technical sector of Russian economy there is a large sector
consisting of unskilled forced labor of the lowest level of
productivity. It means a state of economic backwardness, not suspected
before beneath the glorifying figures of five-year plans and
stackhanovism, an inner weakness beneath the apparent progress. Whereas
organization and skilful planning, according to either admiring or
hostile socialist opinion in the Western world should imply a higher
form of production system, the effect seems to be frustrated to a high
degree by the secret police, essential instrument of dictatorship, that
ever endangers the security and state of life of any member of the
technical and bureaucratic officialdom.

Russia and America are not only rivals in that they both are in need of
the oil abundance in the Near East. Moreover, Russia has to fear the
power of America. The yearly production of steel in 1945 for America was
80 millions of tons, for Russia (after the fourth five-year plan) 24
millions; for coal these figures are 575 and 250 millions of tons. This
shows the relative industrial strength, that cannot be compensated by
Russia having 170 millions against America's 130 millions of people. And
now America transformed its industrial power into military and political
power. This political power finds its ideological expression in the call
for world-unity. "One world or none" was the panic cry of the atomic
scientists when aghast they saw the consequences of their work; if this
terrible new power is not fettered through international unity, it will
destroy mankind itself. But it stands to reason that in any world
organization of "united nations" the most powerful will dominate the
others. The Russian rulers fully realize that to consent to the
establishment of a superpower with large competencies means subjection
under the most powerful of the associates, under American capitalism.
They refuse.

So both prepare for war. Is it inevitable? All we can see and consider
is what deep-seated forces lie at the root of this threat. It is to
America in the first place that we have to turn. Here private capitalism
is in full development, here socialism is insignificant, practically
absent in politics, here planned economy and State direction of
production was only a short-lived war necessity, soon replaced by free
enterprise. All the conditions and phenomena of former free capitalism
in Europe, especially in England and Germany, repeat themselves here,
now on a far bigger scale. In 1928 already American production exceeded
that of total Europe; at the beginning of the war, notwithstanding nine
millions of unemployed, it produced more than in any former year. Then
during the war the production increased enormously, as well on account
of the greater number of workers as of a rapid rise in technical
productivity; so that, despite the tremendous production of war
materials, it was not necessary to impose strict limitations on the
people's consumption, as was the case in European countries. War is
always a golden time for capitalist profit, because the State, as buyer,
pays willingly the highest prices. In America it was a gold rush as
never before; war profits were not in terms of millions, but of billions
of dollars. And the end of the war that devastated the production
apparatus of Europe, sees America with a production apparatus more than
fifty per cent larger than at its beginning, with an industrial
production twice as large as that of the rest of the capitalist world.
For this increased capacity of output a market must be found. This is
the problem facing American capitalism.

An inner market might easily be found: by giving a larger share to the
working class, thus increasing their buying capacity. But this course, a
cutting of profits, capitalism cannot take. It is convinced that the
workers, if they can provide a fourth-hand car and a refrigerator, are
well off and have nothing to desire. The essence of capital is to make
profit.

So foreign markets have to be found. First there is devastated Europe.
Its production apparatus has to be restored by American exports made
possible through big loans. Part of it is already American property, and
for what nominally remains European property heavy interest will have to
be paid to American finance. European economy stands under direct
control of American supervision agents who will see to it that the loans
are spent in such a way that Europe cannot develop into a serious
competitor. In Europe American capital finds a working class with much
lower standard of life than that of the American workers, hence
promising bigger profits than at home. But this is only possible if
first of all its labor power is restored by sending as relief gifts of
food, clothes, fuel, to the hungry impoverished peoples. It is
investment at long, promising profits only in the long run. Moreover, it
is here confronted with Russia trying to extend its exploitation system
over Central and Western Europe.

Then there is China, the most promising market for American products.
But here American capitalism has done its very best to spoil its own
chances. In the civil war it supported the capitalist government against
the red peasant armies, with the sole result that the American officers
and agents turned away with disgust from the incapable rapacious
Kuomintang rulers; that the peasant armies could neither be defeated nor
win entire power, so that the permanent civil war brought chaos and
prevented recovery. The natural sympathy of American capitalist rulers
towards exploiting classes in other parts of the world, and its equally
class-born hostility against popular movements, makes them blind to the
fact that only out of the latter the basis for strong economic
development may arise. Thus an entire reversal of policy would be
necessary. The fact that the communist armies are backed by Russia
intensifies American antagonism towards the Chinese people's masses,
thus preventing China from becoming a market for American export.

Then there is Russia, the U.S.S.R., in extension and population a
continent in itself, after the U.S.A., the second realm of the world in
industrial development under one State government, with immense sources
of the most valuable raw materials, the second gold producer of the
world, abounding in fertile land, with a rapidly increasing population
estimated within twenty years to reach up to 250 millions. It is closed
to foreign commerce; an iron wall isolates it from any foreign
influence. American capitalism, so much in need of markets for its
outpouring mass of products can it suffer such a wall to exist without
trying to break it open? It waged a war for "liberty"; liberty means
free commerce and intercourse all over the world. It is not to be
expected from the mightiest capitalist class that it should tolerate
exclusion from a third part of the industrially developed world.

Moreover, American capitalists are confident that against the impact of
even peaceful commerce Russian economy will not be able to hold out, but
will gradually give way to private ownership. So, apparently, think the
Russian rulers; they refuse to expose their skilfully constructed higher
organization of planned economy to the corrupting influences of private
capitalism.

Thus the conditions for a deep-seated conflict are given. By its very
nature American private capitalism is, fundamentally, the aggressor;
Russian state-capitalism has to defend its position. Of course, defense
often has to consist in attacking; in any war preparation each party
imputes aggression to the other. So Russia tries to establish a
protecting fringe beyond its borders and tries to extend its domination
over Europe. Moreover, in all capitalist countries it has an
organization of devoted adherents and agents, allured by the
revolutionary traditions of 1917, convinced that organized
state-directed economy means socialism, firm in the expectation of an
approaching economic crisis that will upset the system of private
capitalism.

Among expert economists, too, there is a widespread opinion that world
industry, that is, especially American industry, is to face a heavy
crisis. Its productive capacity, its output of products is so large that
there is no market for it. So, after the first peace boom supplying the
deficiencies of the war years, there will come a heavy slump, with large
unemployment and all its consequences. Strictly speaking, it is a
continuation of the 1930-33 slump, after which no real recovery until
1940 took place. Then the war provided an enormous market for a rapidly
expanding production, a market never choked because all products were
rapidly destroyed. Now that the war is over the capitalist class again
faces the pitiful situation that the world cannot absorb its products.
Is it to be wondered at that once more its thoughts turn to those golden
years of high profits when death and destruction of uncounted human
lives brought in such a rich harvest? And that even great parts of the
workers, narrow capitalist-minded as they are, think of that time only
as years of high wages and exciting adventure?

War as a market can be partly substituted by war preparation as a
market. Armaments already occupy a notable part of the productive force
of Society. For the budget year 1946-47 America's military budget
amounted to 12 billions of dollars. Compared with an estimated total
yearly national product of 180 billions it may not look impressive; but
compared with an American peace-time export of seven billions it gains
in importance. The bulk of production is always destined for home
consumption of food, clothes, tools, machinery, etc.; the fringe of
export and extension is the active force that stimulates the entirety of
production, increasing the need for productive apparatus and labor
hands, who, in their turn, need commodities; under capitalism each extra
demand from outside tends to raise, directly and still more indirectly
at a much enhanced rate, the extent of production. The continued demand
for war materials to be destroyed and to be replaced continually because
in a few years they are superseded by new inventions, may act as a force
postponing the impending industrial crisis.

It is highly questionable, however, whether such a rate of war
preparedness can last indefinitely. Though theoretically it seems
possible that two lots of slave-drivers, practicing different methods,
but not so very different in deepest character, when viewing the risks,
may prefer to come to terms with one another, it does as yet not look
probable. The American capitalist class, knowing that at the other side
of the iron curtain war preparations go on in the same feverish tempo,
trusting that at the moment America is the strongest in war technics,
driven by the desire to have the entire world open to international
trade, believing in America's mission to make the world into one unity,
might in view of the allurements of war well be expected to overcome its
fear of seeing its big cities turned into dust by atom bombs. And then
hell again breaks loose over mankind.

Is war inevitable? Is not war an anachronism? Why should man, able to
discover atomic processes, not be able to establish world peace? Those
who pose this question do not know what capitalism means. Can there be
world peace when in Russia millions of slaves are worked to death in
concentration camps, and the entire population lacks freedom? Can there
be world peace when in America the kings of capital keep the entire
society in subjection and exploitation without being faced by any trace
of a fight for social freedom? Where capitalist greed and capitalist
exploitation dominate world peace must remain a pious wish.

When we say that, hence, war is inseparable from capitalism, that war
can only disappear with capitalism itself, this does not mean that war
against war is of no use and that we have to wait till capitalism has
been destroyed. It means that the fight against war is inseparable from
fight against capitalism. War against war can be effective only as part
of the workers' class war against capitalism.

If the question is raised whether it is possible to forestall a
threatening war, it is pre-supposed that there is a conflict between
government, invested with power and authority on war and peace, and the
masses of the population, especially the working class. Their voting
power is without effect since it works only on election day; parliaments
and Congresses are part of the ruling Power. So the question comes down
to this: Have the workers, and in a wider sense the people's masses, at
the moment of danger the possibility, by other than parliamentary means,
to enforce their peace-will upon the war-preparing rulers? They have. If
such a will actually lives within them, if they are prepared to stand
with resolute conviction for their aim. Their form of fight then
consists in direct mass-actions.

A government, a ruling class cannot go into war with the people,
unwilling and resisting. Therefore a moral and intellectual preparation
is no less necessary than a technical and organizational preparation.
Systematic war propaganda in the press, in broadcasting, in movies, must
waken a bellicose spirit and suppress the instinctive but unorganized
spirit of resistance. Hence it is certain that a decided conscious
refusal on the part of the people's masses, demonstrated in outspoken
widely heard protest, can have a determining influence upon the
governmental policy. Such a protest may appear first in mass meetings
voting sharp resolutions. More efficient will be the protest if the
masses go into the streets demonstrating; against their ten and hundred
thousands all riot acts and court injunctions are meaningless. And when
these are not sufficient, or are suppressed by military violence, the
workers and employees in traffic and industry can strike. Such a strike
is not for wages, but to save society from utter destruction.

Government and the ruling class will try to break the resistance with
all means of moral and physical suppression. So it will be a hard fight,
demanding sacrifices, steadfastness and endurance. The psychological
basis for such fight is not at once present in full vigor; it needs time
to develop, and does so only under heavy spiritual strain. Since the
middle classes always tend to vacillate between opposite moods,
capitalist greed expressing itself in nationalist aggressiveness, and
fear for destruction, from them stubborn resistance cannot be expected.
The fight, therefore, takes the character of a class fight, with mass
strikes as its most powerful weapon.

In the 19th century the idea of a universal strike at the outbreak of
war, as well as that of a general refusal to take up arms, was
propagated, especially by the anarchists; it was meant as a direct
impediment to mobilization and warfare. But the power of the working
class was far too small at the time. In the first decade of the 20th
century, when an imperialist war became ever more threatening, the
question of how to prevent it became urgent among European socialists.
In the German socialist party there were discussions about mass strikes,
and the idea gained ground whether mass actions could be used against
war. But the party -- and union -- leaders opposed all such actions
because they feared that in that case Government would suppress and
annihilate their laboriously built-up organizations. They wished to
restrict the workers' movement to parliamentary and trade union action.
In 1912, when again war loomed near, an international peace congress was
held at Basle. Under solemn bib-bam of the bells the delegates entered
the cathedral, to listen to fine speeches from the most prominent
leaders on the international unity and brotherhood of the workers. Part
of the delegates wished to discuss ways and means how to oppose war;
they intended to propose resolutions calling up the workers of all
countries for discussion and mass action. But the presidium said no; no
discussion was allowed. Whereas now the splendid demonstration of unity
and peace-will, it said, would impress and warn the war-mongers, the
discussions exposing our dissensions about the ways of action would
encourage the militarists. Of course, it was just the reverse. The
capitalist rulers were not deceived by this show; they at once sensed
the inner weakness and fear; now they knew they could go on and that the
socialist parties would not seriously oppose the war. So the disaster
took its inevitable course. When in 1914, during the last days of July,
working masses demonstrated in the streets of Berlin they felt uneasy,
because the socialist party failed to give energetical directions; their
calls were drowned in the louder national anthems of the bourgeois
youth. The war started unhampered, with the working class organizations
tied firmly to its chariot.

Basle had been a symbol, a test, a crossroad. The decision taken there
determined all further events, the four years of murder over Europe, the
catastrophe of all moral and spiritual progress, and then beyond,
Hitlerism and the second world war. Could it have been otherwise? The
Basle result was not chance, but a consequence of the actual inner state
of the workers' movement: the supremacy of leaders, the docility of the
masses. Social developments depend on the deeper general power relations
of the classes. But just as in geography small structure details of
watersheds determine whether the water flows to one or to another ocean,
so small hardly noticed differences in relative strength at definite
moments may have decisive effects on the course of events. If the
opposition in the socialist parties had been stronger, more
self-confident; if at the time in the workers the spirit of independent
action had been stronger; if, hence, the Basle congress had been
compelled to discussion and thus had brought more clearness, then the
war, surely, would not have been prevented. But from the onset, it would
have been crossed by class fights, by internal strife within each
country breaking up national unity, exalting the workers' spirits. Then
the history of the later years, the state of socialism, the relations of
the classes, the conditions of society would have been different.

Now again society at large, and the working class especially, stands
before the same question: can the war be prevented? Of course, there are
differences; then the bourgeoisie was mostly unaware of the danger,
whereas now it is itself full of apprehension; then the working class
was well organized in a socialist party proclaiming itself hostile to
imperialist policy, and the deadly foe of all capitalism, whereas
present day America shows nothing of the sort. It is not certain whether
this is only weakness. The Russian workers are entirely powerless; they
lack the liberties which the American workers enjoy and may use in their
fight: freedom of speech, of press, of discussion, of organization, of
action. So, in any case, it is up to the American working class to
decide whether as obedient instruments they will help to make their
capitalist masters all-powerful masters of the world, or whether, by
making war against war, they will enter for the first time into the war
against capitalism, for their own freedom.

### 5.2: Towards new slavery

The second world war has devastated Europe. In Germany nearly all towns
have been turned into ruins and rubbish by American bombers, where 60
millions of people, starving and naked, have to live as savages in their
holes. In France, Italy, Holland, Poland, England, large parts have been
devastated in the same way. More vital still than this visible lack of
housing is the destruction of the production apparatus. Under the
industrial system of capitalism the production apparatus, the factories,
machines, traffic are the backbone, the basis of life. Under primitive,
pre-capitalist conditions of simple agriculture the soil secures life.
Under capitalism-in-ruins agriculture, retrograde as it is, cannot
provide sufficient food for the industrial millions, and ruined industry
cannot provide tools and fertilizers to restore agriculture. So Europe,
after the war, as first and main task, faces the problem of recovery.

Recovery, reconstruction, was the watchword proclaimed and heard
everywhere. It meant more than simply reconstruction of the production
apparatus, the construction of new machines, ships, trucks and
factories. It meant reconstruction of the production system, of the
system of social relations between capital and labor, the reconstruction
of capitalism. Whereas during the war ideas arose and were heard of a
new world to come after the war, a better world of harmony, social
justice and progress, even of socialism, now it was made clear that,
practically, capitalism and exploitation were to remain the basis of
society. How could it be otherwise? Since during the war the workers
acted only as obedient servants, soldiers to vanquish their masters'
enemies, with never a thought of acting for their own freedom, there can
be no question to-day of any change in the basic principle of society,
capitalist exploitation.

This does not mean restoration of old capitalism. It has gone for ever.
Conditions have changed. Capitalism is in distress. We are poor. Where
productive force has been destroyed so thoroughly, it stands to reason
that there must be scarceness of all life necessities. But there is more
to it. Poverty is not equally distributed. As President Truman lately
stated, wages had risen less and profits had risen more than the prices.
The poor are poorer now, the rich are richer than before. This is no
chance result of temporary conditions. To grasp its meaning we have to
consider the deeper economic basis of the new social conditions.
Formerly, in ordinary times, the gradual renovation of the productive
apparatus at the rate in which it was used up or became antiquated, took
a certain regular percentage of the entire labor of society. Now the
mass destruction demands a mass renovation in a short time. This means
that a larger part of the total labor has to be spent on the production
of means of production, and a smaller part is left for consumption
goods. Under capitalism the means of production are the property of the
capitalist class; they are renovated out of the surplus-value. Hence
more surplus-value is needed. This means that a larger share of the
produce has to fall to the capitalist class, a smaller share to the
working class. As capitalist opinion in the middle class literature
expresses it: For recovery of prosperity the first condition is
production of capital, accumulation of profits; high wages are an
impediment to rapid recovery.

Thus the main problem of capitalist policy since the war is how to
increase the surplus-value by depressing the standard of life of the
workers. Automatically this happens already by the steady rise of
prices, a consequence of the continuous issue of paper money under
scarcity of goods. So the workers have to fight ever again for increase
of the nominal wages, have ever again to strike, without attaining more
than that the wages slowly, at a distance, follow the increasing cost of
living. Still there may be a willingness among individual employers --
in view of the shortness of labor power -- to pay more than the
contracted scale of wages; so the State intervenes in the interest of
the entire capitalist class. First by means of the institute of
mediators. These state-appointed mediators, formerly designated to
arbitrate in case of wage disputes, now have the function of imposing
standard wages, maximum wages not to be surpassed by any employer. It
now happens that in a strike the employer is willing to pay more wages,
but the State forbids it. Or the government proclaims a general
wage-pegging which, in view of the rising prices, means a continuous
lowering of life standard. Thus the strike against individual employers
or employers' unions becomes meaningless; each strike is directed and
must be directed consciously against State power.

Trade unions, too, now acquire a new function. They are directly
interposed as officially recognized institutions that negotiate and make
treaties, in the name of the workers, with the governmental and
capitalist bodies. Government gives legal sanction to the decisions of
the union; this means that the workers are bound morally and legally to
the contracts made by the union leaders considered as their
representatives. Formerly it was the workers themselves who in their
assemblies had to decide on the new working conditions; they could, by
their vote, accept and reject them. Now this semblance of independence,
of at least formal free decision in bargaining, is taken from them. What
the union leaders in conference with government and capitalists arrange
and agree upon, is considered law for the workers; they are not asked,
and should they refuse, all the moral and organizational power of the
union is used to force them into obedience. It is clear that unions as
formally self-ruling organizations of the workers with chosen leaders
are far more apt to impose the new bad working conditions than would be
any power institute of the State. Thus the trade unions are made part of
the power apparatus dominating the working class. The union is the
salesman of the labor power of the workers, and in bargaining in
conference with the State officials sells it to the employers.

This does not mean, of course, that now the unions and their leaders in
every case consent to the capitalist demands. Thereby their authority
would soon break down, as is actually the case to a certain degree now.
Their attitude, moreover, often depends on political considerations,
whether they stand entirely at the side of the Government, as in
England, or are hostile against the Government, as in France. The trade
union leaders in France, belonging to the C.P., hence agents of the
Russian rulers, have not the least interest now to sustain the French
capitalist class and its government, as they did some years ago when
they took part in government themselves and stood hostile against the
workers' strikes. Thus the fight of the workers against impoverishment
is used by the political parties as a subordinate means in the struggle
between the Western system of private capitalism and the Russian system
of state capitalism.

The problem facing European capitalism, however, has a still wider
scope. It is not only a matter of wages; it is the question whether,
after this breakdown of the economic system, the working masses are
willing to rebuild it. Capitalism knows that "labor only can save us."
Hard work and low wages are the conditions for recovery. Will the
workers, who remember the hard life under capitalist exploitation before
the war, consent to a still harder life in order to restore that state
of things? They may, if they can be convinced that it is for a better
world that they now exert themselves, for a world of freedom for their
class, for socialism. Socialism is the magic word able to transform
sullen rebels into ready co-operators.

In broad layers of the middle class the conviction awoke that socialism,
in one way or another, was needed for recovery; in most countries
socialist ministers took office, socialist and communist parties
dominated the parliaments. In England the slogan read: "Labor only can
save us"; a large combined middle class and workers' vote gave an
overwhelming majority to the Labor Party that in former governments had
shown its capitalist reliability. Where a downright capitalist
government would have been unable to suppress forcibly the resistance of
the workers and to enforce the new hard living conditions upon them, a
Labor Government was the only escape.

England, indeed, was in a critical condition. The second world war had
exhausted its capital of foreign investments, the interest of which
formerly directed a stream of unpaid consumption goods into the country.
Uncle Shylock had given his generous aid only after his hard-pressed
Ally had delivered most of its assets -- notwithstanding the fact that
the war essentially had served to destroy America's most dangerous rival
to world domination, a Germany disposing of the resources of the entire
European continent. England had to give up a large part of its colonies,
it could hardly bear the expenses of playing the part of a Big Power any
longer. Also we see the English bourgeoisie lose its old self-reliant
feeling of confidence; its foreign policy, e.g., in the Near East, shows
signs of diffidence. The privileged position formerly occupied by the
British working class, having its share in England's exploitation of the
world, had gone. Now the Labor Party faced the task of clearing the
bankrupt estate.

Socialism, however, was not to be simply make-believe. A good dose of
Socialism was really needed to restore capitalism. Some of the basic
industries of capitalist production, as coal mining and railway traffic,
as a consequence of private ownership encumbered with an entirely
antiquated lack of organization, constituted a ridiculous muddle of
inefficiency. To a well-developed capitalist production good
organization of such basic branches as coal, steel, traffic, is just as
necessary as that of post and telegraph; so nationalization is a
capitalist necessity, to which the name socialization is given. Though
there is nothing revolutionary in it former governments were too full of
respect for private enterprise to satisfy those general needs; a
"socialist" Labor Government was needed to establish capitalist
efficiency. When now the miners complain that they find no difference in
treatment between the former mine owners and the new Coal Board they
have to consider that the reform was not made for them, but for
capitalism. It was not an attack on capitalist property; the coal mine
shares -- of doubtful quality -- were replaced by Government Bonds; this
manipulation has in no way lessened the exploitation of the workers.

The State has to assume functions in the production apparatus that
formerly were the domain of private enterprise. This does not yet mean
state-capitalism, as in Russia, but only state-directed capitalism,
somewhat as it was in Nazi-Germany. And there are more points of
resemblance. Capital is scarce in post-war Europe, as it was in Germany
after the first war. The strictest economy is necessary. No more than
under German fascism can it now be left to the free will of the
capitalist class to spill the available national capital by importing
luxuries or materials for the production of luxuries. To rebuild the
production apparatus of the country Government has to take in hand the
control and command of all imports and exports, of all transport of
values across the frontiers. International trade then cannot be left to
private merchants; the governments negotiate trade pacts, often strictly
bilateral, on quantities comprising the bulk of food supplies and the
industrial produce of the entire country. What Nazi-Germany introduced
as the new totalitarian system of trade is now imitated by all the
European States, an emergency measure here, just as it was there. But
the character of the emergency is different; there it was to spare
forces for a new assault toward world conquest, to prepare for world
war; here it is to stave off starvation and revolution, a result of
world war. Every government has to import foodstuffs from abroad --
grain production in Europe by deterioration of the soil and lack of
hands having diminished to only half or two-thirds of its prewar amount
-- lest the hungry population should revolt and bring the C.P. into
power. But they must be paid by the export of industrial products
withheld from their own people; or by loans from America, tying Western
Europe with the bonds of debt slavery to the master of the world's gold.

So the State has a far greater power now than before. It is the
consequence of war destruction. This does not mean, however, that it is
a temporary abnormal state of things. Nobody believes that hereafter old
private capitalism can return. The increasing size of enterprises, the
interconnection of world economy, the concentration of capital demand
planning and organization; though now and then it needs catastrophes to
enforce these tendencies. These post-war conditions form a transition,
an introduction to a new world, the world of planned capitalism. The
State rises as a mighty power above society. It dominates and regulates
economic life, it directs planned production, it distributes food and
other life necessities according to its judgment of primary needs, it
distributes the surplus-value produced by the workers among the owners
of capital; it directs more or less even the spiritual food, having
distributive power over the paper needed for the printing of books. In
its organization the political parties are its bickering
office-of-publicity holders, and the trade unions are part of its
bureaucracy. And, most important, the totalitarian State incorporates
the working masses into its social organization as the obedient
producers of value and surplus-value. This is performed by calling
planned capitalism by the name of socialism.

This is not simply usurpation of a name. A simple word, a deceitful
name, has no such power. The name is the expression of a reality.
Socialism was the watchword of the suffering and fighting workers in the
past century, the message of their liberation, the magic word occupying
their hearts and heads. They did not see that it meant only an imperfect
liberation, the rule of their leaders as new masters, disposing over
production apparatus and product. Socialism was the program of the
leaders and politicians they sent into the parliaments there to fight
capitalism and exploitation. The goal of socialism, after the conquest
of State power, was the organization of production, planned economy,
transferring the productive apparatus into the hands of the community,
represented by the State. Now that in the 20th century capitalism in
emergency needs planned economy, direction and organization of
production through State power, the old slogan of the workers just fits
in with the new needs of capitalism. What had been the expression of
their modest hopes for liberation becomes the instrument of their ready
submission under stronger slavery. All the traditions of former
aspirations, sacrifices, and heroic struggles, binding socialist workers
to their creed and their party and condensed in the name socialism, now
act as fetters laming resistance against the growing power of the new
capitalism. Instead of clearly seeing the situation and resisting,
blindfolded by the dear traditional slogans, they go into the new
slavery.

This socialism is for Europe; it is not for America, nor for Russia. It
is born in Europe, it has to save capitalist Europe. Why did Europe
succumb into such utter powerlessness? It has outside Russia, 400
millions of people, more than the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. together, it
is rich in raw materials for industry, rich in fertile land; it had a
highly developed industry and a well-instructed population disposing of
an abundance of capital. Why, then, such a lack of capitalist power?
Because Europe is divided up in a dozen nationalities, speaking several
dozens of languages, and so is driven by fierce centuries-old
antagonisms and national hatreds. At the rise of capitalism these
nations were the right size for economic units; now that capitalist
efficiency needs larger units, of continent size, Europe is at a
disadvantage against the new powers America and Russia. Its inner
inextinguishable enmities and wars called in those mightier rivals who
trampled it down, physically and economically. What at the end of the
Middle Ages happened to the Italian towns, which had been the
birthplaces of burgher power and early capitalism, but which, torn by
their mutual feuds and hatreds, could not establish a larger national
unity, and so were, as battlefield, trampled by the French and the
Spanish armies and subjected to mightier foreign powers -- now happened
to Europe on a larger scale. European capitalism is now the victim of
that nationalism that once was its force. When after the first world war
President Wilson, as the arbiter of Europe, proclaimed the principle of
national self-determination this was the very means to keep Europe
powerless, divided up into a host of independent, mutually fighting
parts. It is quite natural that now socialist politicians propagate the
idea of one consolidated socialist Europe; but they are too late; Europe
is being partitioned already into an Eastern and a Western block. The
idea itself of trying to make socialist Europe a third world power
bridling the aggression of the others, belongs to the realm of middle
class ideology that sees only contending nations, of continent size now;
this ideology means the salvation of European capitalism.

Looking from a general point of view we may say that the development of
the productive forces of society renders inevitable their social
organization into one well-planned entirety. It may take place in two
different ways. One is the way of capital, making State power the
directing power of the production, making managers appointed from above
the commanders of labor. It leads to totalitarianism in different
degrees, the State extending its regulative power over ever more realms
of human and social life. It leads to dictatorship, more or less
camouflaged by parliamentary or sham democratic form. Such dictatorship
does not necessarily assume the brutal forms we have seen in Germany and
Russia, with an all-powerful secret police keeping all classes in its
cruel grip. For the working class the difference between Western
democratic and Eastern dictatorial forms of Government is not essential,
economically; in both it is subjected to exploitation by a ruling class
of officials that commands production and distributes the produce. And
to stand over against the State as the all-powerful master of the
production apparatus, means loss of a good deal of that limited amount
of free action by which it could formerly resist the demands of capital.

The other way is the way of the working class, seizing social power and
mastery over the production apparatus.

### 5.3: Towards new freedom

The second world war has inaugurated a new epoch. More than the first
world war it has changed the structure of the capitalist world. Thereby
it has brought a fundamental change in the conditions of the workers'
fight for freedom. These new conditions the working class has to know,
to understand, and to face. It has, first, to give up illusions.
Illusions about its future under capitalism, and illusions about an easy
way of winning freedom in a better world of socialism.

In the past century, the first epoch of the workers' movement, the idea
of socialism captured the mind. The workers built up their
organizations, political parties, as well as trade unions, and attacked
and fought capitalism. It was a fight by means of leaders;
parliamentarians as spokesmen did the real fighting, and it was assumed
that afterwards politicians and officials should do the real work of
expropriating the capitalists and building up the new socialist world.
Where reformism pervaded the socialist parties it was believed that by a
series of reforms they would gradually mitigate and finally transform
capitalism into a real commonwealth. Then at the end of the first world
war hopes ran high about a near world revolution led by the communist
party. By proclaiming strict obedience of the workers towards the
leaders under the name of discipline, this party believed it could beat
down capitalism and establish state socialism. Both parties denounced
capitalism, both promised a better world without exploitation, under
their rulership. So millions of workers followed them, believing they
would defeat capitalism and liberate the proletariat from slavery.

Now these illusions have broken down. First about capitalism. Not a
mitigated, but an aggravated capitalism faces us. It is the working
class that has to bear the burden of capitalist recovery. So they must
fight. Ever again strikes flare up. Though successful in appearance,
they do not succeed in staving off want and misery. Against the
formidable power of capitalism they are too weak to bring relief.

Not illusions about party communism. Such could hardly have existed;
because the C.P. never concealed its intention to establish a despotic
rule over a subordinate working class. This goal stands squarely
opposite to the workers' goal of being free masters of society
themselves.

There were, too, illusions about socialism and unions. Now the workers
discover that the organizations they considered as part of themselves
stand as a power against them. Now they see that their leaders,
political and union leaders, take side with capital. Their strikes are
wild-cat strikes. In England Labor holds the State office for
capitalism-in-need, and the trade unions are inserted as part of the
apparatus of the State. As in the Grimethorpe strike a miner said to a
reporter: "As usual, we are united and every one is against us."

This, indeed, is the mark of the new time. All the old powers stand
against the workers, driving, sometimes cajoling, mostly denouncing and
abusing them: capitalists, politicians, leaders, officials, the State.
They have only themselves. But in their fight they are firmly united.
More firmly, more unbreakably than in former contests, their mutual
solidarity forging them into one solid body. Therein lies an indication
of the future. To be sure, such small strikes cannot be more than a
protest, a warning, to reveal the mood of the workers. Solid unity in
such small units can be no more than a promise. To exert pressure upon
the government they must be mass strikes.

In France and Italy, where the government tried to maintain wage-pegging
without being able to prevent a rise of prices, mass strikes flared up,
now indeed consciously directed against the government; combined with
stronger forms of fight, with shop occupation, seizure by the workers of
the offices. It was not, however, a pure class action of the workers but
at the same time a political maneuver in party strife. The strikes were
directed by the central committee of the trade unions (C.G.T.),
dominated by the Communist Party, and had to serve as an action of
Russian politics against the Western governments. Thus from the onset
there was an intrinsic weakness in them. The fight against private
capitalism took the form of submission to state capitalism; hence it was
opposed by those who abhorred state capitalist exploitation as a worse
condition. So the workers could not arrive at real class unity; their
action could not display as real massal class action; their great aim of
freedom was obscured through servitude to capitalist party slogans.

The fierce antagonism sprung up at the end of the war between Russia and
the Western powers has changed the attitude of the classes towards
Russian communism. Whereas the Western intellectuals take side with
their capitalist masters against dictatorship, large parts of the
workers once more see Russia as their partner. So the difficulty for the
working class to-day is that it is involved in the struggle of two world
powers, both ruling and exploiting them, both referring to the
exploitation on the other side in order to make them obedient adherents.
In the Western world the Communist Party, agent of Russian state
capitalism, presents itself as the ally and leader of the workers
against home capitalism. By patient, petty work in the organizations it
shoved itself into the leading administrative places, showing how a
well-organized minority is able to dominate a majority; unlike the
socialist leaders bound to their own capitalism it does not hesitate to
put up the most radical demands for the workers, thus to win their
favor. In countries where American capitalism retains in power the most
reactionary groups, the C.P. takes the lead of popular movements, as the
future master, to make them allies of Russia should they win dominance.
If in America itself the working masses should come to mass actions
against new war, the C.P. will immediately join and try to make the
action a source of spiritual confusion. On the reverse, American
capitalism will not be slow to present itself as the liberator of the
enslaved Russian masses, hereby to claim the adherence of the American
workers.

This is not a chance situation of to-day. Always capitalist policy
consists in dividing the working class by making it adhere to two
opposite capitalist parties. They feel by instinct that in this way the
working class is made powerless. So the more they are alike, two lots of
profit-seeking exploiters and office-seeking politicians, the stronger
they emphasize their often traditional artificial differences into
sounding slogans simulating fundamental principles. So it was in home
politics in every country, so it is now in international politics,
against the working class of the world. Should capitalism succeed in
establishing "one world" it certainly would discover the necessity to
split into two contending halves, in order to prevent unity of the
workers.

Here the working class needs wisdom. Not solely knowledge of society and
its intricacies, but that intuitive wisdom that is growing out of their
plain condition of life, that independence of mind that is based upon
the pure principle of class struggle for freedom. Where both capitalist
powers try to win the working masses by their noisy propaganda and thus
to divide them, these have to realize that theirs is the third way, the
fight for their own mastery over society.

This fight arises as an extension of their present small attempts of
resistance. Up till now they struck separately; when one factory or
industry went on strike the others looked on, apparently uninterested;
so they could only worry the rulers who at most appeased them with small
concessions. Once they perceive that the first condition to enforce
their demands is mass unity of action they will begin to raise their
class power against State-power. Up till now they let themselves be
directed by capitalist interests. Once they understand that the other
condition, not less primary, is to keep the direction in their own hands
by means of their delegates, their strike committees, their workers'
councils, and do not allow any leaders to lead them, they will have
entered the road to freedom.

What we now witness is the beginning of breakdown of capitalism as an
economic system. Not yet visible over the entire world, but over Europe,
where it took its origin. In England, in Europe, capitalism arose; and
like an oil-spot it extended ever wider over the world. Now in this
centre we see it decay, hardening into despotic forms to stave off ruin,
showing the now flourishing new sites, America, Australia, their future.

The beginning of breakdown: what was supposed to be a matter of the
future, the limitedness of the earth as an impediment to further
expansion of capitalism now manifests itself already. The slow increase
of world trade since the first world war indicates the slackening tempo,
and the deep crisis of 1930 has not been vanquished by a new prosperity.
The slackening at the time did not enter into the consciousness of man;
it could only be made out afterwards in statistical figures. To-day the
breakdown is conscious experience; the broad masses of the people feel
it and know it, and in panic try to find a way out.

The breakdown of an economic system: not yet of a social system. The old
dependencies of the classes, the relations of a master and a servant
class, the basic fact of exploitation as yet are in full vigor.
Desperate efforts are made to consolidate them. By transforming the
chance economy into planned economy, by increasing State-despotism, by
intensifying the exploitation.

The beginning of breakdown of an old system: not yet the beginning rise
of a new system. The working class is far back, compared to the master
class, in recognizing the changed conditions. Whereas the capitalists
are active in transforming old institutions and adapt them to new
functions, the workers stubbornly adhere to traditional feelings and
actions, and try to fight capital by putting their trust in agents of
capitalism, in unions and parties. Surely the wild strikes are first
indications of new forms of fight. But only when the entire working
class is permeated by the new insight into the significance of
self-action and self-rule, the way to freedom opens out.

The breakdown of capitalism is at the same time the breakdown of the old
socialism. Because socialism now turns out to be a harsher form of
capitalism. Socialism, as inherited from the 19th century, was the creed
of a social mission for the leaders and politicians: to transform
capitalism into a system of State-directed economy without exploitation,
producing abundance for all. It was the creed of class struggle for the
workers, the belief that by transferring government into the hands of
these socialists they would assure their freedom. Why did it not happen?
Because the casting of a secret vote was too insignificant an effort to
count as a real class-fight. Because the socialist politicians stood
single-handed within the entire capitalist fabric of society, against
the immense power of the capitalist class being master of the production
apparatus, with the workers' masses only looking on, expecting them,
little squad, to upset the world. What could they do otherwise than run
the affair in the usual way, and by reforming the worst abuses save
their conscience? Now it is seen that socialism in the sense of
State-directed planned economy means state-capitalism, and that
socialism in the sense of workers' emancipation is only possible as a
new orientation. The new orientation of socialism is self-direction of
production, self-direction of the class-struggle, by means of workers'
councils.

What is called the failure of the working class, alarming many
socialists, the contradiction between the economic breakdown of
capitalism and the inability of the workers to seize power and establish
the new order, is no real contradiction. Economic changes only gradually
produce changes in the mind. The workers educated in the belief in
socialism stand bewildered now that they see that the very opposite,
heavier slavery, is the outcome. To grasp that socialism and communism
now both mean doctrines of enslavement is a hard job. New orientation
needs time; maybe only a new generation will comprehend its full scope.

At the end of the first world war world revolution seemed near; the
working class arose full of hope and expectation that now its old dreams
would come true. But they were dreams of imperfect freedom, they could
not be realized. Now at the end of the second world war only slavery and
destruction seem near; hope is far distant; but, a task, the greater aim
of real freedom looms. More powerful than before, capitalism rises as
master of the world. More powerful than before the working class has to
rise in its fight for mastery over the world. More powerful forms of
suppression capitalism has found. More powerful forms of fight the
working class has to find and use. So this crisis of capitalism at the
same time will be the start of a new workers' movement.

A century ago, when the workers were a small class of downtrodden
helpless individuals, the call was heard: proletarians of all countries
unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains; you have a world to
win. Since then they have become the largest class; and they have
united; but only imperfectly. Only in groups, smaller or larger, not yet
as one class-unity. Only superficially, in outer forms, not yet in deep
essence. And still they have nothing to lose but their chains; what else
they have they cannot lose by fighting, only by timidly submitting. And
the world to be won begins to be perceived dimly. At that time no clear
goal, for which to unite, could be depicted; so their organizations in
the end became tools of capitalism. Now the goal becomes distinct;
opposite to the stronger domination by state-directed planned economy of
the new capitalism stands what Marx called the association of free and
equal producers. So the call for unity must be supplemented by
indication of the goal: take the factories and machines; assert your
mastery over the productive apparatus; organize production by means of
workers' councils.
