---
title: On the Communist Party
author: Pannekoek, Anton
date: 1936
description: Published in the June 1936 issue of International Council Correspondence under the pseudonym J. Harper. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/pannekoe/1936/06/communist-party.htm>. The errors present in the original published version and noted in the MIA version are retained here.
...

## I

During the world war small groups in all countries arose, convinced that
out of this ordeal of capitalism, a proletarian revolution must ensue,
and they were ready to prepare for it. They once more took the name of
communists, forgotten since the old times of Marx in 1848, to identify
themselves from the old socialist parties. The Bolshevik party, then
having its center in Switzerland, was one of them. After the war had
ceased, they united into communist parties standing for the proletarian
revolution, in opposition to the socialist parties who supported the war
politics of the capitalist government; and represented the submissive,
fearful tendencies in the working class. The communist parties gathered
all the young fighting spirit in its ranks.

Contrary to the theory that not in a ruined but only in a prosperous
capitalistic country the workers could build up a true commonwealth, the
communists put forth the truth that it was the very ruin of capitalist
production which made a revolution necessary and would incite the
working class to fight for revolution with all its energy.

Opposing the social-democratic view, that a parliament chosen by general
suffrage was a fair representation of society and the basis of
socialism, the communists put forth the new truth, stated by Marx and
Engels, that the working class, to attain its aims, had to take power
entirely in its own hands, and had to set up its own dictatorship,
excluding the capitalist class from any share in the government.

In opposition to parliamentarism, they put forth, following the Russian
example, the soviets or worker's councils.

In the defeated Germany, November 1918, a vigorous communist movement
sprang up and united the Spartacus group and other groups which had
secretly grown up during the war. It was crushed the following January
by the counter revolutionary forces of the socialist government. This
prevented the rise of an independent, strong communist power in Germany,
animated by the spirit of a highly developed modern proletariat,
therefore the communist party of Russia entirely dominated the young
rising communist groups of the world. They united in the Third
International, which was directed from Moscow. Now Russia remained the
only center of world revolution; the interests of the Russian state
directed the communist workers all over the world. The ideas of Russian
Bolshevism dominated the communist parties in the capitalist countries.

Russia was attacked by the capitalist governments of Europe and America.
In defense, Russia attacked these governments by inciting the working
class to rebellion, by calling them to world revolution -- a communist
revolution, not in the future, but as soon as possible. And if they
could not be won for communism, then at least for opposition to the
policy of their governments. Hence the communist groups were forced to
go into parliament and to go into trade unions, to drive them as an
opposing force against their capitalist governments.

World revolution was the great battle cry. Everywhere in the world, in
Europe, Asia, America, among the oppressed classes and the oppressed
peoples, the call was heard and workers arose. They were animated by the
Russian example, feeling that now thru the war, capitalism was shaken
from its foundations, that it was weakened still more by the economic
disorders and crisis. They were just small minorities, but the masses of
the workers stood waiting, looking with sympathy towards Russia,
hesitating still because their leaders said that the Russians were a
backward people and because the capitalist papers spoke of atrocities
and predicted an inevitable and rapid breakdown. These very infamies of
the capitalist press, however, showed how much the example was hated and
feared.

Was a communist revolution possible? Could the working class conquer
power and defeat capitalism in England, France and America? Certainly
not. It had not the strength that was needed. Perhaps in Germany only.

What ought to have been done then? The communist revolution, the victory
of the working class, is not a matter of a few years; it is a whole
period of rising and fighting. This crisis of capitalism could only be
the starting point for this period. The task of the communist party was
to build up the power of the working class in this period step by step.
This perhaps is a long way, but there is no other.

The Russian Bolshevik leaders did not understand world revolution in
this way. They meant it to come immediately, in the near future. That
which had happened in Russia, why could it not happen in other
countries? The workers there had only to follow the example of their
Russian comrades. In Russia, a firmly organized party of some ten
thousands of revolutionists, by means of a working class of hardly a
million, within the population of a hundred millions, had conquered
power, and afterwards by the right platform it stood for and by
defending their interests, it won the masses to its side.

In the some way the rest of the world communist parties comprising the
most eager class conscious, able and energetic minorities of the working
class, led by capable leaders, could conduct political power if only the
mass of the workers would follow them. Were not the capitalist
governments ruling minorities also?

The whole of the working class which now suffers from this minority rule
has only to back the Communist Party to vote for it [sic], to its call,
and the party will do the real work. It is the vanguard, it attacks, it
defeats the capitalist government and replaces it, and when in power it
will carry thru communism, just as in Russia.

And the dictatorship of the working class? It is embodied in the
dictatorship of the Communist Party, just as in Russia.

Do as we did! This was the advice, the call, the directive given by the
Bolshevik party to the Communist Parties of the world. It was based upon
the idea of equality of Russian conditions with the conditions in
capitalist countries. The conditions, however, were so widely different
that hardly any resemblance could be seen. Russia stood on the threshold
of capitalism, at the beginning of industrialism. The great capitalist
countries stood at the close of industrial capitalism. Hence the goals
were entirely different. Russia had to be raised from primitive
barbarism to the high level of productivity reached in America and
Europe. This could only be done by a party, governing the people,
organizing state capitalism. America and Europe with their high level of
capitalist productivity have to transform themselves to communist
production. This can only be done by the common effort of the working
class in its entirety.

The working class in Russia was a small minority and nearly the whole
population consisted of primitive peasants. In England, Germany, France
and America nearly half or even more than half of the population
consisted of proletarians, wage workers. In Russia there was a very
small, insignificant capitalist class without much power or influence.
In England, Germany, France, America a capitalist class more powerful
than the world had ever seen, dominated society, dominated the whole
world.

The Communist Party leaders, by proclaiming that they (the party) should
be able to beat the capitalist class, showed by this very assertion that
they did not see the real power of this class. By setting Russia as the
example to be followed, not only in heroism and fighting spirit, but
also in methods and aims, they betrayed their inability to see the
difference between the Russian Czarist rule and the capitalist rule in
Europe and America.

The capitalist class with its complete domination of the economic
forces, with its money power, its intellectual power, does not allow a
minority group to vanquish and destroy it. No party, though led by the
ablest leaders, can defeat it. There is only one power strong enough to
vanquish this mighty class. This power is the working class.

The essential basis of capitalist power is its economic power. No
political laws issued from above can seriously affect it. It can only be
attained by another economic power, by the opposing class, striking at
its very roots. It is the entirety of the workers who have to come into
the field, if capitalism is to be overthrown.

At first sight this appeal to the whole of the working class may appear
illusionary. The masses, the majority, are not clearly class conscious;
they are ignorant as to social development; they are indifferent to the
revolution. They are more egotistic for personal interests than for
solidarity for class interests, submissive and fearful, seeking futile
pleasures. Is there much difference between such an indifferent mass and
a population as in Russia? Can anything be expected from such a people
rather than from that class conscious, eager, energetic,
self-sacrificing, clear minded communist minority?

This, however, is only relevant if it should be a question of a
revolution of tomorrow, as conceived by the communist party.

For the real proletarian revolution, not the superficial chance
character of today, is essential, which is determined by the present
surrounding capitalist world. The real communist revolution depends on
the deeper essential class nature of the proletariat.

The working class of Europe and America have qualities in itself that
enable it to rise with a great force. They are descendants of a
middle class of artisans and farmers who for many centuries have
worked their own soil or their own shop as free people. They therefore
acquired skill and independence, capability and a strong
individuality to act for themselves, persistent industry and the habit
of personal energy in work. These qualities the modern workers have
inherited from their ancestors. Dominated thereafter during one or more
generations by capitalism, they were trained by the machine to regular
intensity and discipline in collective work. And after the first
depression there grew in them, during continual fighting, the new rising
virtue of solidarity and class unity.

On these foundations the future greatness of the revolutionary class
will be built up. In Europe and in America there are hundreds of
millions of people who possess these qualities. The fact that as yet
they still stand before their task, that they have not yet finished it,
that they hardly made a beginning, does not mean that they are not able
to perform it. None other than their own power can tell them how to act;
they have to find their way themselves by hard suffering and bitter
experience. They have brains and they have hearts to find out and to do
it and build up that class unity out of which the new mankind will
arise.

They are not a neutral indifferent mass that does not count when a
revolutionary minority tries to overthrow the ruling capitalist
minority. As long as they do not actively take part, the revolution
cannot be won; but When they do take part, they are not the people to be
led in obedience by a party.

Certainly a party in its ascendance consists of the class' [sic]
best elements, exceeding the mass as a whole. Its leaders usually are
the prominent forces in the party, embodying the great aims in their
names, admired, hated, honored. They stand at the front and when a great
fight is lost, its great leaders are destroyed, the party is crushed.
Knowing this, the secondary leaders, or the party officials, will often
shrink from the supreme fight, from the boldest aims. The working class
itself can be defeated, but it can never be crushed. Its forces are
indomitable; its roots are in the firm earth; as growing green turf, the
blooming tops which are mown always come up anew. The workers can
temporarily desist from fighting when weakened, but their forces
increase continually. A party that follows them in their retreat cannot
recover, it must lose its character and repudiate its principles; it is
lost forever. A party, a group, leaders, have limited force which is
entirely spent, is sacrificed in honor, or in dishonor in the events of
the class struggle; the class itself draws upon an unlimited store.

Prominent leaders can show the way, parties in their principles
and platforms can express the ideas, the aims of the class only
temporary. At first the class follows them, but then it has to pass them
up, putting up bolder aims, higher ideas, conforming to the widening and
deepening of the class struggle. The party tries to keep the class at
its former lower level, at its more moderate aims, and has to be
discarded. The doctrine that a party stands above the class, that it
should remain the leader always, being theoretically false, in practice
means strangling the class and leading it to its defeat.

We will show how in the communist party this doctrine after its first
glorious ascendance led to rapid decay.

## II

These are the principles leading the communist party and determining its
practice: the party has to win dictatorship, to conquer power, to make
revolution, and by this to liberate the workers; the workers have to
follow, to back the party and to bring it to power.

Hence its direct aim is: to win the masses of the workers as adherents,
to bring them to its side; not to make them good independent fighters,
able to find and to force their own way.

Parliamentary action is one of the means. Though the C.P. declared that
parliamentarism was useless for the revolution, still it went into
parliament; this was called 'revolutionary parliamentarism', to
demonstrate in parliament the uselessness of parliamentarianism. In
reality it was a means to get votes and voters, followers of the party.
It served to detract the worker's votes from the socialist party.
Numerous workers who were disillusioned by the capitalist policy of
social-democracy, who wished to stand for revolution, were won over by
the big talk and the furious criticisms of the C.P. against capitalism.
Now this policy opened a new way for them, to stick to their old belief
that by voting only and following leaders, this time better leaders,
they would be liberated. These famous revolutionists, who in Russia had
founded the State of the workers, told them this easy way was the right
way.

Another means was trade unionism. Though the C.P. declared the unions
useless for the revolution, yet the communists had to become members of
them in order to win the unions for communism. This did not mean the
making of the union members into clearly class conscious revolutionists;
it meant the replacing of the "corrupt" old leaders by Communist Party
men. It meant the Party controlling the ruling class machine of the
unions, that it might command the big armies of union members. Of course
the old leaders were not willing to give way; they simply excluded the
red opposition groups. Then new "red" unions were formed.

Strikes are the schools for communism. When the workers are on strike,
fighting the capitalist class face to face, then they learn the real
power of capitalism, they see all its forces directed against them. But
then they realize more fully the necessary force of solidarity, the
necessity for unity. They are more keen to understand, and their spirit
is eager to learn. What they learn is the most important lesson, and
that is that communism is the only salvation.

The Communist Party varied this truth according to its principles in
each strike that it was present to take part, or rightly to take the
lead. The direction must be taken out of the hands of the trade union
leaders, who do not have the right fighting spirit. The workers should
lead themselves. The reason for this statement was because the working
class, as you know, is represented by the C.P., therefore the Party
should lead them. Each success was used to advertise the Party. Instead
of the communist education, which is a natural outcome of each big fight
in capitalism, came the artificial aim: to increase the influence of the
party on the masses.

Instead of the natural lesson, that communism is the salvation, came the
artificial lesson that the communist party is the saviour. By its
revolutionary talk, they caught and absorbed all the eager fighting
spirit of the strikers, but diverted it to its own aims. Quarrels
which were injurious to the workers' cause were often the result.

A continual fight was made against the social democratic party to
detract its followers from it by criticism or its politics. Their
leaders were denounced and were called by the most spicy names as
accomplices of capital and traitors of the working class. Doubtlessly, a
serious, critical exposition showing that social democracy had left the
way of class struggle will open the eyes of many workers. But now, all
at once, the scene changed and an alliance was offered to these
'traitors' for a common fight against capitalism. This was called
solemnly "the unity or the working class restored". In reality it would
have been nothing but the temporary collaboration of two competing
groups of leaders, both trying to keep or win obedient followers.

To win followers and votes, it is not necessary to call upon the working
class alone. All the poor classes living miserably under capitalism will
hail the new and better masters who promise them freedom. So they did as
the socialist party did; the communist party addressed its propaganda to
all who suffer.

Russia gave the example, The Bolshevik Party, though a worker's party,
had won power only by their alliance with the peasants. When, once in
power, they were threatened by the capitalist tendencies in the wealthy
peasants, they called upon the poor peasants as the allies of the
workers. Then the C.P. in America and Europe always imitating Russian
slogans directed their appeals to the workers and the poor peasants
also. It forgot that in highly developed countries of capitalism there
lives in the poor peasants the strong spirit of private ownership the
same as in the big farmers, if they could be won over by promises they
would be but unreliable allies ready to desert at the first contrariety.

The working class in its revolution can only rely upon its own force.
Other poor classes of society will often join them, but they cannot give
additional weight of importance because the strong innate force which
proletarian solidarity and mastership over production gives to
the working class is lacking in them. Therefore, even in rebellion, they
are uncertain and fickle. What can be aimed at is that they will not be
tools in the capitalists' hands. This cannot be obtained by promises.
Promises and platforms count with parties, but classes are directed by
deeper feelings and passions founded on interests. They can be reached
only when their respect and their confidence is aroused because they see
that the workers bravely and energetically attack the capitalist class.

The matter is different for a communist party wishing to win power for
itself. All the poor who suffer under capitalism are equally as good as
followers of the party. Their despair, seeing no sure way out by their
own force, makes them the right adherents to a party that says it
liberates them. They are apt to break out in explosions but not to climb
in continuous fight. In the heavy world crisis of these last few years
the increasing masses of the regularly unemployed, in which the need and
the idea of a rapid immediate world revolution became dominant, also
turned to the communist party. Especially by means of this army, the
C.P. hoped to conquer political supremacy for itself.

The communist party did not try to increase the power of the working
class. It did not educate its adherents to clearness, to wisdom, to
unity of all workers. It educated them into enthusiastic but blind,
hence fanatical, believers and followers; into obedient subjects of the
party in power. Its aim was not to make the working class strong, but to
make the party powerful. Because its fundamental ideas originated from
primitive Russian, not from highly developed capitalistic European and
American conditions.

When a party wishes to win followers with all means and cannot attract
them by arousing their interest in revolution, then it will try to win
them by appealing to their reactionary prejudices. The strongest feeling
which capitalism awakes and raises with all its might against revolution
is nationalism. When in 1923 French troops occupied the Rhineland and
everywhere in Germany the waves of nationalism went high, the C.P. also
played the nationalistic game trying to compete with the capitalistic
parties. In the Reichstag it proposed a companionship of the communist
armed forces, the "red guards", with the German capitalist army
(Reichswehr). Here international politics played a part. Russia, at
that time hostile to the western victorious governments, tried to make
an alliance with Germany, hence the German communist party had to make
friends with its own capitalist government.

This was the chief character of all the communist parties affiliated to
the Third International; they were directed by Moscow by the Russian
communist leaders, so they were the tools of Russian foreign policies.
Russia was 'all the workers fatherland', the center of communist world
revolution. The interest of Russia should be the prominent interest of
the communist workers all over the world. It was clearly stated by the
Russian leaders that when a capitalist government should be the ally of
Russia against other powers, the workers in that country had to stand by
their government. They had to fight their government, in other
countries. The class struggle between the capitalist and the workers
class had to be made subordinate to the temporary needs and fortunes of
Russian foreign politics.

Its dependence on Russia, materially and spiritually, is at the root of
all the weakness of the communist party. All the ambiguities in the
Russian development are reflected in the position of the C.P. The
Russian leaders have to tell their subjects that their
state-capitalistic building-up of industrialism is the building-up of
communism. Hence each new factory or electric power plant is hailed in
the communist papers as a triumph of communism. In order to encourage
the minds of the Russians in perseverance, they were told by
their papers that capitalist was nearly succumbing to a world revolution
and envious of Russia, meditated to make war with Russia. This was
repeated in the communist papers all over the world, while at the same
time Russia was concluding commercial treaties with these capitalist
governments. When Russia made alliances with some capitalist states and
took part in their diplomatic quarrels, the communist papers glorified
this as a capitulation of the capitalist world before communism. The
papers continually advertised Russian 'communism' before the workers of
the world.

Russia is the great example; hence the Russian example has to be
imitated in the communist party. Just as in Russia, the party has to
dominate the class. In the Russian party the leaders dominate because
they have all the power factors in their hands. In the same way the C.P.
leaders dominate. The members have to show 'discipline'. Moscow, the
"comintern" (Central Committee of the Third International) are the
highest leaders; at their command the leaders in every country are
dismissed and replaced by others.

It is natural that in the other countries there are doubts that arise
among the workers and members as to the rightness of these Russian
methods. But such opposition was always beaten down and excluded from
the party. No independent judgment was allowed; obedience was demanded.

After the revolution the Russians had built up a "red army" to defend
their freedom against the attacks of the "white armies". In the same way
the German C.P. formed a "red guard", bodies of armed young communists,
to fight against the armed nationalists.

It was not simply a workers army against capitalism, but also a weapon
against all the adversaries of the C.P; Wherever oppositions arose at
meetings and other workers criticised the party politics, the red guards
at the command of their leaders were to deal with them, with
maltreatment. Not opening their brains, but breaking their skulls was
the method employed against criticising fellow-workers. Thus young and
eager fighters were educated into rowdies instead of educating them to
become real communists. When the national revolution came, when national
violence proved too far stronger and more irresistible than
communist violence, numerous young workers who had learned nothing but
to beat their leaders' adversaries, at once changed their colors and
became just as zealous nationalists as they were before zealous
communists.

Thru the glory that radiated from the Russian revolution, thru its own
gallant talk, the C.P. assembled year by year all the ardent
enthusiastic young workers under its colors. These young workers were
used either in idle sham fights or spilt into useless party politics;
all these valuable qualities were lost to the revolution. The best of
them, disillusioned, turned their back on the party and tried to find
new ground in founding separate groups.

Looking backward, we see the world war, as a culmination of capitalist
oppression, arouse the revolutionary spirit of the workers everywhere.
Barbarous Russia, as the weakest of the governments, fell at the first
stroke, and as a bright meteor the Russian revolution rose and shone
over the earth. It was another revolution, than the workers needed. Its
dazzling light, first filling them with hope and force, blinded them, so
that they did not see their own way. Now they have to recover and to
turn their eyes towards the dawn of their own revolution.

The communist party cannot recover. Russia is making its peace with the
capitalist nations and taking its place among them with its own economic
system. The communist party inseparably linked to Russia is doomed to
live on sham fighting. Opposition groups split off ascribing the decay
to false tactics of some particular leaders, to diversify from the right
principles. In vain; the basis of the downfall lies in the principles
themselves.
