---
title: "Marxism in a Nutshell: From the Criticism of Capitalism to a Classless Society"
author: Robin Goodfellow
date: 2013
description: A text produced by Robin Goodfellow, a group of authors writing primarily in French and formerly associated with the publication Communisme ou Civilisation. This text was posted online at <https://www.robingoodfellow.info/pagesen/rubriques/meren.htm>.
...

## Foreword

Since the failure of the major proletarian struggles of the 1920s, the
longest counterrevolution in history has helped to confuse the basis of
revolutionary theory, even for its militants. In its Stalinist,
Social-Democratic, and Leftist representations, as well as in the
reports made by representatives of the bourgeoisie, Marxism is
disfigured. It bears no resemblance to the powerful critique of
bourgeois society, to the scientific theory that since the middle of the
1840s explains the genesis, the development, and the death of this
society and announces the end of class society.

During the crisis that shook the capitalist economy between 2008 and
2010, some members of the international bourgeois press decided to tip
their hats to Marx. Instead of saluting him as the revolutionary who was
able to make the connection between crisis and capitalism's need to
overcome it, they simply acknowledged him as a "visionary" who foresaw
its future failings. It is because we place ourselves in the viewpoint
of the proletariat that we defend its historic programme; that we urge
it to form a distinct political party in opposition to all the other
parties and take the political power in order to establish a society
free of social classes and the State, wage-labour, money, and mercantile
categories; that we defend the revolutionary scope of this theory
without and against all official and academic approval.

This short work summarizes the essence of the communist critique of
political economy and is meant to offer all those seeking a radical
critique of current society a condensed version of the coherence and
power of the revolutionary theory. It is also meant to show that, far
from being an ideal or just a wishful thinking or a utopia, the
communist future is necessarily embedded in the development of the
bourgeois society reliant on the exploitation of the productive class:
the proletariat.

Socialism has become a science, and should be studied as such. The only
school in which it can be truly understood, transmitted, and developed
is the proletarian party in the historic sense of the term. The authors
of this text are fully committed to this tradition, and do not recognize
any validity in the critiques of the Marxism such as the
"modernizations" made by bourgeois or reformist scholars, economists,
and university professors. They address to a fighting class that knows
by instinct what exploitation means and is seeking sound theoretic means
that will help it better fight tomorrow's battles.

We have attempted here the difficult task of "vulgarizing" a complex
scientific theory. Revolutionary socialism is scientific in the sense
that it explains reality and militant in that it passionately defends
the need of the revolution. "Vulgarization" obviously runs the risk of
limiting complex demonstrations by oversimplifying certain concepts and
phenomena.

Readers who wish to explore certain aspects presented in this book in
more detail can refer to our more theoretical works, which are available
on our website in several languages at
<https://www.robingoodfellow.info>, and of course by returning to the
original source texts. Nowadays, a number of websites ease the access to
these kinds of source texts (although not always to the best
translations).

To make for smoother reading, we have tried to keep our quotation of
Marx and Engels to a minimum besides a few instances where we felt it
would be impossible to improve upon the clarity of the original
formulations.

Marxism is a science, and therefore a living theory whose concepts
thoroughly resist to the complexity of the contemporary world (while on
the contrary bourgeois political economy, not to mention its philosophy
and sociology, are always increasingly idiotic). This does not hinder
the fact that today it is necessary to make a considerable effort to
take the theory even further, to refine the concepts and precisely apply
them to the phenomena of the current capitalist mode of production,
while strictly staying within the general, programmatic, framework
defined by the theory. As Lenin said, without revolutionary theory there
can be no revolutionary movement, and nothing could be truer today.

Sao Paulo - Paris - July 2013

## 1. The historical development of the capitalist mode of production

The unprecedented development of the capitalist economy and the
attenuation of crises during the thirty years which followed in the
Occident the end of the Second World War, the collapse of the false
"communisms" in the East, the rise and development of new capitalist
countries on all continents, and, last but not least, the interminable
counter-revolution which, from the 1920s onwards, reduced the influence
of revolutionary communism to a shadow of its former self, made it easy
to believe that the capitalist system was here to stay.

Rulers, economists, journalists, and other representatives of the
bourgeoisie are sure of one thing: nothing can be accomplished outside
of capitalism. The economy (presumed as capitalist) seems to have become
second nature to us; it seems impossible to even imagine that a society
could work, live, reproduce, and develop without the categories of
money, the market, exchange, and wage labour; that we could live using
products of labour which are not commodities.

All of these categories, however, whose scientific Marxist definitions
we will go over in the next chapter, are not eternal; they have not
always existed, and Marxism shows that they have become obstacles to the
development of society. In order to develop, capitalism has had to
fundamentally transform relations of production between individuals,
along with the modalities of production (the mode of production), to
create the conditions for its own development. This process has been far
from peaceful and idyllic.

### 1.1 The existence conditions for the capitalist mode of production

Marx ridicules bourgeois economists and the morality tale they have spun
to explain the origins of the fortunes upon which merchant's capital was
first built. These fortunes were allegedly the fruit of carefully
accumulated savings on the part of generations of honest, hardworking
entrepreneurs, while the hedonists and the incompetent found themselves
penniless and forced to sell their arms. This is obviously not really
how history produced the two main conditions for capitalist
exploitation: on one side the existence of a mass of workers with
neither hearth nor home, the proletariat, on the other a capitalist
class that monopolises the money and the means of production and
subsistence, allowing the latter to employ the former. Contrary to the
bourgeois economists' fable, these conditions were set up and developed
through expropriation, State intervention, and a bloody legislation to
discipline and hold back the emerging proletariat; through plunder,
theft, pillaging, murder and other violence, not to mention the slave
trade, forced labour, public debt, fiscal exaction, trade wars, and
protectionism.

### 1.1.1 The development of the proletariat

The capitalist economic structure emerged from the dissolution of feudal
society. It required free workers able to dispose their own being, and
therefore emancipate themselves from both servitude and the power of the
guilds.

The creation of the proletariat is therefore the amassing of free
individuals at one pole of the society. What is meant by "free" here is
the freedom to sell one's labour-capacity to those who withhold the
capital. It is necessary to have a class who possess nothing but their
"own labour in a potential state" and who is faced with the necessary
means to the existence of its labour: tools, raw materials, and
workplaces. Unlike artisans, who both own the tools and perform the
labour, proletarians realize nothing because they found themselves, in a
sense, naked before capital. This is a radical separation from the means
of production, something that become further entrenched throughout the
existence of the capitalist mode of production.

Under feudalism in England, for example, a portion of the land was said
to be communal, belonging to the people, or villagers, rather than to
the lords. The villagers were free to graze their livestock or farm
portions of this communal land but had no claim to ownership (this was
not, in other words, a form of private property). In the 17th century,
the so-called enclosure movement (the fencing off communal lands) was
encouraged by the State through Parliamentary acts. This allowed for the
expropriation of a portion of the peasantry, who then became available
to sell itself to capital.

In the chapter of the _Capital, Volume I_, which deals with colonization
(settler colonies) -- _The Modern Theory of Colonization_ --, Marx uses
this particular method of capitalist expansion to show that it is not
the means of production themselves that create capital, but rather the
fact that they exist in the face of a massive, dispossessed proletariat.
In other words, capital alone cannot produce surplus-value because its
production also requires a mass of completely dispossessed proletarians
to be readily available to it. While bourgeois economists invent an
idyllic past to explain the birth of modern society, Marx looks to the
places which clearly show capitalist relations being established:
settler colonies, where the producer still owns the means of production
and the land, a phenomenon that had been wiped out in England several
centuries earlier. This is where Marx says we can see the "secret of the
political economy," in that without the expropriation of workers,
capitalist relations cannot exist.

In Europe, it was through expropriation, the submission of the masses to
the discipline of manufacture work, the Poor Laws in the 17th and 18th
centuries, the punishment of vagrants, and other coercive methods that
the proletarian masses necessary to the capitalist mode of production
were created and subordinated. The history of their expropriation and
the way they were groomed for their imprisonment in the manufactures is
written in fire and blood. But the expropriation of the vast majority of
the rural population is only radicalized with the more highly developed
capitalist mode of production following the industrial revolution, as
the complete separation of agriculture from domestic production such as
spinning and weaving.

### 1.1.2 The genesis of the capitalist class

In order to develop the capitalist mode of production, money and
commodities had to be transformed into capital. In other words, there
has to be money and the means of production and subsistence on one side,
and a class of free workers on the other. The existence of this latter,
however, does not automatically create a capitalist class, whose origins
are varied. The oldest form is the capitalist farmer, which emerged
progressively, over time. Then, as a result of the agricultural
revolution of the late 15th and the early 16th centuries, a domestic
market for industrial products emerged, promoting the existence of a
capitalist class in that sector. This class rose in part from guild
masters, artisans and even wage-labourers who became capitalist
entrepreneurs, but mostly thanks to the legacy of a capital inherited
from the Middle Ages, which before the capitalist era had the rank of
capital: the merchant's capital and the usurer's capital. These
capitalists had accumulated enough money susceptible to be transformed
into industrial capital, that is to say, to buy the means of production
and employ a free labour-power.

The expressions of the modern capitalism were developed from these
"antediluvian forms". Before that, merchant's capital mostly played a
role on the development of exchanges, in that it specializes the social
function of the exchange. In other words, instead of an apple farmer
selling his apples at the market and then buying shoes from a shoemaker
(here we have not a barter, but rather a monetary exchange), the holder
of the merchant's capital now played an intermediary role between the
different producers. One of the later developments of the capitalist
mode of production will be the centralization, by the merchant's
capital, of the means of production in central locations, favouring to
increase labour productivity. So, before socializing labour, capital
first socialized exchanges.

From its inception, the running of the capitalist economy would have
been neither possible nor explainable without the relation between these
two opposing classes, one of which, the capitalist class, could only
impose its dominance over the other, the proletariat, through
exploitation.

We will now briefly explore how the historical movement of the
capitalist mode of production developed from this early impulse.

### 1.2 The great moments of the capitalist development

Capital has deployed throughout history by constantly deepening on what
made its appearance: the valorization of capital through the purchase of
labour-power that produces more value than it costs. In Chapter 2 we
will explore in more detail how Marx's scientific work gave the keys to
explain the extortion of surplus-value.

During its development, capital does not change its nature. In fact, it
gets better at accomplishing its goal: the production of maximum
surplus-value. Thereby, the bourgeoisie amasses and expands the means of
production and develops the productive power of labour. One of the
consequences of this is the socialization of the means of production and
products of labour. What is more, the modern capitalist mode of
production opens the way for the unlimited development of the
productivity of labour. This development comes into contradiction with
capitalism's short-sighted goals, with the quest for maximum
surplus-value, and calls instead for a society for which the groundwork
is already laid. A society in which there is no longer any exploitation
of wage-labour.

According to Marx, this movement went through three phases beginning in
the mid-14th century: simple cooperation, manufacture, and large-scale
industry.

Since its beginning, capitalist production has always required the
exploitation of a significant number of workers under the command of a
single instance of capital, which must have reached a certain amount to
advance wages and means of production.

This arrangement ensures that the collective labour-power contributing
to the production process will have a level of productivity that meets
the social average and, thanks to economies of scale, reduces the cost
of the means of production (such as buildings). The creation of a
collective worker, the result of labour-power's cooperation, allows the
expansion of fields of work that can be done under the sponsorship of
capital, such as major public works, for example, and brings with it an
improvement in social productivity. This simple cooperation, which
implies large-scale production, can be seen throughout the history of
capitalist production, though it is also characteristic of a certain
infancy of it with the professional manufacture^[Manufacture bringing
together one or more workshops but without modifying them through the
division of labour. This manufacture is at the origin of the manufacture
specific to the manufacturing age.] and large-scale agriculture.

With the advent of the actual manufacturing age, which lasted from
around the mid-16th century to the last third of the 18th century, a
form of cooperation based on a new division of labour emerged. As we
have seen, the agricultural revolution of the late 15th and early 16th
centuries led to the rise of the manufacturing production, but it is
only when manufacture is the dominant form of the capitalist mode of
production that the true capitalist era begins. Without detailing the
numerous forms of manufacture, let us emphasize the specificity of the
division of labour during this manufacturing period: here the collective
worker is composed by a large number of fragmented workers. At the same
time, we note a differentiation and specialization of the instruments of
labour. Despite the trend to the fragmentation of tasks, the creation of
a hierarchy between qualified workers and assistants, the reduction of
the cost of apprenticeship, and the mutilation of workers through
intense specialization, handicraft remained the basis of manufacture and
the pivot for proletarian resistance. As manufacturing developed, this
narrow technical basis came into conflict with production needs; to
overcome them, machines were given birth.

### 1.3 Machinery, the industrial revolution, and the development of productivity

In the section of _Capital, Volume I_ dealing with large-scale industry,
Marx includes a chapter on "The development of machinery." He begins the
chapter by reiterating a basic tenet of revolutionary communism: any
increase in the productive power of labour also means increased
exploitation of proletarian labour-power and a refinement of this
exploitation. As a result, developing the application of machinery under
capitalism is simply a particular method of producing relative
surplus-value.

Apologists of technological progress must call in again: it is directly
oriented against the proletariat. It is synonymous with developing
relative surplus-value, with an increased exploitation of labour-power,
and with a higher valorization of capital thanks to increased
surplus-value^[For a definition of this term, see 3.7.].

Socialism takes back the term _industrial revolution_ to mean the moment
(during the early period of large-scale industry in 18th century Europe
after passing through manufacture) when "mechanical production" took
over manual production where tools remain central. Tools which had once
been handled by man' hands now became parts in a working machine.
Workers formerly made use of the tool; now the machine makes use of
them. Tool-based manual production, even in a reorganized production
process such as in manufacture, could only produce a limited increase in
labour productivity. Machines open the perspective of an unlimited
labour productivity.

The industrial revolution does not translate to the creation of machines
which are an extension of the hand, but to the elimination of man from
the productive process. This phenomenon opened up new extraordinary
perspectives to the development of the productivity of labour. Not only
does it mean that the number of simultaneous active tools can be
multiplied, it also means an increase in the speed of execution.
Gradually machinery seized all branches of production, "which are
connected together by being separate phases of a process." Progress in
one branch means progress in others, for example large-scale spinning
and weaving sphere requires progress in the chemical industry so that
dyes might be produced, and so on. The capitalist mode of production
therefore helps to unify all human activity and put in place a "system
of general social metabolism" (Marx). By weaving together the industrial
fabric, interconnecting all branches of production, and considerably
increasing labour productivity, capital creates the conditions for a
society where collective, socialized production will allow for
individual free development.

But the logic inherent to technological development cannot only be
viewed from an inside perspective of the machine, neither as a movement
detached from the social form in which it exists. Spurred on by the
movement of the valorization of capital, the movement that integrates
techniques generates fundamental social consequences for the evolution
of humanity, beginning with the unification of the productive class, the
proletariat.

This is why socialism calls industrial revolution the machinery
phenomenon. It is not only a technological evolution, a new invention of
the human history. Its arrival sets down the material basis for
communism by allowing for an unlimited development of productivity and a
permanent reduction in necessary labour-time, settling the basis of an
affluent society. But that is not all! Machinery also induces a labour
process _specific_ to the capitalist mode of production and permanently
creates the associated social labour. It creates the class of the
associated producers who has to supersede the dictatorship of capital in
order to realize the machinery potential and bring the productive power
of labour to another, higher, level.

Therefore, the industrial revolution, in its very concept, potentially
induces the perspective of a classless society, the communist society.
With the industrial revolution, the bourgeoisie set in motion productive
forces that come into conflict with the exclusive and limited end-goal
of capitalist production: the production of maximum surplus-value. This
conflict between the trend of the unlimited development of the
productive forces and the relations of production specific to the
capitalism mode of production results in general crises of
overproduction (catastrophic crises in that, for social reasons, society
is devastated in the same way as natural catastrophes). Such crises are
periodic reminders that a new society is arrived, and, with their
tendency to be ever larger, they will lead to the violent overthrow of
capital.

All through history, human development has been contradictorily occurred
throughout class societies, conflicts, and various contradictions.
Throughout this development, the question of social _productivity_ has
remained central. As long as human species dedicates a large part of
their time to insure necessary subsistence, there is no room for
socialism, even that, under the form of millenarian movements and
religious utopias, the idea of an egalitarian society find its origins
far back in history. The capitalist mode of production is the first in
history where productivity develops on a social basis in that it allows
foreseeing the satisfaction of social needs that goes far beyond just
the reproduction of the species.

## 2. Some fundamental notions of Marxist theory

### 2.1 The definition of commodity

A _commodity_ is any material object or service produced for the
purposes of being exchanged. Commodities have not always existed: North
America Indian tribes had never known about commodities until the
arrival of European colonists. These tribes instead produced and
consumed products collectively. Between the first appearance of
commodities and what we know today, many societies have been developed
only partly mercantile, and only in certain activities, like for example
during the Middle Ages when villagers were able to continue living on
their own products. Only in the capitalist mode of production is where
the reign of commodities is generalized.

Nowadays, all of the things we use in our day-to-day lives are
commodities, whether it is tangible objects like food, clothing,
furniture, or services like public transport and certain leisure. Also,
commodities are not limited to individual consumption; machines, raw
materials, workplaces, work tools and, specially, the labour-power of
the wage-labourers are commodities. It is the way of consuming that
differs. Marx uses the term _productive consumption_ to refer to the
commodities consumed during the production process.

### 2.2 Use-value and exchange-value

All commodities have a use to those who buy them (we can discuss about
the social value of certain objects or gadgets but that is not the issue
for the moment). We call this their useful value, or more precisely
their _use-value_. The use-value of an object, of a commodity, is what
makes it useful to me and what makes me want to possess it. Up to this
point, the concept is easy for anyone to grasp. Now it remains to ask
why objects as diverse in their uses as a kilo of apples, a DVD, a litre
of gasoline, a monkey wrench, a digital-controlled machine, a tonne of
copper, a computer screen, an hour of cell-phone credit, and a t-shirt
are all called _commodities_. It remains also to understand why, with
$50, I can buy either one microwave oven, ten dozen oysters, fifty kilos
of nails, two hammers, ten reams of paper, one pair of shoes, six movie
tickets, three hours of cleaning services, etc.

The answer lies in the fact that these objects (services) have another
dimension besides their use-value which we call _exchange value_. All
commodities have a dual character: they have both a use-value and an
exchange-value. The latter is due to the fact that they are not produced
primarily to satisfy society's needs, but to be sold on the market. In a
communist society, just as in the first human societies, objects
produced will always have a social use and no longer have an
exchange-value. It would therefore be a commodity-free society.

But what about different quantities of various objects which have the
same value and can therefore be exchanged?

The answer is that two commodities can have the same value because they
contain the same amount of an invisible substance in their concrete
form: the human labour that has been necessary for their production.

Therefore, it is not a matter of a tailor's concrete labour making a
coat, a farmer growing apples, or a papermaker producing paper, but
rather the human labour in general. The _labour-time_ spent to produce a
commodity is what determines the amount of the value, of the
exchange-value. Commodities are exchanged among them because they
represent equal amounts of the same _general labour_, an abstraction
emerged from their concrete forms. Concrete labour, producer of
use-values, is opposed to general labour, abstract, producer of
exchange-values.

The labour contained in commodities, however, must be carried out in
average social conditions of production, which obviously varies both
historically and geographically according to the evolution of societies.
When we say that the labour-time is the measure of the value contained
in commodities, we are referring to the _average socially necessary
labour-time_. Indeed, it is not because a handyman person who enjoys
woodworking makes his^[We will use "he or his", instead of the
"politically correct" 20th century he/she or his/her formulas,
concerning "Man", as a reference to humans, and not to "man" as a
reference to males.] own furniture that this furniture may be sold on
the market at a value corresponding to the labour-time that he actually
spent in its production. The value of a table is calculated on the basis
of the average socially necessary labour-time to make a new instance of
the table, even though our handyman has spent far more private
labour-time to produce his product. If the value of a table with similar
quality of use is sold in a store by $200, for example, the equivalent
of three hours of social labour, and that our handyman has spent nine
hours to produce his table (including the purchase of equipment), he
cannot expect to sell it for more than $200 (and definitely not by $600,
the amount that represents its spending of socially valorized labour).

The dual character of the commodity is not easy to grasp. The commodity
does not indicate at first sight that its value is in proportion to the
amount of human labour socially necessary to produce it. Furthermore,
this dual character appears as something natural. The exchange-value,
which is attached to it and that conceals particular social relations,
presents itself like a natural property. We will see later the
importance of the mystificator character of the commodity.

### 2.3 Labour-power

Why do we say labour-power and not simply labour?

When workers make something, they may assemble a number of raw materials
or objects, but they do not have a box or bucket stamped with "labour"
next to them containing a substance which would be the "labour" that
they would inject into the production. Labour is not a material, it does
not exist outside of the power that is able to create it, that is to say
the human ability, intellectual and physical, that one uses to
accomplish a task, whether it is picking apples, assembling auto parts,
or calculating the structures of a bridge.

One commodity in bourgeois society has a unique use-value: the ability
to produce more value than it takes to reproduce itself. This commodity
is the _labour-power_: the specific human ability to use intellectual
and physical capacity to accomplish a large variety of productive tasks
and, in the end, transform nature.

So, what the capitalist is really buying from the proletariat is not
their labour, but rather this particular commodity, its labour-power,
labour-capacity, in order to be consumed, inasmuch as its use-value is
its ability to produce an additional value, an extra value, a
surplus-value. No other commodity consumed during the production process
give up to the product more than its own value, neither raw materials
nor machines.

In order for this exchange relation to exist, there must be reached a
historical relation that puts capitalists, which have the monopoly of
the money and the means of production and subsistence, on one side and
proletarians^[In ancient Rome, the proletarians (proles) were those
whose only wealth was their lineage.], which have been dispossessed of
all means of production and possessing no source of wealth besides its
own labour-power, which have been forced to exchange for wages, on the
other. This has not always been the case, historically, such as in
ancient Indian tribes and in Gallic society, and still is not for direct
producers like peasants, artisans, and so on.

So how do we define the value of labour-power?

The same way we calculate the value of any other commodity: by the
average socially necessary labour-time required to reproduce it. Before
they are able to perform productive labour, individuals must be raised,
educated, and trained. They also require food, housing, clothing,
electricity, transportation... The sum of all these needs makes up the
total amount of what is needed to spend to maintain this labour-power.
Naturally these needs vary from place to place and times. The portion of
leisure or of abundant consumption may vary, downward or upward.

There are numerous historical examples of the way the eating habits of
the masses were changed to lower the cost of their upkeep, such as
promoting the introduction of potatoes, or making English workers
drinking tea instead of milk.

What is needed to be remembered here is that labour-power is a
commodity. Like all commodities, it has a use-value (the ability to
produce commodities and be the source of value and surplus-value) and an
exchange-value determined by the amount of average socially necessary
labour-time required to produce it.

### 2.4 Surplus-value

Why do we say that labour-power, or labour-capacity, is a commodity that
can produce more value than it costs to its owner, the capitalist, to
buy?

Because the capitalist can exploit the labour-power for more labour-time
than the average socially necessary labour-time required to reproduce
it. And since the value of a commodity is nothing else than the
labour-time required for its production, the value of labour-power is,
in fact, lower than the value created during a working day or month. The
capitalist pays for the former and appropriates the latter. The
difference between the two is what we call _surplus-value_. It
corresponds to the unpaid labour provided by the worker, or
_surplus-labour_.

For example, if a capitalist can buy a working day from a proletarian
for 100 units of currency, he has the right to require the worker to
provide seven, eight, ten or more hours of labour, according to the
labour-laws in place.

Let us suppose that the elements we listed above, as necessary for the
reproduction of labour-power, represent the equivalent of two hours of
production, that, in other words, after two hours of production the
capitalist would have recuperated his advance. So what happens after
those two hours? Does the capitalist then say to the proletarian: "Thank
you, you have done your work well, so you may now rest"? Of course not!
Instead, the capitalist will take advantage of their contract to employ
the worker for the six remaining hours in a normal, legal, working day
in, for example, a 44 hour work-week in Brazil (closer to 40 hours in
fact, at most companies), or 35 hours in France, or more in the U.K. and
the U.S.

And what exactly do these six hours mean to the capitalist? They are
pure bonus, unpaid labour, free labour, and therefore what we have
defined as surplus-labour, the time during which surplus-value is
produced.

This is why the fights for the reduction of the working day are an
essential element in the balance of power between the proletariat and
the capitalist class, because they concern the time which can be spent
in the production of surplus-value.

This results in an important consequence: even respectful capitalists
who treat their workers "well," keeping the length of the working day
within the legal limits, paying the labour-power correctly, and
maintaining a good relationship with their employees, even these
capitalists, despite their virtues, are exploiters due to the fact that
they make their workers produce free labour, that they have not paid
for.

The strength of Marxism is that it is not a morals that limits itself to
denouncing the poor conditions inflicted on the proletariat, but it is a
theory whose demonstration has the power of a scientific truth:
exploitation is inherent to capitalist social relations. So whether
bosses are "crooks" or not, they must all be eliminated, not as
individuals but as the representatives of a social relation rooted in
exploitation. Their time is over. According to Marx and Engels, as the
productivity of labour increases, the entire bourgeoisie becomes
strictly _useless_.

### 2.5 Wages

We have seen that labour-power, like all commodities, has a value
determined by the average socially necessary labour-time required to
reproduce it. And like any other commodity, labour-power also has a
price that represents the concrete monetary expression of its value.

The value of a commodity is socially determined by the amount of labour
it contains, but its market price is a function of supply and demand.
Commodities are sold at a price above their value if demand is high and
below their value if it is low. It is all about _variations_ around a
value, which is determined by the average socially necessary labour-time
required to produce commodities. Yet, just to mention, this is all more
complicated than it first appears. Indeed, in the capitalist mode of
production the market prices of commodities do not gravitate around the
value, but around prices of production. The price of production is the
price resulting from the equalization of rates of profit between large
masses of capital, but these prices of production are themselves ruled
by the movement of the value. During crises, while lacks a solvent
demand for all commodities, there tends to be a generalized fall in
prices, a general depreciation of commodities; this is one of the forms
of the devaluation that seizes capital during crises of overproduction.

This is also true of the labour-power commodity. What the proletarian
trades as wage-labour is the _price_ of his labour-power. We have seen
that the value of labour-power is determined by the amount of time it
takes to both produce and reproduce it. A longer period of education and
a higher level of qualification, for example, but also a faster wearing
of labour-power due to a longer working day or an increase in the
intensity of the labour, all tend to increase the value of labour-power.
On the other hand, there is also the influence of supply and demand
regarding the variation of prices around this average value. If there
are few workers of a certain qualification available when demand is
high, their labour-power will tend to be sold above its value, that is
to say at a higher price; but conversely, if there are too many workers,
in a period of unemployment, for example, wages will tend to fall and
their labour-power will be sold by a price below its value.

Despite the unemployment due to crises, Marx shows that capital
maintains an "industrial reserve army" a surplus population whose role
is to constantly drive wages down.

In the quest for maximum surplus-value, the capitalist class seeks to
lower the price of labour-power below its value as well as to lower this
value itself. In the 19th century, for example, British capitalists
praised the frugality of the French worker for being underfed and
therefore underpriced. They themselves by introducing cheaper food into
the diet aimed at the reduction of the value of labour-power. Marx
wrote: "Nowadays these aspirations were largely exceeded, thanks to the
cosmopolitan concurrence into which the development of the capitalist
production has thrown all workers of the globe. It is no longer question
of simply reduce the English wages to the Continental Europe ones, but
to lower the European level to the Chinese one in a more or less near
future".

### 2.6 The elements that make up capital

The above mentioned concepts: labour-power, surplus-value, and wages,
are fundamental to the critique of political economy, but in order to
fully understand why and how capital is historically condemned we must
look at its movement and the contradictions which appear there in its
entirety.

Capitalists advance more than just wages. To exploit labour-power and to
extract a maximum of surplus-value, they must also have available the
means of production: machines, raw materials, energy sources, buildings
and floors, and land in the case of agriculture. These make up what Marx
calls _constant capital_. It is called _constant_ because these elements
transfer their value to the product during the production process.
Whereas the part advanced to pay wages is called _variable capital_
because it gives back a variable value beyond its initial value. This
part of capital can only render a higher value, however, because it is
exchanged for labour-power, the only commodity able to produce more
value that it costs.

So, a commodity production which goes out each day from a factory will
be made up by:

* a fraction of the value of the machines and what is more generally
  referred to as _fixed capital_ (the fixed part of constant capital);
  this value is not transferred all at once, but little by little, and
  is what economists call value of amortization;
* the value of the raw materials, fluids, etc. that go into the product;
  this is what is called the _circulating_ part of _constant capital_;
* the value of the wages paid to proletarians corresponding to the
  _variable capital_; this is the part of the working day that is paid
  for, which Marx calls _necessary labour_.
* and, finally the _surplus-value_ produced during the working day by
  these same proletarians, which corresponds to the part of the working
  day that is _surplus-labour_.

The value of a commodity therefore boils down to the amount of labour it
contains, that is to say the amount of labour-time necessary to produce
it bringing together all stages of its production. The raw materials
that will be transformed are themselves products of labour, and
therefore have in turn an exchange value in the capitalist mode of
production. This value (as well as the spent fraction of the fixed
capital) is added to the value that is created during the production of
the new commodity. Marx says that the value of this constant capital is
_transferred_ to the product.

This clearly shows one of the challenges capitalism will have to face,
which we will address in the next section when we look at the role of
machinery. To make labour more productive, capitalism tends to increase
the portion of constant capital in the production; well, this portion
does not create new value, it only transfers its existing value.

The relation between constant capital (c) and variable capital (v), as
expressed in the formula c/v, represents what Marx calls the _organic
composition_ of capital. The fact that this organic composition
increases (that is to say that the mass of constant capital grows
significantly in regards to the mass of wages mobilised to put it in
operation) is a contradictory element in capitalist production, whose
only goal is to obtain surplus-value which itself can only be produced
through living labour. We will further see the consequences this has on
the rate of profit and its evolution later on.

But what are the methods capital can use to constantly push this quest
for surplus-value further?

Historically, Marx distinguishes two methods: the production of absolute
surplus-value and the production of relative surplus-value. These two
types of surplus-value are not necessarily antagonistic. They may be
combined, that is to say they can reinforce one-another. In any case,
absolute surplus-value cannot exist without a sufficient level of
development of the productive power of labour and relative surplus-value
cannot exist without a sufficiently long working day. While constituting
the basis from one another, they are distinguished by the historical
evolution of their relations.

### 2.7 Absolute surplus-value and relative surplus-value

Firstly, when capital began to take over production through the
expropriation of traditional producers (artisans and peasants, movement
that we discussed in more detail in Chapter 2), it starts by
_lengthening the working day_. The labour performed in agrarian
societies was certainly hard and the years of poor harvests very
difficult, but despite the long hours spent in the fields, peasants
still had some free time: breaks, meals, snacks, home improvements
during the winter months... But there was a sort of natural rhythm that
dictated the way work was organized and the period over which it was
carried out.

With manufacturing labour, which developed in Europe from the 16th
century onwards, this rhythm was transformed considerably, a
transformation that would be intensified by the transition to
large-scale industry at the end of the 18th century.

The first rise in productivity was achieved by concentrating a large
amount of labour-power in one place. This increased productivity made
the manufacture more competitive, but it was still simply taking again
the techniques used by artisans, concentrating them and rationalising
their application. The only way to further increase the portion of
unpaid labour was to prolong the labour-time.

Marx calls the surplus-value that resulted from this lengthening of the
working day _absolute surplus-value_. If the working day is 12 hours
long, for example, and only 6 of those hours are necessary to reproduce
the value of labour-power (necessary labour), it would have to lengthen
the working day from 12 to 14 hours to gain an extra two hours of
surplus-labour. This would mean 6 hours of necessary labour and 8 hours
of surplus-labour. The amount of surplus-labour, so the surplus-value,
would then have been increased by one-third without affecting the amount
of necessary labour, as long as the additional wearing of labour-power
remained unpaid.

During the period that predates the industrial revolution, capital had
no choice but to favour this kind of surplus-value. But with the limited
technical basis available in manufactures, the working day could not be
prolonged excessively. Besides physical limitations, technical
limitations (such as the lack of sufficient lighting to allow working at
night) and cultural limitations played a role as well, with social
rhythms and customs contributing resistance to this movement.

It wasn't until machinery that capital was able to generalize other
methods for increasing the production of surplus-value. Creating its
specific own technical basis with the machine, capital, through
eliminating the hand from the production process based on large-scale
industry, yields the means to increase the quantity of surplus-value
produced while reducing the value of labour-power through developing
productivity.

This is what Marx calls _relative_ surplus-value, a surplus-value no
longer obtained through the lengthening of the working day but instead
through the reduction of the value of labour-power or through the
changing of the relation between surplus-labour and necessary labour,
therefore changing the relative lengths of the two portions of the
working day without prolonging it.

Necessary labour represents that which is actually _necessary_ in order
for labour-power to reproduce its own value; beyond this, labour-power
produces surplus-value. To allow a _relative_ increase in the portion
dedicated to surplus-labour without also prolonging the labour-time,
either the amount of time it takes to reproduce the value of
labour-power must be reduced or the value created during this same
period is increased while the value (or price) of the labour-power does
not increase proportionally.

Thanks to a general increase in labour-productivity, capital can reduce
the value of commodities that go into the reproduction of the value of
labour-power, thereby decreasing the value of labour-power and, as a
result, reducing the time necessary to reproduce it. Let us return to
the example of the 12 hour working day made up of 6 hours of necessary
labour and 6 hours of surplus-labour. Let us suppose that the general
increase in labour-productivity reduces the duration of necessary labour
to 4 hours. The time spent to produce surplus-value will be 8 hours
instead of 6 as before. This would also allow capital to increase the
mass of surplus-value produced by one-third, but in this case without
affecting the labour-time.

Likewise, by increasing the intensity of labour, capital can increase
the value created during the same amount of time. As long as the value
of labour-power (or its price) remains the same or does not increase too
much, surplus-value increases.

### 2.8 Productive and unproductive labour

Marx, like a number of classical economists, such as Adam Smith, before
him, distinguishes between productive and unproductive labour. The
definition of productive work within the framework of the capitalist
mode of production is quite clear: productive labour is labour that
produces surplus-value for capital. In other words, as we shall see, the
expression "productive labour" does not mean a "labour which produces
something," otherwise every handyman or amateur cook would be considered
"productive," so it really means _labour that produces surplus-value_.

We can therefore clearly see the crucial nature of this question, since
the issue of exploitation and the definition of class and classes
struggle are its background. The proletariat, the productive class, is
also the only class in the capitalist mode of production that is
exploited. On the other hand, if productive labour exists, there must
also exist unproductive labour, and therefore unproductive workers. By
contrast, when labour is exchanged for income and not for capital, it
does not produce surplus-value, it is unproductive. If a capitalist who
owns a cleaning business, for example, employs ten wage-earnings to
clean company offices, for example, that is considered productive
labour. But if this same capitalist hires a cleaner to clean his home
out of his own income (which is not here capital), he is not employing
productive labour because this labour does not create surplus-value
during its consumption.

So one of the main criteria that allows us to determine whether labour
(and therefore a worker or a group of workers performing the labour,
since individualizing the issue has little interest in itself) is
productive or unproductive, is to verify whether it is exchanged for
capital or for income (the case, for example, of State employees).

Labour can be exchanged for capital and from this viewpoint return a
profit to the capitalist, yet still not be considered productive. This
is the case of all labour that arises on the sphere of circulation
(banks, commercial aspects of trade, etc.) or the incidental expenses of
production (insurance and accounting, for example). So only labour that
is exchanged for capital within the sphere of material production
produces surplus-value and is therefore productive.

It follows from that:

1. Although all productive workers are wage-labourers, not all
   wage-labourer is productive. Marxism shows that, even if there is an
   increase in wage-labour, it is the unproductive wage-labour within it
   that grows the fastest and which is the material basis for the rise
   of the modern middle-classes, salaried middle-classes. Ancient
   middle-classes do not emerge from the capitalist mode of production,
   and they tend to diminish. On the other hand, even not being
   producers of surplus-value, they may be producers of value (peasants
   and artisans, for example).
2. Productive labour is not assimilable to the one that produces a
   tangible product, a concrete object.
3. Productive labour is not assimilable to the manual labour. The
   proletariat is not made up solely of the socio-professional category
   "worker" or, in other words, Marx does not conceive of a working
   class made up of only manual labourers. This is similar to when we
   confuse the notion of industrial capital with the industrial branch
   alone. In fact, agriculture and services can emerge from industrial
   capital and allow the production of surplus-value.
4. Productive labour is not assimilable to the one that produces
   socially useful objects. Proletarians who produce weapons or luxury
   items produce surplus-value and are therefore productive. In the same
   way, unproductive labour is not necessarily useless labour or
   socially detrimental. The communist society, for example, will need
   social accounting whose role will be all the more important even
   though its relative cost would be much lower.
5. It is useless to individualize productive labour. Marx shows that the
   capitalist mode of production has, from early on in its existence,
   been characterized by the existence of a collective worker (see
   cooperation, manufacture, and large-scale industry) that carries out
   material production.
6. The salaried middle-class is not characterised by a mid-level income,
   as it is by bourgeois sociology. The upper echelons of the
   proletariat or the most qualified fractions of it may have higher
   incomes than many members of the middle-class. What differentiates
   the two is the productive or unproductive nature of their labour and
   not their levels of wages.

### 2.9 Formal subsumption and real subsumption of labour under capital

When referring to the evolution of the capitalist mode of production
(among other things), Marx uses the concepts of formal subsumption and
real subsumption of labour under capital. By labour we mean productive
wage-labour; this labour is therefore also the way in which the
proletariat is subjugated to the authority of capital.

So what do these somewhat complex terms, whose meanings are often
misinterpreted, mean?

At first, capital can only invest itself in what are the already
established conditions of production in the society of that time. At
this point, the majority of the labour is carried out with fairly
traditional tools, such as the spinning wheel, the weaving loom, and all
the hand tools used in traditional trades (carpentry, masonry,
woodworking, pottery, shoemaking, and so on).

One of the main roles capital plays is first to concentrate a large
amount of labour-power in one place (workshop, manufacture, and later
the factory), naturally resulting in a general rise in the productivity
of labour (see Chapter 1 on simple cooperation) which continues to
increase when a technical division of labour is put in place. This rise
in the productivity of labour which enables simple cooperation and after
the division of labour specific to the manufacturing period allows for
an increase in the production of relative surplus-value. But once this
organization of labour is instituted and since the increase in
productivity of labour remains limited, the increase in surplus-labour
can only be in the form of absolute surplus-value.

Overall, the technical procedures in place in this first period are not
fundamentally modified. Labour processes and production procedures
remain the same or very similar to those used in the pre-capitalist
handicraft. This is why Marx calls it _the formal subsumption of labour
under capital. The form of labour process remains unchanged, but it is
submitted from now on to the valorization process of capital_. In other
words, the spinners or weavers working with others in the capitalist's
workshop perform the same gestures with the same tools, but their social
relation to these work tools and to the product of their labour has
changed. Although the labour process has been inherited from
pre-capitalist forms of production, it is from this point on submitted
to capital and to its only goal: producing maximum surplus-value.

With the formal subsumption of labour under capital, the scale of
production increases. A large number of workers are brought under the
command of capital. This formal subsumption of labour under capital is
therefore at the origin of the capitalist mode of production and has
existed from the moment wage-labourers began to work using
pre-capitalist technology. Simple co-operation, like the manufacturing
period, emerge therefore from the formal subsumption of labour under
capital, because although its end-goal is still the production of
maximum surplus-value, the labour process is not significantly
transformed.

Because of this, in the formal subsumption of labour under capital, once
the level of development of the productive power of labour has been
established, it is only under the form of absolute surplus-value that
surplus-value can be produced. Once the new organization of labour to
render it more productive has been put in place, the amount of
surplus-value produced using the same techniques before capital took
over production cannot be increased without resorting to practices such
as the lengthening of the working day. The formal subsumption of labour
under capital can therefore only produce this form of surplus-value.

Socially speaking, we are dealing here with a completely established
capitalist mode of production, or in other words with the social
relation that chains proletarians to the instruments of labour that
appears before them and outside them as _capital_. From this
perspective, the formal subsumption of labour under capital is a general
form of the capitalist production process. But technically, this capital
has not yet transformed the general forms of the labour process; the
technology used is not yet specific, peculiar to the capitalist mode of
production.

Yet this first concentration of the means of labour (both constant
capital with tools and raw materials, and variable capital with
proletarians) combined with the ensuing division of labour, forms the
basis for a technical progress specific to the capitalist mode of
production. To take the extraction movement of surplus-value a step
further, it is not enough to make men work for longer, but also to make
them work differently.

Marx refers to the moment when capital _really_ subsumes labour, that is
to say when it develops its own technology dictated by the specific goal
of the capital: the production of maximum surplus-value, now no longer
inherited from previous forms of production.

This is why the _real subsumption of labour under capital_ is an
intrinsic form specific to the capitalist mode of production, its most
highly developed form. It includes the formal subsumption of labour
under capital, because in its general dimension which consists of
submitting a large number of workers under capital, this one remains
throughout the capitalist mode of production. The formal subsumption of
labour under capital has therefore a specific dimension and, on the one
hand, particular to a passed historical period of the capitalist mode of
production, but also a general dimension that remains throughout the
history of this mode of production, which is embraced by the real
subsumption framework. In a way, the real subsumption of labour under
capital succeeds the formal subsumption of labour under capital while
also maintaining it and putting it on a higher level. With the real
subsumption of labour under capital, the production of _relative_
surplus-value can soar, bringing with it an extraordinary increase in
the exploitation of the proletariat.

The capitalist mode of production is acquainted with a historical
movement that leads it to develop itself into an increasingly "pure"
model, even if this model is never fully completed in reality. All
branches of production fall under the thumb of capital, which imposes
itself in opposition to the independent producer. Marx says capital is
"value in process", value valorizing itself. Although this expression of
philosophical nature is abstract, this movement is concretely embodied
in its voracious quest for surplus-value, a quest for which the
capitalist mode of production sets in motion the productive forces and
seeks to seize all the results of science and technical development to
put them at the service of this valorization, of this quest for maximum
surplus-value.

It is through the development of machinery, during the industrial
revolution, that the extraordinary gains of productivity, which the
capitalist mode of production puts to the service of the production of
surplus-value, are made possible and which communism will put to the
service of the reduction of the time and the hardship of labour to allow
humans to fully enjoy their free time without worrying about the future.

### 2.10 The rate of surplus-value, the rate of profit, and the tendential fall in the rate of profit

We must now go further in our examination of the general movement of
capital and show how the principles on which capital is founded are the
very thing that will lead to its dissolution. In short, the more capital
seeks to produce surplus-value, the more it comes up against obstacles
to increasing this same surplus-value.

When relating surplus-labour to necessary labour, surplus-value to
variable capital, Marx refers to the _rate of surplus-value_, which is
defined by the equation s/v (the mass of surplus-value produced over the
variable capital advanced). It measures the extent of capital's
exploitation of labour-power.

Let us say that the capitalist advances $100 of variable capital for one
8-hour working day, and that 4 hours of this labour represent necessary
labour. At the end of the day, the value corresponding to the living
labour performed is $200 and the capitalist therefore pockets a
surplus-value of $100. We would then say that the rate of surplus-value
is 100%.

But among the conditions of production, the living labour, labour-power,
is not enough. It can only produce because it sets in motion dead labour
in the form of the means of production (machines, raw materials...)
which are called, according to Marx, constant capital (c).

If we relate our $100 of produced surplus-value to not only the $100 of
variable capital (v) but to the total capital advanced, that is to say
c + v, we no longer get the same result.

If the constant capital c advanced is $100, it is necessary to relate
the $100 of surplus-value to 100c + 100v = 200.

The rate of surplus-value is still 100%, but the _rate of profit_, which
is written as s/(c+v), that is to say the surplus-value related to the
total capital advanced (c+v), is only 50% (100/200).

We see here that, by definition, the rate of profit is lower than the
rate of surplus-value.

However, among the conditions of the development of the capitalist mode
of production we find the development of machinery and of the
productivity of labour that comes with it and which results, as we have
seen, in an increase in the organic composition of capital.

Suppose our capitalist buys machines which are more expensive, but which
allow for an increase in the productivity of labour and require fewer
workers to run them. At the same time, all things remaining unchanged
otherwise, if productivity increases, so does the amount of raw
materials and intermediate products used by the same amount of
labour-power. Then we will have the following situation (abstracting
from the productivity feedback):

200c + 80v +80s

The rate of surplus-value (s/v) is still 100%, but the rate of profit
has now fallen to 28.5%.

Marx calls this phenomenon the _tendential fall in the rate of profit_.
This is the most important law of political economy^[For further reading
on these subjects, see "Aux fondements des crises. Le marxisme de la
chaire et les crises", by Robin Goodfellow.]. It is tendential because,
like all laws, its action is affected by a particular set of
circumstances. In this case, this law is also subject to counteracting
factors. It is therefore only present in the long-term and in particular
circumstances. If there were no counteracting factors, capitalism would
quickly wither away.

Among these counteracting factors, Marx highlights:

* The increase in the exploitation of the labour-power through the
  development of the productivity and intensity of labour;
* The depreciation of the elements of constant capital: the calculation
  we have applied to the value of v also applies to c. Suppose that
  where before it took 50 hours to build a machine, now it only
  takes 25. This means that the portion of c represented by this machine
  has had its value cut in half. In the same way, if the rise in
  productivity overtakes the production of raw materials and
  intermediate products, the value of these items decreases. Capital has
  therefore succeeded in increasing the _technical composition_ of
  capital while holding up the rise of the _value composition_. This is
  why that to define the organic composition of capital we say that it
  is the value composition, insofar as it reflects the technical
  composition.
* Relative surplus population. There exists in society an unemployed or
  underemployed population which carries weight to technical progress
  because capital may prefer to employ underpaid workers rather than
  invest in modernization. This is the case for luxury industries in
  general, and the tendency to develop luxury follows the development of
  capital, particularly when it comes to satisfying the needs of the
  upper middle-classes. Generally speaking, the development of branches
  which employ more than the average amount of living labour helps to
  counteract the tendential fall in the rate of profit.

### 2.11 The cycle of accumulation

Capitalist production takes the form of the following circular circuit,
or cycle:

_Money_ (money-capital advanced by the capitalist) -- _Commodity_
(purchase of the means of production and the labour-power) --
_Production_ (production of commodities within the production process)
-- _Commodity_ (commodities resulting from the production process ready
for sale; their value is higher than the value of the commodities at the
beginning of the production process because they contain surplus-value)
-- _Money_ (realization of the value of commodities into money; at the
end of the cycle, the money-capital is greater than the money-capital
advanced at the beginning of the cycle because it has been increased by
surplus-value).

The capitalist advances capital in the form of money, converts it into
means of production and labour-power to end in producing commodities.
Yet these commodities are of no use to the capitalist if they cannot be
sold. In other words, the movement of the transformation of
money-capital into commodity-capital is of no use without the rest of
the movement: the transformation and realization of commodity-capital
into money-capital augmented by the surplus-value produced.

As the terms "cycle of accumulation" and "circulation" suggest, this is
a circular movement which is never-ending in principle. But it would be
a mistake to overlook what is happening at the different moments of the
cycle. We might compare it to the cycle of water. All of the
metamorphoses of the cycle must be completed in order for the cycle to
be complete, but it is not irrelevant to examine it from one of its
states rather than another one. There is water, the vapour produced by
evaporation, clouds, rain, and back to water, these are always the same
matter (H2O) which expresses itself in various forms.

Here it is capital which appears in different forms and passes from one
form into another, from the form of money to the form of productive
capital (the means of production and labour-power), to the form of
commodities and then back to the form of money.

Through this movement, capital achieves its objective, its
"supreme-goal:" producing maximum surplus-value. In other words, the
capitalist does not want to simply recover the amount invested in
production, but to recover a greater sum of money.

It is important to remember that all that lies behind these objects
(money, commodities) is _capital_. Capitalists throw their capital into
the production process and it metamorphoses itself, constantly changing
its forms, from money-form to the form of means of production (machines,
raw materials, labour-power), to the form of commodities destined for
the market, back to money-form, and so on. If this cycle is regular and
sustained there is no problem, but if there is a long delay between two
metamorphoses, the cycle may break down. This is what happens during
_crises_: if the commodities produced cannot be reconverted into money,
if capital can no longer continue its cycle to be reincarnated into
money and be reinvested, it remains unemployed and risks becoming
devalued. This is why Marx calls these crises as _crises of
overproduction_: there is too much capital, too many commodities being
produced which cannot be realized. At the same time, if money-capital
cannot make enough surplus-value, it will not succeed to accumulate.
Lack of realization and failure to convert money-capital into the
elements of productive capital (means of production and labour-power)
are two aspects of the same phenomenon specific to general crises of
overproduction, that is to say the economic crises specific to the most
developed capitalist mode of production, the first of which dates back
to 1825.

But what do capitalists do with surplus-value if they do manage to
realize it? If they spend all of it, there can be no accumulation. In
order to pursue capital's end-goal, the production of maximum
surplus-value, surplus-value must be at least partly capitalized upon,
that is to say it must be retransformed into capital that can begin a
new production cycle on a larger scale. If capitalists have a given
amount of money to put into the production process in the first place,
we have seen that they will also need to have at their disposal means of
production and labour-power. As soon as they have an additional amount
of money to inject into the production process, they will also have to
find additional means of production: more machines, raw materials, and
labour-power.

This constitutes the basis for the movement of capital, the accumulation
of capital. Marx also calls this reproduction on an increasing scale,
and compares it, using the words of the bourgeois economist Sismondi, to
a _spiral_.

This is how the conditions for the development of a capitalist society
are created. It is not enough for there to be money, there must also
exist in front of money something to be employed usefully _as capital_.

In other words, it is necessary to transform money into means of
production and labour-power on the market. We have mentioned that, along
with commodities, the division of labour is a _sine qua non_ condition
for the exchange of products on a common standard: their value as a
function of the amount of labour-time spent to reproduce them. Here we
find again the division of labour, but on a social scale. There must
exist complementary branches of industry, so that some produce tool
machines, others raw materials, others electronic parts, and so on.
There must also exist a class of free workers who will, under the
authority of capital, provide productive labour. In this way, the
production process is also a process for the reproduction of capitalist
relations of production, a production and reproduction process as well
as an expansion of both. This expansion ever-increasingly disadvantages
the productive class.

Bourgeois economists who came before Marx, and, to a greater extent, the
Economics professors of today understand none of all this. They believe
that the additional value recovered by capitalists comes from the
commercial sphere, that it is because a commodity is sold more expensive
than its price that they are able to pocket a surplus-value, or they
imagine that the means of production themselves, such as faster
machines, fertile soil, and new inventions, for example, have the
ability to produce value. However, as we have seen, surplus-value is in
fact created in the production sphere by productive wage-labour. It is
not theft, but it is the result of the exploitation of the proletarian
class.

There is another point on which Marx criticizes his adversaries: the
economists. As good defenders of bourgeois law, economists always
portray the relationship between the capitalist and the worker in terms
of two people who have entered into a contract. But this relationship
should not, however, be examined on an individual level, it should be
seen as the way relations between these two classes are tied, in other
words, as all capitalists against all proletarians.

The goal of the movement we call the accumulation of capital is to
produce maximum surplus-value. It is an absolute necessity for capital
to continually expand production from the moment this latter is based
upon its valorization. This means any value invested in production is
purposeless unless it renders, at the end of the productive process, a
greater value made up of the advanced value and the surplus-value.
Capital, according to Marx, is _value in process_, value which moves to
increase constantly; it cannot be otherwise as long as we stay in the
logic of the accumulation of capital.

### 2.12 Economic relation and relation of exploitation

Bourgeois political economy, as well as the bourgeois labour law,
considers the transaction between the worker and the capitalist to be a
fair dealing between two people possessing commodities and exchanging
them, which in this case is a labour capacity over a certain amount of
time (labour-power), exchanged for money (wages).

But Marxism shows that under the fairness of this trade lies
exploitation and that this relation of exploitation reproduces and
perpetuates itself. On the one hand the process of production constantly
produces and reproduces capital, and on the other the workers emerge
from the process as they entered it: a personal source of social wealth
deprived of their own means of realization. Their work, made into the
property of the capitalists, can only be realized through this process
in products that flee from their hands.

Capitalist production, which is also the capitalist's consumption of
labour-power, constantly transforms the products of labour into not only
commodities, but also into capital, into value that drains the creative
power of labour, into means of production that dominate producers, and
into means of subsistence which buy the workers themselves. The
continuity or periodic repetition of the capitalist process of
production alone reproduces and perpetuates its own basis, the worker in
his quality of wage-labourer.

### 2.13 Profit and surplus-profit

At the level of society, the productive class as a whole creates a
growing mass of surplus-value which is then divided among the different
fractions of the dominant class in a variety of forms. In enterprise,
this surplus-value takes the form of profit.

Today the term "profit" is often used, with moral connotations, to mean
a parasitical "commercial" profit, and is used to condemn the fact that
someone would sell a commodity above its price of production in order to
gain an advantage which would be the profit. In the scientific
vocabulary of Marxism, profit as a whole cannot be equated with
commercial trickery, because it is a fraction of surplus-value. All
commodities are sold at their value and it is because they are, taken as
a totality, sold at their value that capitalists are able to appropriate
surplus-value.

This surplus-value will be split into profit and rent, separating the
capitalist class from the landlord class. Within the capitalist class,
the profit is divided among the capitalists according to the capital
they advanced. This is called the equalization of rates of profit.
Commercial capitalists therefore receive an average rate of profit equal
to the general rate of profit like industrial capitalists, even if their
effective contribution to the production of surplus-value is lesser. The
profit itself will be divided into profit of enterprise and the interest
that ends up in the finance capitalist. But that is not all, because
taxes are the very basis of the State and they also constitute a portion
of surplus-value (as well as social wage). Let us not forget the
management salaries the capitalists pay themselves and the salaries (and
means of production) of unproductive classes which are also forms of
surplus-value.

This is the way the surplus-value is divided within society between the
different dominant classes and within the bourgeoisie itself between its
different fractions, and beyond. But Marx is very insistent when
stressing the single source of this mass of surplus-value that is
divided afterwards between different protagonists. It is well, at first,
the industrial capitalist (by which we mean any capital involved in any
sphere of production and not only the capitalist of industry) who
guarantees the production of surplus-value thanks to its exploitation of
productive wage-labour. Contrary to the claims of the branches of
petty-bourgeois critiques of capitalism, the banks and the financial
institutions are not the true enemy to knock down as opposed to the
"virtuous" industrial capitalist. The capitalist mode of production is
not based on finance; it is based on the production and accumulation of
surplus-value through the exploitation of the proletariat.

Developing theories specific to agrarian questions was also an
opportunity for Marx to address the various forms of surplus-profit.
Whether this surplus-profit is the result of productivity differentials,
social monopolies, like land ownership, or actual monopoly prices
resulting from a higher demand than supply (owing to the relative rarity
of a fine wine, or because it is organised by trademarks and patents,
for example), they find an illustration in the different kinds of ground
rent. Marx shows how, far from being a theoretical novelty and a
particular phase in the history of the development of the capitalist
mode of production, average profit and surplus-profit as well as
competition and monopoly hinge on the basis of the action of the law of
value.

### 2.14 Fictitious capital

Along with the accumulation of real capital comes what Marx, like other
economists before him, calls fictitious capital. This capital consists
firstly of securities (shares, bonds, treasury bills, trade bills, and
so on) which correspond to real capital which has been loaned out
(regardless of its purpose). Because these securities can be negotiated
over (on the stock market, for example, with a bank, or a factoring
company for bills of trade and other bills issued by a company) they are
traded on private markets governed by their own laws. These markets are
the sites of intense speculation which allows acquiring portions of
surplus-value.

In petty-bourgeois socialism, this sphere is at the root of all crises,
and the capturing of surplus-value through speculative activities and
interest payments (or dividends, in the case of shares) in compensation
for loaned capital is the most accomplished form of exploitation. We
have seen, however, that these are simply forms of surplus-value, just
like profit, rent, taxes, and the salaries of the unproductive classes.
Once surplus-value is extracted within the productive sphere, it is the
subject of competition and balance of power games which determine how it
will be divided. Communism's goal is to abolish wage-labour and other
mercantile categories rather than controlling the more obvious
manifestations of social parasitism.

Another meaning (2nd meaning) of the term fictitious capital concerns
the fraudulent use of borrowed capital. Once the money has been loaned,
the borrower squanders it and does not use it as capital. Besides crooks
and professional fraudsters, we must not forget that there is a fine
line between a company in difficulty requiring credit to get through a
rough patch in the hopes that business will pick up again and companies
that end up mired in debt. The State itself is a major, if not the
biggest, borrower in this game, zealously spending money as revenue, and
may be regarded with suspicion. History is punctuated by its
bankruptcies and debt restructurings, placing it as one of the biggest
dispensers of fictitious capital from this viewpoint.

A final aspect of the notion of fictitious capital (3rd meaning) is
found in surplus-credit. In order to realize additional surplus-value,
new means of payment must be created. As soon as they exceed the needs
of accumulation (there do exist other markets, so they must necessarily
exceed these needs) and since, on the other hand, it is in the interest
of the banks to lend as much as possible whenever they assess that their
risk is limited (incompetence, greed, State guarantees, and technical
feats both in financial engineering and in the automation of
decision-making... these are all factors that lead to the minimization
of risk, despite the fact that at one time these same factors will
accentuate it), the development of credit brings with it the development
of surplus-credit. This phenomenon turns into price inflation of
commodities, inflation of fictitious capital (in its 1st meaning:
securities), inflation of ground rent (land prices and real estate
assets), and inflation of fictitious capital (in its 2nd meaning), in
short, inflation of social parasitism. When inflation turns into
deflation these phenomena, themselves vectors of crises, are only one of
the most visible aspects of the crises of overproduction which have
their origin in the very heart of capitalist production.

## 3. Capitalist Dynamics and the Social Classes

### 3.1 Unveiling the mystifications of capital

In his time, Marx managed to accomplish work that was both scientific
and revolutionary. It was scientific because it went beyond the various
phenomena noticed by different protagonists of society to show their
deeper motivations, providing an explanation that broke with the
interpretations of the bourgeois economists of the time. It was
revolutionary because he was able to see who provided the material
conditions for revolutionary rupture behind the functioning of the
capitalist economy. What's more, the scientific work could not have been
accomplished if Marx had not approached these questions from a
revolutionary point of view, the point of view of the proletariat and of
the society of the future: the communism. This is why Marx's major works
on the subject of the economy are subtitled "a critique of political
economy."

More than a century and a half after its birth, the materialist concept
of history is still struggling to impose itself. Put into a defensive
position since the end of the 19th century, being reinvigorated by the
Russian revolution, annihilated by the counter-revolution that followed
the failure of the revolutionary wave of the 1920s (the defeat of the
German, Hungarian, Chinese, ... revolutions, the involution and then
counter-revolution in Russia with the triumph of Stalinism), Marxism
still has not ended to learn lessons from the defeat of the proletariat.
The systematic reexposing of the concepts, theoretical elements, and
conclusions first put forward nearly a century and a half ago, along
with their application to the understanding of the evolutions and
mutations of the contemporary capitalist mode of production, is
necessary in the movement for the emancipation of labour.

### 3.2 The evolution of the social classes

The evolution of the social classes, the productive class included, is
one of the most important questions facing Marxist theory today.

The 20th Century will be remembered as both the liveliest and the
deadliest century in history. World population quadrupled and
life-expectancy rose significantly while at the same time wars claimed
the lives of 120 million victims, and 800 million were affected by
malnutrition while on the other extreme, 300 million were considered
obese. Malnutrition of course brought with it a cortege of tragic
consequences: shortened life-expectancy, high infant mortality (6
million deaths a year today), and a variety of physical and mental
illnesses.

The capitalist mode of production has progressed even faster than
population growth. Wage-labourers make up an ever-increasing majority of
the global active population. In countries where the capitalist mode of
production is the most highly developed, wage-earners make up 80 to 90%
of the active population. Then, the proletariat has come to make up the
majority of society. The old social classes of independent peasants,
artisans, and small business owners are shrinking, and their so-called
"independence" is only formal, and their existence is coiled into the
pores of bourgeois society. At worst, their activity is simply the
antechamber of the general precariousness and unemployment.

Agriculture, for example, which is the world's number one employer, no
longer represents an absolute majority of the active population. A large
mass of this agrarian population, like that of peasant farmers, for
example, produces value, but no surplus-value. It does not have salary
relations with capitalists, but they are linked with landlords if they
do not own their own land property. In the most developed countries, it
now represents a very small portion of the active populations, whereas
in Marx's day it made up the majority. Within it, wage-labour plays an
increasingly important role. The capitalist mode of production
increasingly seizes agriculture, subjects it to its laws, and ruins the
peasantry, who is forced to join the industrial reserve army and swell
the urban populations.

Besides the proletariat, the capitalist mode of production has two other
basic social classes, the capitalist class and the landowner class. The
analysis of price formation in agriculture and in the production of raw
materials shows that the least fertile lands (whether for mining or
resource extraction) in the worst locations are used as the basis for
setting the production prices around which gravitate market prices. In
the capitalist mode of production the relative prices of raw materials
and basic resources essential for life are higher than those of other
commodities because industrial luxuries are easier to produce than
agricultural necessities. Moreover, the monopoly of land property makes
this process even harder by slowing down the development of productivity
in these spheres of production. Beyond these phenomena, we must also
consider the effects of monopoly prices in the narrow sense, like those
held by producers of the world's finest wines, for example.

Taking into account these different phenomena allows us to see how
harmful the capitalist mode of production is to the social metabolism.

The contradictions inherent to the capitalist mode of production push
the antagonism between town and country, the imbalance between the urban
and the rural, to their ultimate limits. This contradiction reaches such
heights^[From now on, more than half of the world's population has
become urban (up from 5% in 1920), and the vast majority of this number
is piled up in major urban centres.] that the bourgeoisie, failing to
attain a harmonious distribution of the population over the territory,
is forced to take responsibility for this latter and to feed and
maintain under perfusion the populations it excludes from its system of
production. Therefore, the masses of people expelled from agricultural
lands end up crowded into the outskirts of the megalopolis.

At the same time, urban rent has skyrocketed. In France, for example, it
has far surpassed the ground rent in mass for a long time. Even though
buildings (whether residential or for productive tasks) take up much
less space than agricultural lands, their overall prices are much
higher, and the relationship between the price per square metre of the
most opulent housings or offices and the worst agricultural lands
continues to grow. This ratio has now reached a million to one in
France. Indeed, in the most fashionable Paris districts the price per
square metre easily reaches on the average 10,000 Euros, while the worst
agricultural lands are sold at around 1,000 Euros per hectare. If we
consider the most extreme examples, this already considerable gap
increases tenfold.

Bourgeois society will never succeed in properly feeding humanity, nor
will it ever be able to provide decent housing, nor manage territories,
forests, the soil, the health and well-being of the populations, and the
metabolism between man and nature, in a way that benefits the mankind as
a whole.

### 3.3 Old and new middle classes

What is true of agriculture is also true of industry and service sector;
the stranglehold of wage-labour stretches out and makes the dominance of
capitalist production always more evident. Besides the peasantry, the
artisan sector, and the still powerful commercial sector which make up
the classic, historical middle classes, a new, modern, salaried middle
class has developed. As we have seen, the capitalist mode of production
devalues commodities in its quest for maximum surplus-value by reducing
the average socially necessary labour-time needed for their production.
But this growing mass must be sold, and capital must double its efforts
and its unproductive spending on market research, advertising, sales
forces, credit, insurance, and the like in order to circulate
commodities and realize commodity-capital into money-capital.
Circulation-time increases relatively over production-time. The
increasing number of sources of capitalist accumulation along with their
hordes of small businesses leads to the creation of a class of small
capitalists whose wages and income come under surplus-value and require
a maintenance cost proportional to their numbers. At the same time we
see the development and maintenance of intermediary categories, in both
large and small companies, whose role is administration, accounting, and
business management.

And finally, modern capitalist societies have seen considerable
development of the State and the bureaucracy. As they are paid with
State funds, that is to say through taxation and borrowing, State
employees are neither exploited (that is to say they produce no
surplus-value and do not face capital in the sale of their
labour-power), nor are they proletarian. Their labour-power is not
exchanged for capital, but rather for income. With the defeat of the
proletariat in the 1920s and the subsequent rejuvenation of capital
(particularly after the Second World War), there followed several
decades where the growth of production of surplus-value coincides with
an increasing qualification of labour-power. This was only achieved by
mimicking the communist program through the realization of a social
democracy, by bringing progress in terms of working hours, health, and
education within the limits of the capitalist mode of production, all
the while maintaining the iron fist (the police, the army, etc.) and the
State bureaucracy. All of these phenomena brought about the creation of
State employees and made the State a major, if not the biggest,
employer.

All these phenomena indicate that wage-labour does not _sensu stricto_
imply a relation of exploitation. When labour-power is exchanged for
income, or when it is employed in the circulation sphere, or also
constitutes one of the incidental expenses of capitalist production
(accounting, billing, administration, for example) it is unproductive;
it produces neither value not surplus-value, although it may still
render a profit. All proletarians are by definition wage-labourers
because the only thing they possess is the sale of their labour-power,
but not all wage-labourers are proletarians.

The considerable expansion of the productivity of labour since the
Second World War can be explained in two ways.

* The first is that this social wealth is produced by the _totality_ of
  the wage-earning population. And yet, in the developed world, this
  population receives an equivalent that varies between half and
  two-thirds of the GDP. Then it is easy to conclude that both the
  absolute and the relative exploitation of the proletariat (which in
  this case is taken together with the general wage-earning population)
  will not worsen, and that the interests of capital and labour are
  therefore compatible.
* The second is to maintain Marx's crucial distinction between the
  productive and unproductive portions of the employed population, the
  latter of which may be wage-earners themselves. In this case, it is
  necessary to bring back the production of surplus-value to the sole
  productive portion. This means that the value and surplus-value are
  produced by the proletariat alone and not by the totality of the
  wage-earnings. As a result, it is clear that the exploitation of the
  proletariat is much greater than the first explanation allows and it
  is shown that the interests of labour are irreconcilable with those of
  capital.

The consequence of this last point in determining the possibility of
communism is crucial; in fact, the concentration of the productive
sphere on the proletariat, and not on wage-earnings as a whole, shows
the unprecedented productivity attained through the development of the
capitalist mode of production, productivity whose product _must_ be
wasted to avoid the pot boiling over. This shows the amazing capacities
of a reorganization of productive functions; the elimination of a number
of unproductive sectors, even socially harmful, and the generalizing of
productive labour throughout the society as a whole while decreasing
individual labour-hours, would bring about considerable changes from the
very first phases of a revolutionary process.

At a time when, faced with the catastrophic perspectives offered by the
bourgeois society, many currents favour "degrowth," a Malthusian
limitation of wealth production, often in the name of ecology and the
protection of the planet, it is important to recall that the origin of
the economic catastrophes that ravage society is social, and that a
society led by the revolutionary proletariat is an absolute necessity.

### 3.4 The role of the modern middle classes

A large part of this category of unproductive wage-earners makes up what
we call the modern "middle classes." The wage-labour is what
distinguishes them from old middle classes made up of artisans, peasants
and the like, as we discussed earlier. Contrary to what bourgeois
commentators claim, this phenomenon of the expansion of the salaried
middle classes was perfectly predicted by Marx. Living off of
surplus-value, and therefore off of the exploitation of the proletariat,
these classes defend interests "close to those of the exploiting
classes" (Marx).

In _Capital, Volume I_, Marx sets out the role of capitalist managers by
defining its social function, psychology, and evolution. Capitalist
managers (to be distinguished from the owners of capital) personify
capital, "functioning as personified capital." Their function is to make
them produce maximum surplus-value, which involves both obtaining the
best yield possible from labour-power at one time as well as increasing
the accumulation of capital, both in width and in depth. Production for
production's sake and the glorification of the development of the power
of productivity of labour, these are the functions of the capitalist, a
fanatical accumulation agent.

Capitalists are only interested in exchange-value, which is why
frugality, austerity, and greed are quite rightly the most prominent
characteristics of the pioneers of capitalist development. But these
bourgeois "virtues" have weakened, over time. Capitalists have succumbed
to the mermaids of unproductive consumption of surplus-value. It is true
that the progress of the concentration and centralization of capital has
led to an increasing production of surplus-value with which capitalists
can increase its consumption without significantly affecting its
accumulation. What is more, this consumption has become a professional
necessity, since the flaunting of wealth is a way for capitalists to
obtain credit, inspire confidence, and maintain the sphere of their
relationships. But this tendency meets its limits among capitalists,
since enjoyment and spending are done with a sort of guilty conscience
because of their propensity to the contrary which is necessary to stoke
the fires of accumulation.

If capitalists give up enjoying accumulation in order to accumulate
enjoyment, they are also giving up their social function. For
capitalists, the eventual sanction of consuming surplus-value
unproductively instead of accumulating is to be beaten out by the
competition.

From the perspective of capital as a whole, two opposing pitfalls lie in
wait for the capitalist mode of production. If we imagine a society made
up of only proletarians facing a capital whose only goal was the
production and accumulation of surplus-value, it would result in a spike
in the development of the productive powers and of the productivity of
labour. Such prodigious development would then quickly undermine the
bases for this same capitalist production, pushing the devaluation of
capital to the extreme while at the same time creating a massive
accumulation of commodities which would grow increasingly difficult to
sell or, in other words, to realize. This would mean capital driving
into overproduction and crises that much faster. On the other hand, the
development of production for production's sake, partnered with a
development of the capitalist's personal wealth, could lead capitalist
production to wither and lose its momentum, to purr before its amassed
profit without seeking to systematically push the productive power of
labour. This would mean that capital would leave behind its historical
mission that much sooner.

Since 1845, Marx and Engels insisted that the very productive powers
that the capitalist mode of production develops also become destructive
powers. While the capitalist embodies the passion of accumulation, the
love of production for production's sake, it is necessary that the
passion of spending and of consumption for consumption's sake be
expressed in society as well. We have seen that the capitalist cannot
have completely this function without renouncing its being. This is why
production's dialectical counterpart, consumption, must be expressed by
another class. And so a class which represents spending, consumption for
consumption's sake, must develop. Since the capitalist class, despite
developing its penchants for consumption, cannot carry out this function
alone, and since this function contradicts its social function at a
certain point, the class which best represents spending and consumption
is the middle class.

Such is the economic function of the middle class, according to Marx. It
embodies the passion of spending and thus plays a regulatory role within
the capitalist mode of production. The volcano of production is limited
in its expansion while at the same time being stimulated. But beyond
this facet, the middle classes also play a political and social role as
a shield for the dominant classes.

### 3.5 The capitalist class and landed property

Capital concentrates itself, in that it is accumulated in the same
centres, through the development of capitalist production. Under the
drive of the progression of productivity; of the development of the
minimum amount of capital necessary to make productivity meet its social
average; of the effects of competition and crises; and of the
development of credit which allows some individuals to access social
capital, capital centralizes itself, or, in other words, all things
considered, that the number of centres of accumulation is reduced. For
example, it is said that there are 80,000 multinational corporations, a
dramatic rise, which produce 10% of the global GDP and control
two-thirds of world trade. What is more, their subsidiaries are said to
produce more than the volume of world trade. Social forms of property
(joint-stock companies, public enterprises, cooperatives, pension funds,
holdings, and so on) are developed in parallel to the credit system, as
well as the separation of capital and property is maintained while their
respective protagonists become professionals: on the one hand capitalist
managers who assure capital management, on the other hand finance
capitalists who claim the capital's property interests. The line between
capitalists and landowners becomes blurred and these classes tend to
merge, with some buying the lands, forests, and buildings that are then
subject to corporate property firms while the rest become shareholders
and capitalists. As an owner class, the bourgeoisie is increasingly
remote from the production process that it continues to hinder while
facilitating crises. This is also how it reasserts its parasitic nature.

### 3.6 The concentration and centralization of capital

The concentration and centralization of capital are phenomena which are
relative and non-absolute. Just like the influence of multinational
capital and of the biggest enterprises continue to grow relatively,
small and even the smallest businesses are also proliferating. The
accumulation of capital in new centres, whether through detachments to
older societies or through supplies of new capital, is even greater
especially since these new sites of accumulation do not require large
amounts of capital to exist. The development of services that imply
closer relations between individuals and relative physical proximity
tend to fall under this frame. Marx describes an identical phenomenon
when talking about the production of luxury items, which employs a
larger workforce: the production of more refined, higher quality or
luxury products increases as the development of productivity increases.
The development of qualified labour-power which can gain autonomy more
easily because the design process takes up an ever-increasing portion of
the total labour-hours required to produce commodities also contributes
to the success of this movement.

The reasons these small businesses develop recurrently are many. Where
the desire to escape wage-labour may motivate some, the majority may
have no choice but to try to exist by themselves on the marketplace
because they cannot find wage-paying employment. On the other hand, an
array of more or less archaic statutes and protections which, in most
countries, apply to occupations like pharmacist, notary, physician,
lawyer, architect, and so on, slow the expansion of wage-labour in these
sectors. These smallest enterprises are also essential in that their
existence allows the most productive enterprises to create surplus
profit and serves as a regulator to them under all forms. Last but not
least, innovation is often synonymous with the small enterprise, which
is more agile than its big enterprises counterparts. A Darwinian
selection process for new products, services, and markets develops. A
hundred may try, but only ten will emerge, and only one will succeed.
This successful enterprise will then be bought out for a good price by
the big enterprise.

This movement towards concentration and the continual emergence of new
production units also applies to agriculture. Although world population
quadrupled over the 20th century and by the end of the century almost
half the active population was employed by the agricultural sector, the
number of peasants and peasant-landowners also increased. This created
an overwhelming disparity in productivity between large-scale capitalist
agriculture and the peasantry which, due to its lack of property, could
not even produce enough for its own subsistence.

Productivity, which had reached 1000 tons per active per year for a few
million actives in developed agriculture, fell for about two-thirds of
the active agriculture population, hundreds of millions of people who
were affected by the so called "green revolution", to 50 or down to 10
tons depending on whether they have available animal traction or not.
Finally, the remaining third (a few hundred million people) living in
destitution produced only about one ton per year per active^[Mazoyer,
Marcel. _Protecting Small Farmers and the Rural Poor in the Context of
Globalization_. FAO, 2001.].

This level of productivity, setting aside the methods used to attain it
and its limitations, potentially menaces hundreds of millions of farmers
to disappear and forces them to move to the cramped cities;
dialectically, a few million people practicing rational agriculture
would be enough to fulfil the agricultural needs of the mankind by
freeing labour-time. More than ever the agrarian question, much like the
resolution of the antagonism between town and country, are at the heart
of the social revolution.

### 3.7 Accumulation and crises

In its quest for maximum surplus-value, capital develops the
productivity of labour as though it was not limited by the mode of
production itself. The large mass of commodities must be realized as
money and a certain relation -- which capitalist production tends to
violate -- must exist between productive consumption and individual and
collective unproductive consumption. By failing to find a large enough
market for this large mass of commodities, restricting the wages of the
productive classes, and stoking the fires of accumulation that upset the
relation between production and consumption, bourgeois society promotes
the overproduction of commodities. On the other hand, if the
accumulation of capital does not create enough surplus-value, if the
growth of productivity is broken down and the rate of profit plunges
drastically, then it is the overproduction of capital,
over-accumulation, which menaces it.

At the same time, fictitious capital (shares and the like) also swells
under the combined effects of the accumulation of real capital,
speculation, and surplus-credit. Credit is one of the most important
factors in fostering tension of productive powers and causing
overproduction.

The quest for maximum surplus-value takes several forms:

* lengthening of the working day;
* raising of the productivity.

Other forms favour the creation of more value and surplus-value
simultaneously, such as:

* developing the intensity of labour, which involves creating more
  commodities of the same value in the same amount of time;
* developing the complexity of labour, meaning the same labour power
  will produce more or less value depending on the type of the labour,
  simple or complex, it is being used for;
* developing the quality of labour, meaning the more qualified labour
  power has relatively more value than a less qualified one producing
  more value in the same amount of time;
* optimizing the position of national labour in the international
  division of labour^[The international application of the law of value
  is fundamentally transformed in that, on world market, the most
  productive labour acquires a higher social value as long as
  competition does not force it to lower this value. This means one hour
  of labour in a more developed country can be exchanged for three hours
  of labour in a less developed country, for example. If these two
  countries have trade relations, the former exploits the latter. France
  and Brazil, for example, have comparable GDP's nowadays, but Brazil
  must employ an active population triple the size of France's, and
  therefore expend a total of three times more labour to obtain it, and
  this does not take into account the differences in annual labour-time
  and in the relative size of unproductive classes. This law is also
  used by multinational corporations to spread out production across the
  globe to best serve their interests. This also allows corporations get
  around State fiscal and social policies and, in doing so, put pressure
  on these policies.].

In doing so while also continuing to pursue its ultimate goal: maximum
surplus-value, capitalist production develops productive powers within
the limits proper to this mode of production. Upon doing so, the
potential of production, and overproduction, is increasingly important.
In order to postpone this contradiction and counteract its effects,
capital implements a series of responses different in nature. We can
classify them according to the type of their responses:

1. Facilitating sales, the realizing of the social product = credit
   development.
2. Seeking out new outlets and outside areas of accumulation = exports,
   the fight to dominate new markets.
3. Increasing need and creating new needs = development of advertising
   and marketing to give commodities a new appeal.
4. Diversifying and creating new needs, creating new use-values =
   development of the means of luxury consumption. One of the appeals of
   this sector is that in general it produces a larger amount of
   surplus-value due to the fact that it employs relatively more living
   labour. These branches also have a lower organic composition than
   average, which favours a rise in the rate of profit.
5. Historical evolution of use-values and needs driving the unit value
   of commodities to a slow-down. The "revalorization" of
   use-values^[The automobile, for example, has not stopped evolving in
   terms of equipment and options. Its relative price has not so much
   dropped as it has remained steady, despite progresses in productivity
   and the substitution of certain materials (a phenomenon that might
   affect pricing either way).] and the evolution of needs = yesterday's
   luxuries become today's needs.
6. Planning the obsolescence of commodities. Organizing the wasting of
   resources.
7. Fixing capital. Accumulating fixed capital which are not productive
   immediately (major highway structures, public infrastructure, canals,
   and so on), absorbing surplus-value without immediately affecting the
   productivity of labour.
8. Development of a class of consumers that consumes without producing:
   an unproductive class. A consumer class is a necessity.
   Underconsumption theorists, notably Malthus, predicted this need.
   This cannot be met by the proletariat, whose consumption is limited
   and whose relative wages fall with the development of capitalist
   production, which fulfils it. The raising of real wages could
   certainly occur, but it would necessarily be within strict
   limitations. This modern unproductive class is the salaried
   middle-class. As it develops, the rate of accumulation is limited and
   the demand of means of consumption rises, bringing with it the
   consumption of sophisticated products and luxury goods.
9. Tendential fall in the rate of profit and in the rate of
   accumulation. Accumulation and growth slow down, and capital
   postpones these contradictions by giving up its mission.

Crises do not mechanically lead to war or revolution, but they do
contribute to causing them, and while revolution is the proletariat's
ultimate solution for ending its own exploitation and halting the
catastrophic path of the capitalist mode of production, war will be
capital's ultimate solution for regenerating itself, at the risk of
destroying mankind.

## 4. Towards a classless society

One of the major dramas in recent history has been the political
disappearance of the proletariat, which has been stripped of its
revolutionary nature. Its international party twice fell into the hands
of counter-revolutionary forces (during the second and third
internationals). We are not going over the details of the historical
circumstances that led the proletariat into the counterrevolution in the
corner of the 1920s after it completed the most heroic feat of
emancipation in its history at the international scale, the high-point
of which was the 1917 October Revolution in Russia. From that point
forward, the proletariat all but disappeared as an independent political
party and therefore as a class aware of its historical goals. Not only
have its representations, traditions, songs, flags, and emblems become
the symbols of its oppression, but its theory has also been sterilized,
denatured, caricatured, and transformed from revolutionary theory into a
social preservation mechanism. Meanwhile, societies based on the
capitalist mode of production like the USSR, China, Cuba, and others
have become the established references for real socialism.

Throughout all this, the proletariat has only existed as the far-left
wing of democracy, being in thrall to the parties of other classes. In
doing so, in the most developed countries it has merely traded its
emancipation for improvements in its situation. A reduction in working
hours, a higher standard of living, longer life expectancy, an education
for its children, access to healthcare, and so on... in other words, all
the elements of so-called "social democracy". It has also pushed for the
conquest of political democracy and expanded universal suffrage and
women's rights. The number of countries under democratic constitutions
or organized as democratic republics continues to grow. The proletariat
has therefore won the battleground for the final battle against the
bourgeoisie; it has allowed the bourgeoisie to direct the development of
the productive powers to the point where its contradictions are so
accumulated that the evidence of the need for a classless society that
can overcome them is increasingly obvious.

Although it has not quite returned to its revolutionary struggle, the
world proletariat is still in a position that makes it, as the only
exploited class, a revolutionary class whose goal is the communist
revolution and the complete overthrow of the current society's
framework. This revolution is more than ever a vital issue for all of
humanity. Nothing came to deny which was already the essential purpose
of the 1848 _Manifesto of the Communist Party_.

The political capacity of the proletariat will obviously depend on the
circumstances and on its readiness and energy to organize itself as an
independent, international political party remaining coherent in its
revolutionary program and opposed to all other parties. Its historic
power, however, remains unchanged because it is engraved on the heart of
the social relation which characterises the capitalist mode of
production. The proletariat, the productive class, not only produces
surplus-value, but also produces capital. It reproduces the entirety of
the capitalist social relation. But in the capitalist society, this
relation appears under a reversed and mystified form.

### 4.1 The proletariat and its alienation

At the heart of productive labour and the production process, the
proletariat produces value through its labour, reproducing the value
advanced for constant capital and wages, plus surplus-value. This value
not only slips from proletarians, it is also turned against them, so
that their labour is transformed into their opposite, into capital by
facing them. They are dominated and confronted by their own labour. Marx
calls this phenomenon alienation, meaning being estranged from oneself.
Exploitation (which, let us not forget, only affects productive labour
and therefore the proletariat) is at the same time alienation. The other
classes are also prey to the general mystification that masks the true
nature of social relations, the personification of things and
thingification of the relations of production^[Marx never uses the term
"reification", and even less as an autonomous concept as Lukacs or
bourgeois philosophers will later do. He systematically qualifies he
nature of the social processes that are converted into things and are
dialectically confronted with their opposite: the personification of
things. Indeed, on the original German text of the Capital, Marx says:
"Personifizierung der Sachen und Versachlichung der
Produktionsverhaltnisse", or "personification of things and
thingification of the relations of production" (cf. The Trinity
Formula - _Capital, vol. 3_). We have chosen to utter the somewhat
unusual term "thingification", which immediately relates to "thing",
instead of "reification" to avoid either the Lukacsian (or the bourgeois
philosophers) a-dialectical reduction or even the petty-bourgeois logic
that regrets the situation of being surrounded by too many "things".],
the fetishism of commodities and capital, and even the fact that capital
and the earth appear as independent sources of value, living entities
able to produce value by themselves. Yet these classes can neither
unveil these phenomena by themselves through scientific analysis, nor
shatter them by overthrowing the capitalist relation.

In Chapter 1 we discussed the origins of the capitalist mode of
production, and in Chapter 2 we went over Marx's analysis of
commodities. The existence of commodities presupposes a society in which
community ties that set down _a priori_ the human activity framework as
a social activity have been at least partially broken. This means the
disappearance of the social relationships evidence. Each producer
produces privately and has no contact with anyone unless through
exchange. And yet it is _products_, attained through the producer's
labour, that are being exchanged and are now not simply useful objects,
but also commodities. Not only does this mean that human relations now
seem mediated by the exchange of commodities, but this very exchange is
now necessary if social relations between people whose activity is now
separated and carried out privately are to exist at all. The fact that
the socialization of labour is now carried out through exchange, through
a mediation that is no longer controlled by the individuals themselves,
creates a sort of veiled reality which Marx compares to a religious
phenomenon.

From the moment the production of commodities is generalized and
labour-power itself becomes a commodity, the mystification it brings
with it increases. The more the capitalist mode of production is
developed, the more this mystification is intensified. With the
development of relative surplus-value and the labour process specific to
capitalism, this mystification creates a complete reversal in the way
social relations are conceived.

The capitalist class owns all the means of production and exchange in
all their various forms. This is how capital appears as society's
driving force, its productive face. Marx uses the word "reversal"
because capital appears productive when it in fact produces nothing on
its own. Capital simply puts all of the elements necessary for
production into contact and sets them in motion. Yet these same elements
(on their bases, since they historically evolve) were also used to
produce in pre-capitalist forms of production: all production requires
materials, means of labour (tools, for example), and an agent of
production, the worker.

Capitalist social relation therefore masks, and even reverses the real
relation underlying it. This is how capital appears "productive,"
creator of wealth, when in reality this is the role of human
labour^[This is illustrated in the vulgar discourse of the bosses who
talk about the "risk-taking" and the "responsibility" of entrepreneurs
and others. The bosses tend to say that they "give the labour" when in
fact it is the opposite, it is proletarians who freely give away a
portion of the labour-time in which their labour power is used. When
proletarians internalize this argument, they might say "who will give me
labour if there are no bosses?" Engels clearly wrote: "We have seen at
the very beginning that the so-called "productivity of capital" is
nothing but the quality inherent in it (under present-day social
relations, without which it would not be capital at all) of being able
to appropriate the unpaid labour of wage workers" (_The Housing
Question_).]. By stimulating the overall movement, continuing to seek
maximum surplus-value, and developing the productive power of labour,
capital hides the fact that the source of this surplus-value and the
very thing that allows for the development of capitalist civilization is
the productive labour realized by the proletariat. The proletariat not
only produces the material basis for the society which it thereby helps
to reproduce and expand, it also reproduces and perpetuates capital and
its inherent exploitative relations. This creates a diabolic vicious
spiral in which the proletariat creates a foreign being that slips from
it becoming its dominator. Capital therefore confronts the proletariat
not only through concrete forms such as machines and facilities, for
example, but also in a more general, anonymous form that exploits and
dominates it. Scientific and technological progresses turn over against
the worker.

Mystification is perfected through circulation and competition.
Interest-bearing capital, fictitious capital, and even the earth itself
are seen as sources of revenue completely divorced from labour. The
equalization of rates of profit between equal masses of capital
employing unequal amounts of labour-power also obscures a process too
vast to be contained by individual capital. Forms of capital such as
commercial capital, that move within the sphere of circulation and
participate in this equalization process, contribute to the impenetrable
veiling of social relations. The randomness of the successes and
failures of individual capitalists, who are subject to competition, also
contributes to the mystery of capital production. Counter-revolutionary
forces often successfully lean on this mystification as their basis,
falling victim to their own best intentions. These forces will direct
the anger of the masses towards the banks, "finance," and financial
capital, for example, all the while touting the virtues of industrial
capital. This tends to make people forget that the latter is at the
heart of the exploitative relationship and effectively subjugates the
proletariat, making it produce maximum surplus-value in its various
forms (profits, interest, rent, taxes, and so on) which are the subject
of much disputes between the different segments of the bourgeoisie and
its accomplices.

Throughout this process, the very essence of human labour is reversed.
This is why capitalist social relations are historically the most
violent: they deny the very being of man who is subjected to capital,
that is to say subjected to the value in process. As violent as the
relations between master and slave or lord and serf may have been, they
were still relations between persons and were clearly identified as
power and exploitation relationships. After all, Spartacus knew why and
against what and whom he should and would rebel.

In the capitalist mode of production, the social relation, the relation
between classes take the form of a _thing_, the capital, the _value in
process_, that dominates the proletarian. This is why the proletariat
may feel powerless at times; capital dominates everything and seems like
a _deus ex machina_, an invincible naturalised force as fixed as the sky
and the mountains. And yet capital is nothing but an inversed figure of
reality, and rebelling against it is simply a way of setting the world
right side up. Such is the role of the revolutionary theory and
revolution itself, since the weapon of criticism cannot, of course,
replace criticism by weapons. The revolution of the modern proletariat
differs from all those that came before it because it will not be
limited to bringing to power a new class who can develop a new mode of
production. Instead, it is the reunification of the human species with
itself and the definitive abolition of all conditions of exploitation
imposed on one class by another.

This will only be possible, however, because the capitalist mode of
production, through its tendency to increase the productive power of
labour, has developed the objective, material conditions that lay the
groundwork for a new society that does not neither need the framework of
private property nor a dominant class to develop itself. Moreover, this
development cannot take place without the abolition of private property,
which has become an unbearable obstacle. Social classes must be
abolished, not for moral reasons, but because they are obstacles to
social development.

The frightening feeling of never being able to escape the domination of
capital comes from the fact that the process of exploitation functions
as a spiral, where all the exploited class's energy is concentrated in
front of it strengthening and developing the conditions of its own
exploitation. And yet, in describing this process, we are also outlining
the conditions for its destruction, since the proletariat, its
life-force, is also the only class that can grind it to a halt. It need
only regain its autonomy and break its ties with capital to begin the
revolutionary transformation of society, towards a classless society.

In _Capital, Volume I_, Marx describes communism in the following way:

>Let us finally imagine, for a change, an association of free men,
>working with the means of production held in common, and expending
>their many different forms of labour-power in full self-awareness as
>one single social labour power. All the characteristics of
>Robinson's^[Marx alludes to Robinson Crusoe, the character of the
>famous novel by Daniel Defoe.] labour are repeated here, but with the
>difference that they are social instead of individual. All Robinson's
>products were exclusively the result of his own personal labour and
>they were therefore directly objects of utility for him personally. The
>total product of our imagined association is a social product. One part
>of this product serves as fresh means of production and remains social.
>But another part is consumed by the members of the association as means
>of subsistence. This part must therefore be divided amongst them. The
>way this division is made will vary with the particular kind of social
>organization of production and the corresponding level of social
>development attained by the producers. We shall assume, but only for
>the sake of a parallel with the production of commodities, that the
>share of each individual producer in the means of subsistence is
>determined by his labour-time. Labour-time would in that case play a
>double part. Its apportionment in accordance with a definite social
>plan maintains the correct proportion between the different functions
>of labour and the various needs of the associations. On the other hand,
>labour-time also serves as a measure of the part taken by each
>individual in the common labour, and of his share in the part of the
>total product destined for individual consumption. The social relations
>of the individual producers, both towards their labour and the products
>of their labour, are here transparent in their simplicity, in
>production as well as in distribution.

### 4.2 Behind the capitalist mode of production lies the communism

The possibility of a classless, Stateless society where wage-labour no
longer exists is not a dream that has to be made into a reality.
Communism is already possible because its material foundation, starting
with the socialization of the means of production, has been laid out
during the development of the capitalist mode of production. As we have
seen, capital, in its movement, tends to become concentrated and
centralized, creating vast, planned industrial groups owned by
transnational corporations across the globe, such as in the auto or
aeronautic industries. This development, through the world market,
results in a completely tangled economic fabric in which it is almost
impossible to distinguish and abstract islands that could be protected
from crises or be exempt from the laws of capitalist production.

But this tendency to exclude smaller producers, group together
productive powers, and rationalise techniques at the international scale
comes up against the obstacles inherent to the capitalist mode of
production. Marx calls this the contradiction between the development of
the productive powers and the relations of production, because these
relations have become _too narrow_ at a certain point in their
historical development. Production itself requires large-scale,
borderless coordination, which conflicts with bourgeois and national
property relations. Considering the catastrophic path capital is on, it
would be best if important policies on energy, natural resources,
agriculture, space planning, and manufacturing production were decided
and consciously managed on a global scale according to the interests of
associated producers instead of being based on the demands of the
production of surplus-value characteristic of capitalist production.
This means capital is now confronted with an untenable contradiction.
Its own interests force it to increasingly unify the productive
apparatus and the organisation of commodity and money circulation, and
develop the productive power of labour as though it were limitless, yet
it cannot pursue this movement to its apex without negating itself.

As we have seen, this contradiction is often expressed through
potentially worsening crises of overproduction. Private property and
wage-labour, along with the social division of labour, have gone from
being factors of the historical development of capital in its inception
to actual hindrances to the future development of humanity. Like a
compressed form lying within a too narrow frame, the communist basis
which stays on the heart of bourgeois society only requires to come out
a strong enough force to shatter this narrow frame. Private property
itself takes a social nature through movements like nationalization,
regionalization, municipalisation, and other forms of public capital, as
well as cooperatives and anonymous societies that allow for a
centralization of power and the dispersal of property through holdings,
institutional investors, and pension plans. This effectively abolishes
private property within the framework of private property. From a
materialist point of view, this is one of the bases for the development
of communism, which, far from being an unattainable ideal, is rather a
necessity due to the very development of society.

A world market is another condition of the existence of capital, and in
it, Marx saw one of the material conditions necessary for the
development of the international communist movement he envisioned. After
the revolutionary failure in Europe in 1848, Marx and Engels questioned
whether the revolution might suffocate in such a "small corner of the
world" while capital still had considerable expansive prospects across
the rest of the globe. From his part, Stalinism was forging the doctrine
of "socialism in one country" to develop capitalist relations of
production in Russia and to dominate by crushing all autonomous
expressions of communism internationally. Communism is in total
contradiction with national development, and cannot exist if not on an
international, global scale. Today the considerable development of the
capitalist mode of production across the planet, despite the unequal
levels of development from region to region, makes the material
possibility of a transition to a classless society more than mature.

In his various writings, Marx barely describes or _explicitly_ defines
communism and its contents. Yet every time it is mentioned, it is
presented as the radical reversal of the _status quo_ and the recovery
by the mankind of its vital functions, after throwing off the capitalism
gangue. The communism is a society that abolishes alienating labour, the
wage-labour, structuring necessary labour and free labour on another
basis. Through the socialization of the means of production and
exchange, it is the community of associated producers that make the
decisions and organize society. The free development of each one
requires the reduction in necessary labour and its distribution between
all members of the society in working-age and capable to work. While
developing a polytechnic training, society struggles against the social
division of labour by generalizing manual labour, versatility of
activities, and working hard to eliminate the antagonism between town
and country.

In communism, _money and the value-form of the products of labour are
eliminated_. Individuals will be assigned a portion of the social labour
for a predetermined period of time (which will be much shorter than what
it is now), in compensation for which they will be able to consume, once
the elements necessary for the expansion of society, collective
consumption, and for other members of society who are unable or no
longer able to work have been deducted. This consumption will be
limited, at first, but will eventually only be limited by their own
satiation and common sense.

The revolution's goal is to _abolish wage-labour_. In the community of
associated workers the relations of dominance between the owner of the
means of production and the proletariat will no longer exist. Thanks to
the mediation of the community, the work of individuals immediately
becomes social.

Marx emphasizes this immediately social nature of production many times.
In communism, "individual labour no longer exists in an indirect fashion
but directly as a component part of total labour" (_Critique of the
Gotha Programme_).

The _indirect fashion_ Marx is referring to is the merchant relation
that connect the capitalist class to the proletariat, relation that only
exist because the former has the monopoly of the means of production and
exchange and the latter has only its own labour-power. Overturning the
terms of this exchange allows the true human nature of labour to express
itself, and it also means that the productivity of labour acquired
through the development of machinery truly serves human needs and no
longer be completely ruled by and for the maximum valorization of
capital.

It was already true in Marx's time and is even more so today: the time
is more than ripe to establish the conditions for eliminating the
private property of the means of production and exchange and to enjoy a
collectively organized society.

### 4.3 The conditions for revolutionary rupture

This brings us back to the contradictions that naturally undermine this
mode of production as a result of the very way it is socio-economically
organized. By constantly pushing for higher productivity of labour and
through developing the productive powers, capital is creating the
conditions for a new society. It also proves by itself that the
relations of production specific to the capitalist mode of production
are too limited to allow for its further development. There must be
established a new mode of production, new relations of production that
correspond to a classless society and bring humanity out of its
prehistoric era so it can consciously plan its future. Marxism shows
that this is an ineluctable phenomenon, and that the history of the
capitalist mode of production is "the revolt of modern productive forces
against modern conditions of production." This revolt regularly erupts
in the form of crises during which capital, in its various forms
(machines, money, commodities, labour-power, and so on), is brutally
devalued, its commodities destroyed, machines at a standstill,
bankruptcies, disastrous drops in prices, unemployed labour-power, and
more.

In other words, the increasing rise in the productivity of labour,
thanks to the use of machinery and science in the production process, is
the best guarantee that today's society will eventually and necessarily
lead to an affluent society, but it is also the biggest threat to the
very foundations of such a society.

There comes a time when capital and the capitalist class not only can be
overthrown -- because the material basis for collective, immediately
social labour free from mercantile constraints and the valorization of
capital has sufficiently been developed -- but also _must_ be, in order
to ensure the continuity of the human history.

Yet this process will be neither gradual nor mechanic. If today's
society is pregnant with a classless future society, the baby is so big
that it must be immediately pulled out by forceps from the belly of a
cruel mother ready to commit infanticide. There can be no "spontaneous"
transition at the very moment when the productive powers attain the
level at which communism can emerge in a "natural" manner. A
discontinuity, a revolution is necessary in order to shatter the
thousand ties of the mercantilism. The primary condition for this
revolution is the conquering of political power by the proletariat
organized into a distinct political party opposed to all other parties.

In the same way that capital creates the conditions for its own
abolishment, it also creates a class that will carry out its sentence:
the proletariat. Marx wrote that "The proletariat must be revolutionary
or it will not exist at all." A proletariat can only exist as a carrier
of this revolutionary power, as a conscious class organized into a
political party, armed with a scientific understanding of the world
through Marxism, and able to predict and enlighten a sustained action
that will overthrow the power of the bourgeoisie and its society.

Marx and Engels believed that the proletariat could only exist as an
organised and therefore conscious social force by constituting itself
into a political party. As Engels put it in _The Housing Question_, "the
views of German scientific socialism...[:] the necessity of political
action by the proletariat and of its dictatorship as the transition to
the abolition of classes and, with them, of the State." He goes on to
say that this "had already been expressed in the _Manifesto of the
Communist Party_ and since then on innumerable occasions." In these
other occasions, the condition of "the constitution of the proletariat
into a political party" is clearly laid out.

By taking the appropriated measures to demolish the bourgeois State,
abolish private property and exchange of commodities, the revolutionary
proletariat will break the infernal cycle that transforms proletarian
labour into its opposite while also repositioning the society's
productive powers. This does not mean that communism will be able to
immediately realise its entire programme, it merely means that there is
a qualitative leap which can potentially take society from one sphere
into another one. This is the phase of political transition that Marx
and Engels called the dictatorship of the proletariat.

A revolutionary party will have to define the measures which will be
necessary _today_, based on the development of modern productive powers
that are much more developed than in 1848, in order to destroy the
machinery of State and take society to a classless society.

These measures, which may vary from one country to another and the setup
of which depends on the balance of power and the international
revolutionary situation, might look something like these:

Labour:

* An immediate and drastic reduction in working hours and integration of
  polytechnic training within these working hours, including among other
  things, how to manage the proletarian semi-State whose organisation
  goal is ultimate simplification.
* The generalization of labour and of manual labour among all members of
  society who are in working-age and capable to work.
* The banning of all night work and any unnecessary shift work other
  than in healthcare, security ...
* The creation of measures that socialize domestic labour like cooking,
  cleaning, laundry, childcare ...
* A rotation of and division of collective tasks through civil service.

Economy:

* The development of the public sector through free access to services
  such as healthcare and education ...
* The State-ownership of banks and insurance, creating a unique new
  entity.
* The setting up of social planning and accounting to allocate labour
  power among the major branches of industry.
* The proletarian State ownership of major corporations.
* The creation of measures that help unify small companies into larger
  entities, and the pooling of resources to increase social
  productivity, one of the conditions to reduce working hours.
* The abolishment of indirect taxes. Progressive income tax. The
  abolishment of inheritance. The institution of a social pass based on
  working hours (the equivalent of the labour-time vouchers promoted by
  Marxism in the 19th century) for managing individual consumption. This
  pass is not money, because it cannot be accumulated and cannot be used
  to pay a salary to labour-power.

Territory organisation:

* The requisition of housing so as to immediately remedy conditions for
  those living in poor housing.
* The halting of construction development in large cities and their
  suburbs. The creation of measures that help reconcile the town and the
  country. The development of labour-power in the agriculture, forestry,
  and ocean industries.

Security:

* The arming of the proletariat and the creation of militias insuring
  the tasks of police.

Administration:

* The abolition of parliaments and the dismantling of State and local
  administration in order to re-establish the management of social life
  within the community of associated producers.
* The settlement of territorial councils (soviets) in charge of the
  administration of society and holding executive, legislative, and
  judiciary authority.
* The election of responsible representatives that may be recalled at
  any time.
* The representatives paid salaries equal to the average salary.
* The unification of all countries having accomplished revolution and
  the abolition of borders.

Education:

* The creation of an education which, from childhood onwards, combines
  the learning of fundamental skills, manual labour, sports, creativity,
  and collective life.

Religion:

* The total separation of church and State. The relegation of religious
  life strictly to the private sphere.

## 5. Conclusion

The capitalist mode of production has played a crucial role in the
development of humanity. It has developed the productivity of labour and
the machinery, created the world market, continuously unified production
and exchange conditions, and, most importantly, created the proletariat:
an international class capable of seizing the productive apparatus and
leading society to a society free of exploitation and social classes.
The capitalist mode of production has then created the conditions that
pave the way to a superior society.

The continuity of the capitalist mode of production, its survival, its
hold over all means of production and of life, and its continued mad
course are full of disasters for humanity. By pursuing the development
of the productivity of labour, capital continues its quest to produce
maximum surplus-value and subjugates a growing number of proletarians,
while the simultaneous development of its productive fields turns them
onto the streets. By ruining all other forms of production, it also
creates a situation in which the hundreds of millions of African,
Chinese, Brazilian, and Mexican peasants, among others, along with the
millions of Europeans and Americans who are unemployed and excluded, do
not even have a place in this society based on the exploitation of the
proletariat.

Although all the conditions needed to create a harmonious way of life
for humanity exist, famine, crises, wars, and other catastrophes lie in
the menu of the coming century. Only the proletariat can rise up to
overthrow the _status quo_ and establish the classless society: the
communism.
