---
title: "A History of Bolshevism: From Marx to the First Five-Year Plan"
author: Rosenberg, Arthur
date: 1932
description: Published in German in 1932 and English in 1934, this text was written by a figure on the very left of the German Communist Party (KPD). This basis for this edition of the text comes from <https://www.marxists.org/archive/rosenberg/history-bolshevism/index.htm>.
keywords: USSR
...

## Preface to the English Translation

This translation of the original German edition of my _Geschichte des
Bolschewismus_ (published in 1932) is an exact rendering and does not
contain any alteration of any kind whatsoever. Events that have occurred
since the appearance of the German edition fully confirm the views
expressed in these pages. The collapse of the KPD without any show of
resistance proved that the Communism of the Third International could no
longer be looked upon as a living revolutionary force. The ruin of the
KPD sealed the fate of the Third International, which has ceased,
together with its affiliations in Czechoslovakia, France, etc, to be a
factor in international politics. Moreover, the attitude displayed by
the Soviet government towards Hitlerite Germany shows that Stalin is no
longer interested in the so-called world revolution. The Soviet
government did not in its negotiations with Nazi Germany allow itself to
be actuated by any other consideration than that of self-interest, and
displayed no regard whatever for the German Communists or the Communist
International. Stalin thus indirectly proclaimed the dissolution of the
Third International as an independent and active labour movement. In
Soviet Russia the course followed by events has been that indicated in
the original German edition. At the same time the Soviet government has
revealed itself powerless to resolve the glaring contradictions in its
governmental system.

_Arthur Rosenberg_

Zürich, August 1933

## Preface

An immense literature exists on the subject of Soviet Russia and the
Russian Revolution -- documented and journalistic, scientific and
sentimental, condemnatory and adulatory. This book does not attempt to
compete with what has already been written and instead seeks to fill a
definite gap. Up to the present there has not been available any history
of the evolution of Bolshevism from its roots in Karl Marx through the
individual stages traversed by Lenin, down to the theories and tactics
of Stalin in 1932. It has thus come about that false notions are common
in the widest circles on the subject of Bolshevism. It is either
underestimated or overestimated and never appreciated for what it really
is.

Ideas are the products of actual conditions and not of a vacuum. It is
therefore necessary here to take note of the factors in the development
both of Russia and the world in so far as they are essential for a
proper understanding of Bolshevism. It would have been beyond the scope
of this book to have attempted to describe fully any one event in the
Russian Revolution or -- for example -- to analyse the Five-Year Plan in
detail.

The problem which I have attempted to solve in this book is scientific
and not a problem of party politics. At the time of the split in the
Independent Social-Democrat Party in Germany in 1920 I joined the
Communist Party in common with the majority of the USPD. I was for years
a member of the Berlin Committee, the Central Committee of the KPD, and
the Executive of the Third International. I was forced to resign from
the Communist International in 1927, as so many Communists of all
countries have been forced to do before and since. Since then I have not
belonged to any political party nor to any of the small groups
comprising the Communist Opposition. I have not written this book to
please any party or group, and I am not conscious of any desire to make
'revelations' or to 'settle accounts'. Those who hope to find in this
book anecdotes about Stalin and the 'torture chambers' of the GPU will
be bitterly disappointed.

It is obviously necessary for scientific and political reasons to remove
the problem of Bolshevik Russia from the atmosphere of petty strife and
political debate. It will be shown that important issues depend upon our
judgement of Bolshevik Russia, such as German-Russian relations,
proletarian unity, and the relations between Russia and the
international proletariat. It must be clearly understood that despite
everything that has happened, Soviet Russia is progressing and the Third
International is irretrievably heading towards destruction. This book
seeks to explain how this unique twofold situation has arisen.

As far as possible I have used Bolshevik sources. At the same time I
have not hesitated to state my own opinions. I have throughout avoided
giving this book an autobiographical character which would have been
unsuitable for the task I had in view. Among German literature on
Bolshevism I am specially indebted to the works of Karl Korsch.

*Arthur Rosenberg*

Berlin-Zehlendorf, June 1932

## Table of Contents

[Chapter 01: Marx to Lenin, 1843-1893][]
[Chapter 02: Revolution in Russia, 1893-1914][]
[Chapter 03: The World War, August 1914 to February 1917][]
[Chapter 04: The Third International, August 1914 to February 1917][]
[Chapter 05: March to October 1917][]
[Chapter 06: The Bolshevik Revolution and Wartime Communism, 1917-1921][]
[Chapter 07: The Third International at the Height of its Revolutionary Power, 1919-1921][]
[Chapter 08: The Great Change: NEP and the Third World Congress, 1921][]
[Chapter 09: Lenin's Testament, 1922-1924][]
[Chapter 10: Stalin Versus Trotsky, 1924-1927][]
[Chapter 11: 'Socialism in a Single Land', 1927-1932][]
[Bibliography][]

## Chapter 01: Marx to Lenin, 1843-1893

While on a journey in Holland in March 1843, the twenty-five-year-old Dr
Karl Marx wrote to his friend Ruge a letter in which he described the
follies of Frederick William IV of Prussia. He added:

>The state is too serious a concern to be turned into a harlequinade. It
>is possible that a ship manned by idiots might run before the storm for
>a time. Its fate would nevertheless overtake it if for no other reason
>than that the idiots would not realise it. In our case this doom is the
>revolution that is at our doors.

This trumpet-blast was answered by Ruge in a mood of deep pessimism:

>Although it is a hard saying, I must write it because it is the truth.
>I cannot imagine any nation that is so disunited as the German nation.
>You see workmen -- and not men; thinkers -- and not men; masters and
>servants, young people and those who are already settled in life, but
>not men. Is that not a battlefield where arms and legs and mutilated
>bodies lie heaped on one another while the life-blood runs out upon the
>ground? Hölderlin in Hyperion. That describes my mood; and
>unfortunately it is not a new one. The same cleavage works at different
>ages in the same manner in all humanity. Your letter is filled with
>illusory ideas. Your courage only serves to intensify my lack of
>spirit. You say that we -- the contemporaries of these Germans -- are
>going to experience a political revolution? Your wish is father to your
>thought, my friend. Oh, I have lived through it all! Hope is sweet and
>disappointment bitter, very bitter. It takes more courage to despair
>than to hope. Nevertheless, it is the courage of common sense, and we
>have reached the point at which we dare not let ourselves be
>disappointed any longer.

Ruge went on to add:

>In so far as one can speak of a German spirit, it is contemptible, and
>it gives me no qualms of conscience to declare that it is owing to its
>contemptible nature that it appears as it does.

He concluded his letter with the words:

>Our nation has no future. What does our reputation matter?

Marx refused to be discouraged. He agreed indeed with Ruge that a
Germany of shopkeepers and fools could not be the scene of a revolution
like the French or English revolutions. But in the eyes of Marx that
only meant that a revolution in Germany must take on a special
character; it must be no revolution of half-measures but must
revolutionise the entire structure of society in a single effort. And
Marx formulated his theory as to the nature of the coming revolution in
Germany in his celebrated 'Criticism of Hegel's Philosophy of Law' which
appeared in 1844 in the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_. This review
bore on its title-page the names of its two editors -- Arnold Ruge and
Karl Marx. Hence Marx's article was also a tirade against the pessimism
of his co-editor.

In this article Marx asked the question:

>Can Germany accomplish a revolution that will not only raise it to the
>level of a modern nation but also to the pinnacle that will be attained
>in the immediate future by the other nations?

Marx went on to declare that the German middle class would certainly
never be capable of carrying out this revolution, since it was nothing
more than the type of the commonplace mediocrity that characterised all
the other classes in the old Germany. But a new class was coming into
existence in Germany which was no longer a part of the middle-class
order of society, which was completely outside society, and which could
only achieve its own freedom by overthrowing the entire existing
world-order. This class was the industrial proletariat. In the course of
its struggle the proletariat would attract to itself all the poor
classes in society, in the country as well as in the towns, and by so
doing would accomplish the truly great revolution -- the German
Revolution.

>The emancipation of Germany from medievalism [wrote Marx] is only
>possible in the form of a simultaneous emancipation from the effects of
>an incomplete liberation from medievalism. It is impossible to destroy
>any form of slavery in Germany without destroying all forms of slavery.
>Germany is too thoroughgoing to be able to revolutionise in any other
>way than from the very foundation of society. The emancipation of
>Germany means the emancipation of mankind. Philosophy is the directive
>impulse of this emancipation; its life-blood is the proletariat.

The _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ reveals with an unmistakable
clarity the psychological path trodden by the youthful Marx. It was not
an overwhelming consciousness of the necessity for freeing the
proletariat from its hunger and misery that caused Marx to regard
revolution as the sole means to achieve that aim. He did not proceed
from the proletariat to revolution. Indeed he chose a path proceeding in
a directly contrary direction. His path had its beginning in his own
intellectual and spiritual qualities, and his choice was influenced by
the ideals that Hölderlin had implanted in the young German
intellectuals of the _Vormärz_. He sought to free himself from the
pressure exercised upon him and his intellectual equals by the mediocre
German police state. And the way to such a liberation lay only through a
German revolution.

Marx was not actuated in these ideas by egotistic motives. It was not
that he desired special privileges for himself and his friends. His aim
was to raise the Germans from serfdom to freedom so as to make them men.
It was in his search for a means by which to achieve this revolution
that Marx discovered the proletariat.

A hasty consideration of these facts might lead one to think that the
youthful Marx was a crafty or a would-be crafty liberal. At first sight
he seems to be a typical middle-class liberal who recognised that his
own class did not possess sufficient strength of itself to attain its
ends and therefore looked around for allies. The feudal 'police and
bondman' state was the enemy. The educated and propertied middle class
was not powerful enough to overthrow this enemy by its own force. Other
forces -- the peasant and the industrial workman -- must be called upon
to help. It was thus that France in 1789 had stormed the Bastille with
the aid of the poor. It was thus that the French _bourgeoisie_ had
hunted Charles X from his throne in July 1830 with the help of the
proletarian fighters on the Paris barricades. In the same way many
Russian liberals sympathised in 1900 with the workmen's movement and
accorded it an important share in the common task of overthrowing
Tsarism.

It was Marx's lack of interest in the prosperity of the propertied
middle class that distinguished him from this type of French and Russian
liberal. His aim was to raise humanity to philosophic heights and to
make out of a bondman a free and independent individual. This pinnacle
of human development is as incompatible with the cash-books of a banker
as with the castle of a feudal baron.

To this may be retorted: 'All these idealistic demands', 'philosophic
heights', 'true humanity', etc, are only trappings to disguise a
capitalistic striving after profits. The battle of Marxism against
capitalism is only a sham fight. Marxism and liberalism are at bottom
identical. They pursue a common aim: the destruction of a propertied,
conservative order of society based upon family and tradition. That,
however, is 'the fight against feudalism'. Are the reproaches justified
which today are levelled against Marx and Marxism particularly in lower
middle-class and anti-Semitic circles?

The social aspect of the middle-class revolution consists in the
substitution of the rule of the propertied middle class and of the
intellectuals who form a part of it for that of the feudal aristocracy
with its following of officers, bureaucrats, priests, etc. The middle
class, nevertheless, cannot simply denounce government by aristocrats
and priests and praise that by manufacturers and lawyers, in order to
achieve its aim. It is compelled to develop a radical criticism of the
entire order of society that is bound up with aristocratic government.
In other words, it must attack the existing order of society as a whole.
The middle class cannot cry out against old fetters and then substitute
new ones for them. It must demand the abolition of all fetters. Nor can
the middle class substitute government by plutocrats for government by
aristocrats. It must substitute the liberation of mankind.

It was ideas of this nature that inspired the middle-class revolutions
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But the moment the
middle-class revolution is victorious it must divorce itself from its
own ideology. For in order to establish the power of money on the ruins
of feudalism it is necessary to throw up fresh barriers against the
unpropertied classes. The place of the old fetters must be taken by new
fetters that are distinguishable from them only in shape. This
transformation took almost grotesque forms in the policy pursued by the
French Constituent Assembly from 1789 to 1791.

Nevertheless, there are always to be found in such a situation a number
of radical minds who separate from their class and go ahead of it. These
minds hold firmly to the theories which they propounded before the
revolution took place. Their desire is to give the fullest possible
practical expression to their theories of liberty and equality. Thus
Robespierre still clung to his hope of realising Rousseau's ideals after
the fall of the Bastille and the collapse of absolutism. Such logical
minds are forced to seek for new elements and classes in the population
with whose aid they may complete the work abandoned by the middle class.
Robespierre appealed to the poverty-stricken masses of the population;
Marx to the proletariat.

In the 1840s, when the German middle-class revolution was anticipated,
Marx had before his eyes, in the examples of England and France, the
attitude adopted after a successful revolution by the entire European
middle class. Moreover, the theory and practice of contemporary German
liberalism showed only too clearly what would be the attitude of the
German middle class after a successful revolution. He was not,
therefore, labouring under any illusions.

A precisely similar example of the relationship between ideology and
class warfare is to be found in the Reformation in the sixteenth
century. Princes, knights and townspeople wanted to seize the revenues
of the Church for themselves and to refuse to acknowledge priestly
authority. In order to attain this aim they were forced, however, to
call in question the entire social order that had been in existence in
Europe for a thousand years. To papal dogmas they were compelled to
oppose the principle of freedom and equality for every Christian. When,
however, the new evangelical state church rose from the ruins of the
Roman Church, and the new faith came to take the place of the old, men
like Thomas Münzer refused to be content with what had already been
achieved. The task that had been abandoned by princes and merchants
should be completed by the peasantry. It was for the peasants to throw
off the shackles of serfdom and thus achieve the promised freedom.
Robespierre and the youthful Marx stood in the same relationship to
middle-class liberalism as Thomas Münzer stood to Luther -- as fire to
water.

Ever since the revolution of 1688 the middle class had held the reins of
government in England. In France it had finally grasped them in the July
Revolution of 1830. But in Central and Eastern Europe monarchical
feudalism reigned until 1848. It was the steady development of machinery
and industry since the middle of the eighteenth century that conferred
upon the middle-class movement its expansive force. At the same time the
middle-class intellectuals sought to clarify and coordinate their ideas
about their own class, aims and duties. This tremendous intellectual
task was attacked from two sides by the English political economists and
the German philosophers.

The English political economists -- especially Ricardo -- discovered
that the source of all values lies in the human capacity for work.
Although they had also ascertained correctly the division of results as
between employer and employed, that is, that the former took the profits
and the latter obtained a bare minimum on which to exist, they accepted
this fact as a natural law which could not be broken or called in
question. It was Hegel who discovered the schism in the middle-class
society that sprang from the ruins of the old patriarchal order. He drew
attention to the contrast between the small minority which grew ever
richer and the great majority which steadily became more and more
impoverished. This contrast seemed to him to proceed from an unalterable
natural law. And in order to avoid a revolutionary solution of the
problem Hegel proceeded to develop his conception of an omnipotent state
founded upon Reason, in which the contrast between rich and poor
afforded by the middle-class order of society would be overcome by a new
and corporative order of society arranged according to professions. But
Hegel's own teaching was contradictory of this artificial solution. He
believed in an incessant spiritual progress that was always in
opposition to itself. Each appearance of the world spirit (_Weltgeist_)
at a definite period in history of necessity gave rise to opposition. It
was out of the conflict of power with power that a new and third force
was born. This dialectic method when applied by Hegel to his own age
clearly taught that the thesis (middle-class society) must be overcome
by the antithesis (proletariat) in order to prepare the way for the new
synthesis. In Hegel's eyes each period in history constituted a unity.
The world spirit displayed itself similarly in politics and philosophy,
art and religion. If that be granted, then there is no longer any
absolute historical value, since all the ideas of the philosophers,
religious thinkers, etc, are the product of a definite historical period
and must disappear with that period. Only the world spirit itself is
absolute in its eternal progression. In these ideas of Hegel are to be
found the chief elements composing Marx's materialistic conception of
history.

The critical minds among the middle-class _intelligentsia_ in Germany as
in England thus attained the uttermost limits of their self-analysis in
the years preceding 1830. A single step farther must of necessity
involve an upheaval of middle-class society.

In countries like France and England, in which the middle class had been
politically victorious, it had drawn a sharp line of demarcation between
itself and the poor and non-propertied masses. In England, as also in
France under Louis Philippe, the suffrage was reserved for the
propertied minority. The working classes, the peasantry and the
labourers, were the objects of law-making. The ruling middle class
sought to conserve everything in the old feudal governmental system that
could be of use in protecting the existing order against the masses. The
English middle class retained the monarchy, the House of Lords and the
antiquated feudal ceremonial. The French _bourgeoisie_ also retained the
monarchy in addition to the highly-centralised administrative apparatus
that had been set up under Louis XIV, destroyed during the revolution,
and resurrected in an even more centralised form under Napoleon I.

The disappointed masses did not wish to renounce the freedom and
equality which had been promised by the prophets of the middle-class
revolution. They wanted democracy; the self-government of the masses;
and the abolition of all the privileges of the newly-aggrandised middle
class no less than of the old feudal nobles. Although democratic ideas
of republicanism and universal suffrage were at first purely political,
it was not long before the conception of economic reform was added to
them.

In the years preceding 1848 the rebellion of the workmen against their
lot was obliged at first to take democratic form after the example of
Robespierre and of 1793. Such of the young middle-class intellectuals as
were radically inclined were also unable to reconcile themselves to the
plutocracy which had come to occupy the throne formerly occupied by
feudalism. These youthful radicals set themselves at the head of the
democratic movement. In England they formed the democratic working-class
party known as the Chartists; while in France a number of opposition
groups came into existence whose programmes embraced everything from
purely political reform to its logical outcome, social revolution.

Feudalism still flourished in Germany. The Germany of 1847 stood
politically where France had stood in 1788. The propertied middle class
made ready to enter upon their inheritance. But behind the moderate
liberals rose the menacing figure of Demos intent upon substituting a
complete revolution for the partial revolution which was expected to
occur. The radicals among the German intellectuals were the heirs of
Hegel and developed his ideas to their logical conclusion. In the ranks
of the young Hegelian revolutionaries stood Marx and Engels.

Karl Marx risked the final step and placed himself and his ideas outside
the pale of middle-class society. He was now able to turn the economic
notions of Ricardo to his own purposes. It was no longer a natural law
that the factory worker should only receive a bare living-wage for his
work; it was only the phenomenon characteristic of a particular
historical period -- the period of middle-class capitalism. The
capitalist law of wages would disappear with the downfall of capitalism.
Similarly the state is not the incorporation of eternal wisdom but only
the political superstructure of a middle-class order of society. The
state falls with the destruction of that order of society.

The materialist interpretation of history consists in the application of
dialectical criticism to all aspects of human life. The value of every
activity and interest is carefully weighed in the balance and found
wanting. Nevertheless, criticism alone did not suffice to bring about
the disappearance of the middle-class state and the middle-class
standard of wages. Philosophic criticism showed that no form of life was
eternal. This did not indeed mean that the subjects of critical analysis
were mere figments of the brain any more than air disappears because of
the discovery by a scientist of the elements composing it. The police
force maintained by the middle-class state and the cash-boxes of the
capitalists are bitter truths which cannot be avoided by stripping them
of their ideological coverings. The revolution was the sole means of
depriving the capitalists of power and of destroying them. And this last
of all revolutions could only be carried out by the class which fate had
liberated from all the traditions, theories and other restrictions
imposed upon the feudal and middle-class societies -- the proletariat.

The working class was thus in Marx's system confronted with a task that
was as unique as it was vast -- the consummation of a philosophy. It was
to be their task to put the theories of the philosophers into practice.
The middle-class intellectuals destroyed their own class in their final
and most courageous conclusions by mobilising a social underworld in
order to prove the truth of their doctrines. Thus Marx saw an
indissoluble association between theory and revolution. Theories are no
more than intellectual toys without the revolution that gives them
practical form. Marxism is a book of fundamental principles whose final
chapter is revolution.

The working classes in France and England, Belgium and Germany, were up
to 1848 becoming daily more and more conscious of their peculiar
situation. They sought in consequence to improve their miserable
condition, and dreamed of a new and better order of society in which
'rich and poor' should no longer exist. Nevertheless, the European
proletariat achieved little before 1848 in the way of independent
thinking and organisation. It contented itself with feeling its way
slowly within the framework of the democratic movement. A few isolated
and desperate outbreaks on the part of workmen did nothing to raise the
working-class level.

Once Marx had made up his mind on the subject of his own system it
became necessary for him to seek the support of the working class.
Europe was faced with a democratic revolution. It was hoped that the
proletariat would play the part in this revolution that Marx had
assigned to it. Marx visited Brussels, Paris and London, in company with
his friend Engels, in order to establish contact with the various
democratic and proletarian groups. He sought to bring home to the German
workmen abroad the nature of the historic mission which they were called
upon to fulfil, and he founded the Communist Party with a mere handful
of supporters. On the eve of the revolution of 1848 Marx published his
_Communist Manifesto_, which contained the party's programme.

In this _Manifesto_ Marx drew a clear line of demarcation between the
great task awaiting his party in the future -- the overthrow of
capitalism -- and its more immediate work of assisting in ensuring the
success of the coming democratic revolution in Europe.

On the subject of Germany the _Communist Manifesto_ runs:

>As soon as the _bourgeois_ revolution begins in Germany, the Communist
>Party will make common cause with it against the absolutist monarchy,
>the feudal landed proprietors, and the lower middle class. At the same
>time the party will lose no opportunity for making apparent to the
>working class the enmity that exists between middle class and
>proletariat. It will do this in order that the social and political
>conditions which must of necessity arise out of the rule of the middle
>class, may be used by the workers as so many weapons to be turned
>against that class so as to ensure that the moment the reactionary
>classes have been overthrown in Germany the battle against the middle
>class will begin. The eyes of Communists are turned towards Germany
>because it is there that the middle-class revolution is about to break
>forth which will be carried out with the help of a far more advanced
>proletariat and under the more progressive influence of present-day
>European civilisation than were the revolutions in England and in
>France in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. For this reason the
>German middle-class revolution will only be the prelude to a
>proletarian revolution.

The Communists in England were to support the Chartist movement, in
France the Social-Democrat Party, and in Poland the nationalist
revolutionaries who also desired an agrarian reform. In short, the
Communists were to support all revolutionary movements that were
directed against existing social and political conditions. Marx set
before the Communists the duty of working everywhere for the unification
of the democratic movements throughout the world. International
cooperation among democrats in the Europe of 1848 was only natural in
view of the fact that the feudal and monarchical governments had united
themselves beneath the banner of the Holy Alliance. Nevertheless, Marx
did not intend to supplant nationalism by internationalism.

In the _Communist Manifesto_ is to be found a sentence that is
frequently torn from its context: 'The working class knows no country.'
The sentences that follow reveal what these words were intended to mean,
namely, that the working class had no country simply because others were
in possession of it -- it was for the working class to conquer it for
themselves. This does not mean that the conception of patriotism is
senseless and something which ought to be combated. In the present
political state of the world the idea of nationality exists and must be
respected as a political reality. It cannot be destroyed merely by
creating in the working class a feeling of belonging to no country in
particular. Its disappearance will only come about through a social and
economic development that will gradually unite the European states after
a successful proletarian revolution.

The fall of the feudal monarchy and the middle-class liberals was to be
followed by the rule of democracy -- self-government by the proletariat.
In Marx's view true democracy in a modern industrialised state can only
mean the government of the proletariat in the sense that the working
class assumes the leadership of the middle class and the peasantry.
Through 'autocratic attacks upon the right of property' common ownership
would gradually be established. Marx concluded by painting in glowing
colours a picture of the disappearance of the state itself as the final
step in this evolutionary process:

>When in the course of evolution class differences vanish and production
>is concentrated in the hands of the community, governmental authority
>will lose its political character. In its essence governmental
>authority is the utilisation of the organised force of one class for
>the suppression of another. But when the proletariat of necessity forms
>itself into a class in its fight against the middle class and through a
>revolution becomes the governing class itself and then abolishes the
>old methods of production, it abolishes with these old methods of
>production the fundamental causes of class differences, class
>differences themselves, and therefore its own authority as a class. In
>place of the old middle-class order of society with its class divisions
>and differences there comes into being an association in which the free
>development of the individual is the preliminary condition for the free
>development of all.

After the overthrow of the kings, nobles and great capitalists, a
democratic government in the sense of 1793 would have to suppress
counter-revolution with an iron hand and carry out the abolition of
ownership. Nevertheless, the authoritarian state was not an end in
itself. At the last the state -- that vehicle of middle-class and feudal
government -- would dissolve itself and in its place would appear
voluntary association. Hence the 'ideal state' is not one of Marx's
ideals, since in his view there should no longer be any state in the
future, and its place should be taken by a voluntary association of
independent individuals. It was thus that he hoped to realise the
highest ambition of the eighteenth-century revolutionaries -- the
perfect freedom and equality of mankind.

The tasks actually facing Germany in 1848 were naturally far less
ambitious. The immediate problem was the destruction of princely and
aristocratic power. Marx and Engels actively participated in the
revolution, and in Cologne in 1848-49 they published the _Neue
Rheinische Zeitung_ as 'a mouthpiece of democracy'. It proved to be the
most daring and most influential newspaper at the disposal of German
democracy. In its columns Marx and Engels preached a revolutionary war
on the part of the German nation against Russia, as well as against
Denmark and against the Austrian Slavs, in the hope that in such a war a
dictatorship similar to that of 1793 would be established that would
still farther carry on the revolution. The _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ was
both nationalist and militarist in an actively democratic sense. It was
not a workman's paper in the customary meaning of the word. Indeed the
various occupational and class interests of the workers received scant
attention in its pages.

This was left to Stephan Born, who in 1848-49 in Berlin and Leipzig
sought to pursue a truly working-class policy -- a policy founded upon
conditions of work, wages and hours of work that defined the position of
the working class within democracy in general and more especially within
the middle-class order of society. Although he was a member of the
Communist Party, Born worked independently of Marx and Engels, and his
great services were ignored by Marx despite the fact that they were
conducted along strictly revolutionary lines. For Marx as a practical
German politician only the coming democratic revolution was then of
importance. This revolution could only succeed through a merciless
criticism and showing-up of the middle class. This criticism, however,
must concentrate for the present upon the great political problems and
not upon proletarian problems of wages, hours of labour, etc. At this
stage in the revolution it was necessary to reveal the 'treachery' of
the middle class in the Danish, Polish, agrarian and constitutional
questions rather than in the wages issue.

In sentences in the _Communist Manifesto_ that have become famous Marx
defined the relations between the Communists and the working class:

>The Communists are not a special party as compared with the other
>labour parties. They have no interests that are not those of the entire
>proletariat... The Communists are therefore the most determined and
>propulsive element in the labour parties in all countries. They simply
>possess a clearer insight into the conditions, course and results of
>the proletarian revolution than the majority of the proletariat.

Who were in fact the Communists of 1848? The choice of the title is to
be explained as follows. In those days the term socialist merely denoted
in general anyone who was interested in questions of property ownership
and in criticism of the existing order of society. A Communist was a
more revolutionary type of workman who was engaged in fighting
capitalism. The only organised Communists were the members of the
Communist Party. Nevertheless, the policy of the party was not
determined by the wishes of its members.

The only true communism was the teachings and opinions of Marx himself.
The only equal whom Marx then and subsequently recognised was Friedrich
Engels, whose views he listened to. All the others who worked with Marx
and Engels in promoting the movement were treated by them with contempt.
In proof of this it is only necessary to recall the expressions used by
Marx and Engels in their letters to one another in speaking of Lassalle
and Wilhelm Liebknecht. The party organisation was looked upon by Marx
and Engels simply as a medium through which they could better influence
the working class as a whole. And never once in any serious issue did
they ask what were the wishes of 'the rebels'. If the party were to make
difficulties, or to fail to perform its functions, Marx and Engels
believed it would be better either to abandon it or to dissolve it, and
to confront the masses alone without the restrictions imposed by
cooperation with a petty-minded deliberative body. On 13 February 1851,
Engels gave open expression to these views in a letter to Marx. He
wrote:

>At long last and for the first time for years past we have an
>opportunity for showing that we do not need either the support or the
>applause of any party in any land and that we are wholly independent of
>such foolishness. From this moment onwards we are answerable for
>ourselves alone. When the time comes in which they have need of us,
>then we shall be in a position to dictate our own terms. Until then at
>least we have peace... Moreover, we have no need to lament because the
>_petits grands hommes_ avoid us. Have we not pretended for many years
>that Krethi Plethi was our party, although we had no party there, and
>those whom we at least officially recognised as members of our party...
>did not comprehend the very ABC of our movement? How can men like
>ourselves, who avoid official positions like the plague, belong to a
>party? What would become of us scorners of popularity if we began to be
>popular? What have we to do with a party that is nothing more than a
>herd of asses, and that swears by us because its members look upon us
>as their equals?

This letter was written by Engels in the bitterness of exile, and after
the failure of the revolution, at a time when Marx and Engels were
ostracised by the other refugees. Although this fact explains the
presence of many forcible expressions in the letter, the general tone is
a faithful echo of their views. The two men invariably remained loyal to
this principle and never bowed before the authority of their 'party' in
any weighty question. The 'Communists' of the _Manifesto_ were in truth
only Marx and Engels themselves.

It may be discerned clearly from this how in those days Marxism was
introduced into the working classes as something extraneous to them. Out
of the working class itself sprang with elemental force only criticism
of existing conditions, especially of their own living conditions, as
well as a naive utopian belief in a better future and in the great
uprising of the peoples which was to effect the overthrow of all proud
and oppressive rulers. The working man himself did not realise, before
his eyes had been opened for him by non-working-class counsellors, that
he was himself to take over the leadership of this revolution and to
advance by definite stages towards the realisation of the communal order
of society. The working class was indeed prepared to play its part in a
national revolution at the side and under the leadership of the radical
middle class. Hence the bitter disappointment aroused in the German
working class in particular by the 'betrayal' of the common cause by the
middle classes in 1848-49.

The naive and inexperienced working class was thus in accord with Marx
and Engels in its belief that the first necessity was the middle-class
-- the national -- revolution. Although the working class was prepared
to participate in this revolution loyally and obediently at the side of
the middle class, Marx and Engels informed it that the middle class
would prove itself incapable of bringing even its _own_ revolution to a
successful conclusion, and that therefore the national revolution must
be conducted in a way in which the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ had sought
to secure the intellectual leadership of the revolution of 1848-49. The
theory of the political mission of the working class was thus inoculated
into that class by the two most radical minds among the middle-class
intellectuals -- Marx and Engels. Since, however, the working masses
were unaccustomed to such a task, it was obvious that it could not be
achieved by the workers alone and unaided; and that it was only to be
brought to a successful conclusion by means of a strongly-disciplined
organisation that blindly followed the orders of its intellectual
leaders. If the organisation should prove itself unwilling to submit to
so stern a discipline, then it must be destroyed and a new organisation
built up in its stead. It was out of this unique and variable
relationship between the radical intellectual leaders and the
proletarian masses that there emerged the dictatorship of the leaders
over the proletariat. The purpose of the Communist teaching was that the
workers should gradually come to recognise their historic mission in the
doctrines of Marx and that they should themselves achieve their own
liberation. Meanwhile they were very far from such knowledge, and until
they had attained to it Marx and Engels were compelled to lead
autocratically the infantile working-class movement.

After the collapse of the revolution of 1848-49 Marx and Engels went to
England. The Communist Party broke up in consequence of the failure.
Marx saw no possibility for decades to come of putting his theories into
practice. The life had gone out of Marxism and the loss was not
compensated by Marx's theoretical work on 'capitalism'. The First
International, which was founded by Marx in 1864, was not a
revolutionary party in the Marxian sense. It was not even a united
political party. It was no more than a loose international union of
working-men's organisations of all kinds. Its membership included the
liberal and middle-class English trade unions and Latin anarchists. Two
small labour parties founded by Lassalle and Wilhelm Liebknecht in
Germany in the 1860s were among the closest supporters of Marx within
the International -- a fact that did not prevent Marx and Lassalle from
criticising their leaders in a forcible and unjust manner [^01].

Throughout the constitutional struggles in Prussia from 1862 to 1866,
when Bismarck was making war upon the liberal majority in the Prussian
Diet and ruling unconstitutionally as a dictator, Marx indulged once
more in hopes of a middle-class revolution in Prussia and Germany, and
he looked upon Lassalle's refusal to share this hope as little short of
treachery. But Lassalle no longer believed in the German middle class as
a means to revolution, and his object in a non-revolutionary period was
to organise an independent class-conscious proletarian party that should
be clearly distinguished from the liberals. Nor was Lassalle's
conscience in the least disturbed by the fact that in pursuit of his
great aim he was temporarily brought into tactical association with
Bismarck. Marx demanded from the Prussian working class that it should
fight against the Hohenzollerns and the junkers in the sense laid down
by the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_; and once again he reminded it that the
democratic middle-class revolution was its first objective. All
subsequent criticism by Marx and Engels of the Social-Democrats in
Germany, up to Engel's criticism of the _Erfurt Programme_ of 1891, is
based upon a single reproach -- the reproach of insufficient preparation
for the middle-class revolution, of suppressing the republican
principle, of an indefinite attitude towards 'the state', etc.

The year 1871 saw the great workmen's uprising known as the Paris
Commune. Marx had no part in preparing this rising and its leaders were
not communists. The fact that among these leaders were to be found
members of the International does nothing to prove the contrary; for the
loose and varied nature of the International has already been explained
above. The Commune proclaimed the substitution of self-government and
free association for the centralised authoritarian state. The masses
were to be represented in the municipal and provincial administrations
by representatives who were not to receive more than a workman's wage.
These representatives were to incorporate the deliberative, law-giving
and executive powers. Modest 'communal' officials were to replace the
parliament and bureaucracy of the ancient feudal and middle-class state.
An armed nation was to act as its own army and police.

The Paris Commune took a course that was very different from that
visualised by Marx. Marx had postulated a centralised and ruthless
revolutionary government, inspired by the mentality of 1793, which
should beat down all enemies of the people by means of a concentration
of all revolutionary forces. To proclaim a federalist and communal
organisation of society in the middle of a civil war seemed to Marx
sentimental folly. The Commune started to realise its plans at the very
point where Marx made his revolution end -- with the destruction of the
state and the establishment of the rule of liberty. This served at least
to bring the ideals of the Commune into some sort of connexion with
those of Marx.

After the defeat of the Commune Marx induced the Committee of the
International to place itself unreservedly on the side of the Paris
workmen. In his famous pamphlet, published in 1871, Marx proclaimed that
the cause of the Commune was his own cause. All differences in theory
and practice were ignored and only praise accorded to the revolutionary
achievement of the Paris workmen and the destruction of the state. Marx
had adopted the Commune of 1871 for his own purposes, an action unique
in history in that the Commune was neither politically nor theoretically
the work of Marx.

Marx thus took a fateful step. It was thus -- and thus only -- that he
acquired for communism a real revolutionary tradition. It was then that
communism became for the first time the creed of all revolutionary
workers throughout the world. This great success was bought at a price:
the immediate dissolution of the centralised state authority became the
classical model for a working-class revolution.

The First International broke up in the 1870s in consequence of its own
internal dissensions and Marx's autocratic methods. All prospects of
revolution had vanished not only in Central and Western Europe but also
in America. Governmental authority had become so firmly established in
Germany and France, Austria-Hungary and Italy, England and the United
States of America, that armed revolt seemed to have no chance of
success. Capitalism became more and more powerful everywhere. At the
same time the numbers and importance of the industrial proletariat
experienced a concomitant increase. The political working-class movement
again became daily more evident; and especially in Germany, where in
1890 the laws against the Socialists had undergone modification.
Nevertheless, the European proletariat in the heyday of the Second
International after 1889 no longer had the democratic revolution as
their political objective as had their forebears of 1848. Instead, their
energies were devoted to improving their social and economic condition
within the capitalist state. It is true that the Second International
adopted Marx's theories. These, however, were forced to undergo a
singular change to make them adaptable to a non-revolutionary age.
Communism now served, above all else, to enable the proletariat to
differentiate itself ideologically from the middle class. In other words
-- to secure for itself an independent class existence within capitalist
society. The socialist working class -- the Marxist parties now adopted
the designations 'Socialist' or 'Social-Democrat' -- no longer permitted
itself to be dictated to by individual intellectuals in its party
organisations and trade unions. The organised workman now claimed for
himself the right of self-determination within his organisation.

Thus communism changed from a revolutionary doctrine used by the extreme
radicals among the middle-class intellectuals to drive the working
masses onwards, to a professional ideology with whose help the
class-conscious workman defended and improved his position within the
middle-class order of society. Although this change in communism between
1848 and the Second International indicated a great development in the
personal activity and the self-confidence of the working class, it was
at the same time a definite step backwards on the revolutionary path.
There was, nevertheless, still a great country in the Europe of the
1890s where communism could regain its position of 1848, and where it
was not obliged to evolve any farther in a Western European form. This
country was Russia. There the middle-class revolution was imminent and
the finest brains among the intellectuals desired to perfect the
revolution in a Marxist sense with the help of the working class.
Revolutionary communism of 1848 thus found the path to further
development open to it in Tsarist Russia.

The young revolutionary Lenin arrived in St Petersburg from the Volga in
1893 to put the theories of Marx into practice.

## Chapter 02: Revolution in Russia, 1893-1914

A crude modernity characterised Tsarist Russia in the eighteenth
century. At a time when almost the entire European continent bore the
stamp of Absolutism Peter the Great and Catherine II were progressive
rulers. And in days that saw the Congress of Vienna, Alexander I could
afford to be more liberal in European politics than either Metternich or
the King of Prussia.

The scene underwent a change during the reign of his successor, Nicholas
I. The ideals of the French Revolution began more and more to penetrate
Russia, where they were enthusiastically welcomed by the
_intelligentsia_, which from this time onwards walked step by step with
the radical theorists of Western Europe. Moreover, the criticism of
existing conditions on the part of the _intelligentsia_ found its
justification in the misery of the vast Russian peasantry, which was
still cumbered with the chains of serfdom.

Russia in the nineteenth century was still a feudal state. On the one
side were the Tsar, the aristocratic landowners, the church, army,
police and bureaucracy; on the other were the serfs. Between these two
opposing forces stood a numerically small commercial and industrial
middle class and a proletariat that was slowly coming into existence.
The _intelligentsia_ in Russia played a very important role in hastening
the development of events. For the most part the educated and
independent radicals were aristocrats by birth. A father would sit in
his office as chief of police or governor while his daughter stood at a
street corner throwing bombs. The social and intellectual history of the
Russian Revolution reveals the very strong suicidal tendency at work in
the Russian nobility as a class. Young students of noble birth
themselves destroyed all that their fathers had constructed and
venerated. The French aristocracy destroyed itself in a similar fashion
in the eighteenth century before the outbreak of the French Revolution.
As soon as the feudal organisation of the state was felt to be
intolerable by the masses, and once the historical development of the
_ancien régime_ had publicly revealed itself as outworn, its leaders
faded away and opened the doors to revolution.

Tsar Alexander II sought to stem the tide by the so-called liberation of
the serfs in the 1860s. The peasants thus acquired legal freedom.
Nevertheless, the land itself remained for the most part in the hands of
the landowners and the village police were as powerful and brutal after
the 'liberation' as before. The liberation of the serfs only testified
to the strength of the revolutionary movement without solving a single
one of the problems confronting Russia. The bomb that blew Alexander II
to pieces in 1881 was the revolutionaries' reply to the comedy of the
liberation of the serfs.

Who were the men and women who assassinated the Tsar? They were
conspirators belonging to the great and many-sided movement that for
close on fifty years, from about 1870 to 1917, constituted the driving
force of the Russian Revolution, and manifested itself under every kind
of title and organisation. This movement as a whole can best be
described as the 'popular' or 'national' movement. The characteristic
common to all _Narodniki_ ('democrats') was a frenzied hatred of the
Tsar and his government and a firm belief in Russia and especially the
Russian peasant. Their aim was to overthrow the brutal governmental
bureaucracy and replace it by a popular government in which the chief
power should rest in the hands of the peasantry, as forming the great
majority of the nation and embodying its special characteristics. The
last vestiges of communal ownership among the peasantry that had
survived the Tsardom and serfdom should perhaps be used to form the
foundation of a Russian agrarian socialism. Russia should learn from
Western Europe without necessarily adopting its theories in their
entirety.

It was clear that the stupid and uneducated Russian peasant could not
attain to this knowledge by himself. For this purpose he needed the
assistance of the _intelligentsia_. Hence the self-sacrificing young
aristocrats and intellectuals went 'among the people' and into the
villages in order to indoctrinate the peasantry and prepare the
revolution. There thus came into existence the type of educated Russian
revolutionary who fought with all the means at his disposal, who did not
hesitate to use terrorist methods against the hated representatives of
the government, who pursued the same ends in Switzerland and Siberia
that he had followed in St Petersburg and Moscow, and who served the
cause of the Russian people in prison and on the gallows as well as in
the editorial office of a prohibited newspaper and in the deliberations
of his party. The 'popular' movement created the professional Russian
revolutionary who knew no other end in life except revolution, and who
was ready to sacrifice his life in the popular cause. This type,
however, was very far removed from the peasant. The finest
characteristic of the 'democrats', who subsequently became generally
known as 'Social Revolutionaries', and other groups allied with them,
was their revolutionary heroism. Their weakness lay in their confused
ideology. They refused obstinately to recognise that Russia could not
remain for ever an agrarian paradise in the midst of a modern
capitalistic world. And they could return no answer to the question as
to what change would be wrought in Russia by modern industrialism.

The romanticist policy of the Social Revolutionaries was blind to facts
and sought either to ignore capitalism in Russia, or to exclude it. In
the 1880s and 1890s, however, industries rapidly arose on a large scale
that were called into being by the military requirements of the Tsarist
government and under the stimulation of foreign capitalists. The modern
employer appeared at the side of the old half-Asiatic type of Russian
merchant. Out of the villages came an industrial working class that at
first maintained a bare existence under miserable conditions and then
began to fight against their exploiters.

The greater the importance for Russia of the industrial and proletarian
problem the greater was the interest displayed by a part of the Russian
_intelligentsia_ in socialism and Marxism. Since public and legal
activity on the part of Russian socialists in associations or trade
unions was forbidden by the Tsarist police, an illicit Social-Democrat
Party came into existence.

There is a surprising resemblance between Russia in 1895 and Germany
in 1845. In both countries a middle-class revolution was imminent; the
majority of the population was engaged in agrarian pursuits, although
industry was increasing; the governmental system was the object of
intense hatred on the part of all courageous and independent thinkers;
and in both countries the majority of the nation was filled with an
overwhelming desire for liberty. In Germany the youthful disciples of
Hegel appealed to the nation to aid them in realising their
philosophical ideals in the same way that in Russia the _intelligentsia_
turned to the masses in the hope of stirring them into rebellion against
the Tsar. Finally, the mass of the population in both countries, and
especially the working class, was politically ignorant and incapable of
acting independently without receiving guidance from another source.

For this reason all the conditions preceding the revolutionary Marxism
of 1848 made their appearance again in the Russia of 1895. The
inculcation into Russia of Marxism in its original form nevertheless
presented grave difficulties. For Russia in the 1890s did not make
acquaintance with Marxism in the form of the 'Union of Communists' but
in the great labour parties -- especially the German Social-Democrat
Party -- of the Second International. A twofold development of Russian
socialism thus became possible: either through alliance with
contemporary Central and Western European labour movements or in a
revival of the original Marxism of 1848. In choosing the latter path
Lenin created the Bolshevism that stands in sharp contrast to Western
European Social-Democracy and that claims with some justification to
have resurrected the old revolutionary Marxism.

Lenin was descended from an ennobled family of Russian state officials.
His brother took part in a conspiracy against the life of the Tsar and
was executed. Lenin himself was filled with the same fiery hatred of
Tsarism. Although he admired the heroism of the _Narodniki_, Lenin could
not join the Social Revolutionary movement since his logical mind and
scientific education prevented his sympathising with the vague and
sentimental ideals of the 'democrats'. He recognised that Russia could
not escape industrialisation and that Marxism as a scientific system
towered above the fantastic notions of the _Narodniki_. He saw his
mission as the task of allying a number of clear-thinking, realist and
determined revolutionaries with the industrial proletariat. It was only
in this way that Tsarism could be defeated. Lenin thus took over from
the _Narodniki_ the organisation of revolutionary 'cells' which live
among the masses and are entrusted with the task of influencing and
directing them. To await a spontaneous uprising of the masses would mean
that revolution would be postponed for ever.

The development of Russian Social-Democracy took the same course that
had been followed by the Social Revolutionary parties. Enthusiastic
young revolutionaries in the 1880s and 1890s went among the industrial
workers instead of the peasants. Armed with the writings of Marx and
Engels, they abandoned their luxurious homes in the fashionable
districts of St Petersburg and Moscow and went to live in the slums of
the working-class districts where they 'discovered' the proletariat. At
first they contented themselves with winning the confidence of the
working class by means of night-schools and free instruction, before
attempting to inculcate them with socialism.

What a different picture from that presented at the same time by the
socialist labour parties in Western Europe! It was, nevertheless, the
same method that had been followed half a century before by Marx and
Engels in order to win over the German manual workers in Paris and
Brussels to the revolution.

The further development of the infant Social-Democrat Party in Russia
depended now upon what they decided on as their principal aim. Two
courses were open to them: to lay the greatest emphasis in their work
either upon the special class interests of the workers -- the social and
political questions of wages, hours of work, conditions of work,
housing, etc -- or upon the political struggle against the Tsarist
government. If they chose the former course, then the industrial workman
became the decisive factor in the movement. The right of each individual
member of the organisation to vote would be preserved and the
revolutionary impetus would be weakened. If, however, they adopted the
second course, the professional revolutionaries would have control of
the movement and the ordinary workman would have to obey them. Under the
first of these two alternatives it might indeed have been possible to
achieve a partial legal existence for socialism even under the Tsarist
regime. The second alternative meant a life and death struggle with the
Tsarist government after the fashion of the struggle waged by the
_Narodniki_ terrorists.

Lenin unhesitatingly decided upon the second course. In 1902 he wrote:

>We often say that the workman does not possess an inherent socialist
>democratic feeling and that this must be inculcated in him from
>without. Yet the history of every country shows that the working class
>is capable by itself of attaining trade-union consciousness, that is to
>say, of attaining to the conviction of the necessity to unite in trade
>unions, to fight against employers, to demand the passing of this or
>that law by the government in the interests of the working class, etc.
>The theories of socialism have developed from the philosophical,
>historical and economic theories that have been the offspring of the
>brains of the educated elements in the propertied classes -- the
>_intelligentsia_. Even the founders of modern scientific socialism --
>Marx and Engels -- belonged socially to the middle-class
>_intelligentsia_. The theory of social-democracy in Russia arose in a
>similar manner and wholly independent of the tremendous growth of the
>labour movement. It came into being as the natural and inevitable
>consequence of the intellectual development of the revolutionary
>socialist mind.

Lenin continued:

>The workman can only grow class-conscious outside the influence of the
>economic struggle and of his relations with his employer. The only
>sphere in which this knowledge can be gained is that of the relations
>between all classes in the state and the government -- the sphere of
>the interplay of relationships between all classes. It is for this
>reason that the question 'What is to be done to make the workman
>politically intelligent?' cannot always be answered with the simple
>reply that satisfies many practical minds: 'Associate with and teach
>the workmen.' In order to make the working class politically
>intelligent Social-Democrats must go into all classes of the community
>and must send out divisions of their army in all directions.

Lenin firmly rejected the type of labour movement which he called trade
unionism after the English trade unions that were then specially typical
of this movement. It was not enough that the proletariat should fight
for their own class interests. The Russian Social-Democrats must
introduce their propaganda and carry on their agitation in all classes
of the community and especially among the peasantry. The daily
discontent of the workman with factory conditions, etc, must be
developed into a general dissatisfaction with Tsarism as the source of
all evils.

Again Lenin wrote:

>We possess neither a parliament nor freedom of assembly. Nevertheless
>we are able to hold meetings of workmen who wish to listen to a
>Social-Democrat. We must, however, manage to hold meetings for all
>classes desirous of hearing what a democrat has to say. For he who
>forgets that 'communists support every revolutionary movement', and
>that we are therefore bound to make clear to the people the common task
>of democracy without for a moment concealing our socialist convictions,
>is no true Social-Democrat. Nor is he a Social-Democrat who forgets his
>duty to go a step ahead of all others in the formulation, provocation
>and solution of every general democratic problem [^02].

Lenin regarded Social-Democracy as the great leader of the Russian
nation in its struggle for freedom. If, however, that was to be its
task, then it could only adopt one form of organisation -- the close,
strongly-disciplined party of professional revolutionaries. The great
mass of the working class should be influenced by the party without
being members of it. In Lenin's eyes a labour party in the Western
European sense of the term was impossible in Russia for the simple
reason that the police forbade it. The real reason was of another and
deeper nature: such a party would not be able to carry out its
revolutionary task. Russian Social-Democracy must not be inspired by the
ideas of a trade-union secretary but by those of a tribune of the
people. Let us listen once again to the voice of Lenin speaking in 1902:

>Our principal failure in the matter of organisation has been that
>through our dilettantism we have lowered the prestige of the revolution
>in Russia. Weak and undecided in questions of principle, possessed of a
>narrow mental outlook, excusing his own dilatoriness by the unruliness
>of the masses, incapable of drawing up broad and daring plans,
>inexperienced and clumsy in the pursuit of his profession, that is, the
>fight with the political police, a man who can respect his opponents
>and who reminds one of a trade-union official rather than a tribune of
>the people -- such a man, I tell you, is no revolutionary but only a
>contemptible amateur. No professional revolutionary need feel himself
>insulted by these bitter words; they apply to myself above all others
>in so far as inadequate organisation is in question. I was an active
>member of an organisation that was busied with far-reaching plans and
>every individual member of that organisation suffered heavily from the
>consciousness that we were only amateurs, at a time when it is possible
>to say in a variation of the well-known phrase: 'Give us organised
>revolutionaries and we will liberate Russia!'

Marx would have been in complete agreement with these sentiments of the
youthful Lenin, which were, nevertheless, rejected by a large number of
the Russian socialists. Out of their refusal to follow Lenin arose two
opposing parties within the framework of Russian socialism in general.
The first believed that the Russian Social-Democrat Party should be a
labour party whose object was the improvement of the social condition of
the proletariat. This did not mean that they were not to participate in
the political struggle with Tsarism. Since, however, the approaching
Russian revolution could only be a middle-class revolution, the rate of
its progression must be determined by the middle class itself. The
second and opposing party believed that the Social-Democrats should
become a secret society of professional revolutionaries whose task it
would be to persuade the proletariat to seize control of the
middle-class revolution.

These two tendencies in Russian Social-Democracy first became evident at
the congress of the party which was held in London in 1903. In those
days Russian socialists could only carry on their deliberations
undisturbed in foreign countries. The split came over the wording of
Paragraph I of the party rules. Lenin proposed that this should read:
'Anyone is a member of the party who participates in the organisation of
the party.' Martov introduced a counter-proposal which ran: 'Anyone
working under the supervision of the party is a member of the party.'
Russian Social-Democracy split into two groups over this to all intents
and purposes not very important difference of opinion. In the voting
that followed, Lenin's proposal received a couple more votes than that
of Martov out of a total of some three dozen voters. From that day
onwards his supporters called themselves the Majoritarians (Bolsheviks),
while those of Martov styled themselves Minoritarians (Mensheviks). A
small handful of Russian refugees in London thus made world history by
their hair-splitting; for that day was the birthday of Bolshevism.

What was the actual difference between the proposal of Lenin and that of
Martov? Socialists and their sympathisers in the Russia of those days
were divided almost of necessity into two groups: the active party
workers who prosecuted the political work of the party in secret; and
the far greater number of those who sympathised with them and supported
them as far as lay in their power without giving up their own private
activities. If Martov's proposal had been adopted, this vast body of
sympathisers would have automatically become members of the party in so
far as they -- students or workmen -- worked regularly for the party and
under its supervision. As members of the party these would have the
right to determine the policy of the party and the appointment of its
executive officers. Lenin's proposal was of quite a different nature. He
deprived this large body of sympathisers of all influence over the
fortunes of the party. In Lenin's eyes the party meant the small circle
of active conspirators -- and nobody else. Even in the then unfavourable
conditions obtaining in Russia Martov wanted to uphold the principle of
the right of self-determination for the masses. Lenin was of a directly
contrary opinion. Martov was anxious to give to Russian Social-Democracy
the character of a Western European labour movement. Lenin utterly
repudiated any such proposal. Certain sentences out of one of Lenin's
speeches to the congress serve to reveal clearly his attitude at this
time. His words were directed against Trotsky, who had taken the part of
the Mensheviks in the discussion over the wording of paragraph I:

>Comrade Trotsky [said Lenin] shows that he has completely misunderstood
>the basic idea of my pamphlet _What Shall Be Done?_, by saying that the
>party has no conspiratorial organisation. Others have also reproached
>me similarly... He has forgotten that the party is only an advance post
>and the leader of the great mass of the working class which in its
>entirety, or virtually in its entirety, works under the supervision and
>direction of the party organisation without, however, belonging or
>being able in its entirety to belong to the party. Let us consider the
>conclusions arrived at by Comrade Trotsky in consequence of his
>fundamental misunderstanding. He said that if after numbers of workmen
>had been arrested all were to declare that they were not members of the
>party our party would be shown up in a singular light. Is it not in
>fact the exact contrary? Do not the arguments of Comrade Trotsky show
>up in a singular light? He deplores what every more or less experienced
>revolutionary should applaud. If hundreds and thousands of workmen who
>had been arrested in the course of strikes and demonstrations were to
>prove that they were not members of party organisations, this would
>only demonstrate the efficiency of our organisation and that we have
>properly understood our task of forming a more or less small circle of
>conspiratorial leaders and of indoctrinating as many of the proletariat
>as possible with the ideals of the movement.

Here were two wholly opposed worlds. In the eyes of Trotsky and Martov
the politically active workmen and the party are identical. Lenin looked
upon the party as a secret and directive power that stood behind and
above the workers. In the course of the debate Lenin said less about the
fact that his proposal would mean the exclusion of the proletariat from
the party itself than that he refused to accord the honour of membership
of the party to weak-kneed intellectuals who refused to take any risks.
This, however, does not in any way alter the nature of Lenin's
fundamental reason for opposing Trotsky and Martov.

Lenin did not look upon workpeople as being of little account. He was
firmly convinced that the future belonged to the proletariat and he
welcomed former factory-hands among the ranks of the professional
revolutionaries. In his eyes, however, the immediate task of the Russian
proletariat was to assist in achieving a middle-class revolution.
Everything else was secondary to this political aim.

Notwithstanding many attempts to restore the unity of the Russian
Socialist Party the breach between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks
remained until 1917 and continues to the present day. It is true that
the simple socialist workman in Russia only thought of himself as a
Social-Democrat until 1917 and did not attach much importance to the
differences of opinion between the various groups within the Socialist
Party. The leaders of the movement both at home and abroad nevertheless
remained opposed to each other despite a few temporary resolves to
reunite. For his own part Lenin devoted himself from 1903 onwards to
organising a revolutionary party in accordance with his own ideas. In
1905 Bolshevism received its baptism of fire.

The Russian Revolution in 1905 did not begin as the result of an order
on the part of a party executive. It began in a sense directly contrary
to Lenin's wishes with a spontaneous upheaval of the masses. The nation
revolted after the defeat of Russia in the Russo-Japanese War had
undermined the authority of the Tsarist government. Lenin himself was
under no illusion as to the real character of the uprising. His widow
tells in her _Memories of Lenin_ how Lenin said in October 1905: 'I
would postpone the revolution until the spring. But we shall not be
asked.' The revolution began with the 'Bloody Sunday' on which the St
Petersburg workmen under the leadership of the priest Gapon demonstrated
before the Tsar's palace. The troops fired upon the demonstrators. A
thousand dead bodies covered the square. All Russia rose in fury. Every
month of that year until December was filled with strikes and
demonstrations on the part of workmen and civil servants, with peasant
revolts and with mutinies in the army and navy. The Tsar was forced to
concede Russia a parliament -- the Duma. The zenith of the revolution
was reached in the great strike in December of the Moscow workmen; this
was broken by the government. From that moment the revolution was a
failure. The bravery of the revolutionary workpeople was not of itself
sufficient to achieve the downfall of the Tsar. Peasant revolts and the
mutinies in the army and navy were too sporadic and too lacking in
cohesion to prove successful. The government was able to restore
discipline in the armed forces and to suppress the peasantry. The
efforts of the workmen were thereby deprived of all prospect of success.

Lenin recognised clearly the true character of the revolution in 1905:

>The peculiarity of the Russian Revolution consisted in the fact that
>while from a social standpoint it was middle-class and democratic, it
>was proletarian in its choice of weapons. It was middle-class and
>democratic because the democratic republic was its immediate aim, which
>it sought to achieve with its own strength. It sought to achieve the
>eight-hour day, the confiscation of the vast estates of the nobility --
>in a word, all that the middle-class revolution in France in 1792-93
>had in great part accomplished. At the same time the Russian Revolution
>was proletarian not only in the sense that the proletariat formed the
>advance-guard of the revolution and gave it its leaders, but also
>because that specially proletarian weapon -- the strike -- was the
>chief means used to stir up the masses and was the outstanding
>characteristic of the wave-like progression of the decisive events.

Of the last months of the revolution Lenin wrote:

>The proletariat formed the head of the movement. It had taken upon
>itself the task of achieving an eight-hour day by revolutionary means.
>The battle-cry of the St Petersburg proletariat was: 'Eight-hour day
>and arms!' The steadily increasing number of workmen realised that the
>fate of the revolution could and would be decided only by force of
>arms.

In those days the workmen of St Petersburg were the most intelligent and
most revolutionary element in the Russian nation. If their object were
the eight-hour day, it served to show that they were prepared to accept
the continued existence of their employers after a successful revolution
and that they looked upon the revolution as a middle-class revolution.

The two Social-Democrat groups (Bolsheviks and Mensheviks) took part in
the revolution beside the Social Revolutionaries (_Narodniki_) without
paying any regard to the differences of opinion between their leaders.
It cannot be shown that the Bolsheviks in 1905 worked harder and
exercised a greater influence over the masses than did the other
socialist and revolutionary groups. It was, indeed, the Mensheviks who
took the initiative that led to the establishment of the famous
workmen's council in St Petersburg in October 1905. In truth there was
in those days no special group of revolutionaries who could lay claim to
a monopoly of political wisdom. The working class was for the most part
revolutionary in a general sense and not inclined to divide itself into
groups. And this was still more true of the peasantry, soldiers, civil
servants and students.

On the subject of the creation of the workmen's council in St Petersburg
Trotsky writes:

>Although the Social-Democrat organisation only held together a few
>hundred workmen in secret and only exercised any considerable political
>influence over a few thousand workmen in St Petersburg, it nevertheless
>contrived to set an aim before the masses by illuminating their
>primitive experience with the searchlight of political thought. Their
>strength was not, however, sufficient to enable them to unite hundreds
>of thousands of men and women through a living bond with their
>organisation because the greater part of their work was accomplished in
>conspiratorial 'cells' that were concealed from the eyes of the masses.
>The organisation of the Social Revolutionaries was paralysed in a
>similar manner and was rendered still more impotent through infirmity
>and want of resolution. The establishment of a non-party organisation
>was rendered indispensable by the rivalry between the two
>Social-Democrat groups as well as by the conflict between these two
>groups and the Social Revolutionaries.

The council of workers' delegates in St Petersburg was so constituted
that every five hundred workers were represented by a delegate. The
great industries elected their delegates according to this principle,
whilst the lesser industries were combined for the purposes of an
election. The trade unions were also represented in the council, which
was a revolutionary fighting organisation for the purpose of
accomplishing the downfall of Tsarism. At that time nobody thought that
a system of workers' councils would come to take the place of the
Russian parliament. All Russian revolutionaries, including the
Bolsheviks, were unanimous in 1905 in thinking that after a successful
revolution an all-Russian constituent national assembly elected on the
widest possible suffrage would be called upon to determine the destinies
of the nation. The workers' council was only intended as a means towards
the realisation of the national assembly and not as a substitute for it.

In an article dated 25 November 1905 Lenin set forth his views on the
system of workers' councils. His views at that time were wholly
different from those he subsequently entertained in 1917. The committee
of the workers' council in St Petersburg had just refused a request from
the anarchists to be represented on the council -- a refusal which Lenin
upheld for the following important reason:

>There can be no question that if one desired the soviet of workers'
>delegates to be a workers' parliament or the executive of a
>self-governing proletariat, the refusal to admit the anarchists was
>wrong. Although the influence of the anarchists over our working
>classes is fortunately slight, there can be no doubt that they can
>reckon a certain number of workmen among their supporters... The fact
>that the anarchists, who repudiate political warfare, themselves wish
>to enter an institution devoted to conducting such a warfare only
>serves to illustrate once more the tactics and unstable attitude to
>life of the anarchists. Of course it is true that instability is no
>ground for exclusion from a parliament or the executive of a
>self-governing organisation.

Lenin looked upon the workers' council 'neither as a workers' parliament
nor the organ of a proletarian system of self-government -- indeed in no
sense an organ of self-government -- but as a fighting organisation for
the attainment of a definite aim'. In consequence of a temporary
agreement this militant organisation was the common property of the
Russian Social-Democrats, the Social Revolutionaries, and the non-party
revolutionary working men. The Russian Revolution was carrying on its
fight 'for urgent democratic demands recognised and approved by the
overwhelming majority of the nation'. Since the anarchists disapprove of
political reform, they have no place in the fighting union that 'carries
out our democratic revolution'; and were they admitted to it they would
only prove an obstacle and a disintegrating influence. It is clear that
the basic principle of the soviet -- the right to self-determination of
the proletariat, including the non-party revolutionary working men --
could easily be reconciled with Menshevism and scarcely reconciled at
all with Bolshevism. Lenin refused absolutely to believe that
spontaneous action on the part of the proletariat could lead to a real
and lasting revolutionary victory. A workers' council constituted on
this model must appear to him as a centre of disintegration. Although
the state of affairs in 1905 compelled the Bolsheviks to accept the
workers' council, they themselves would never have established such an
organisation.

In his extremely interesting speech in Zürich in January 1917, in
commemoration of the twelfth anniversary of the Bloody Sunday in St
Petersburg, Lenin contented himself with a few casual words on the
subject of the workers' councils. At the beginning of 1917 the councils
still played a secondary part in the revolution in Lenin's estimation,
and it was the experience gained since February 1917 in the new Russian
Revolution that caused Lenin radically to alter his view of them.

It is typical of the feeling prevalent in 1905 that the workers' council
in St Petersburg should have elected the young non-party lawyer
Nosar-Khrustalev to be its first chairman. Of this election Trotsky
says:

>Very shrewd and alert in practical matters, clever and forcible as a
>chairman, a speaker of no special talent, but an impulsive temperament,
>a man without any political past, and without the bearing of a
>politician, Khrustalev revealed himself as born for the position to
>which he was elected at the close of 1905. Although the masses of the
>working class were revolutionary and possessed of a strong class
>feeling, they were in the majority not sympathisers with any particular
>party. What has been said of the council applies equally to Khrustalev:
>all socialists with a political past were possessed of strong party
>feelings and the candidature of a member of a definite party would have
>given rise to dissensions at the establishment of the council.

Thus the St Petersburg proletariat which had entrusted itself to the
mysterious adventurer Gapon in January, now in October placed its
confidence in the radical Khrustalev who belonged to no party. It is
clear that it is impossible to speak of a Bolshevik leadership even
among the most advanced Russian workmen at this time. After Khrustalev
had been arrested in December his place as chairman of the council was
taken by a committee of three of which Trotsky was politically the
ablest. On the subject of his opinions on the Russian Revolution --
opinions that differ absolutely from those of Lenin -- more will be said
presently.

As early as the spring of 1905 discussions took place among the leaders
of Russian Social-Democracy as to the character of the revolutionary
government that would be set up after the downfall of Nicholas II.
Events belied these optimistic views. Nevertheless, the discussions are
of extreme importance in that they show with great clearness the
opinions then held by both Bolsheviks and Mensheviks.

The Mensheviks, whose principal spokesman was Martynov, thought as
follows. The Russian Revolution is a middle-class revolution. On the
overthrow of the Tsar the constituent national assembly will establish a
middle-class republican government entrusted with the task of putting
democratic reforms into operation. A socialist Russia is for the time
being impossible, owing to the small percentage of industrial workers in
the Russian population and the backward economic state of agriculture.
Nevertheless, suppose that a few socialists are to be found in the new
government -- they will be in a position of great delicacy. If they
content themselves with the measures of their middle-class colleagues,
they will take upon themselves in the eyes of the working class a
certain measure of responsibility for all the evil aspects of the
capitalist system that will not only continue to exist but will for the
first time manifest its full strength; and thus Social-Democracy will be
discredited in the opinion of the proletariat. If, however, they
continue the socialist battle within the government by demanding strong
measures against employers for the protection of the workers, then the
government will be forced along the path of socialism against its own
will; the middle class will come to fear socialism; and it will be
driven into the ranks of the reaction. The working class must of
necessity be defeated in a forlorn fight for socialism in a country that
is not sufficiently developed for it. The consequence might even be a
return to absolutism, which would appear a lesser evil than socialism in
the eyes of the middle class. These two dangers could only be avoided by
the Social-Democrats through refusal to participate in a provisional
revolutionary government. Their task would be to further the revolution
by all the means in their power; to leave to the middle-class parties
the task of constructing a government after the Tsar's downfall; and to
oppose that government in the capacity of a labour opposition entrusted
with the defence of the special interests of the working class.

It is obvious from the foregoing that the Mensheviks were an extreme
labour party in the Western European meaning of the term that repudiated
any attempt to bridge the gulf between proletariat and middle class and
that designated the entry of Social-Democrats into a middle-class
government as 'Jaurès-ism'. This expression 'Jaurès-ism' owed its origin
to the lively discussions then taking place in the International over
the thesis of the French Socialist Jaurès, that the French working class
must be prepared to cooperate in a middle-class republican government
for the defence of the republic. The intellectuals in the Second
International were sharply divided among themselves over this question.
The congress of the Second International in Amsterdam rejected Jaurès'
tactics, and it was in the spirit of this decision that the Mensheviks
formulated their policy.

Lenin was sharply opposed to this Menshevik policy. His standpoint was
one that seemed that of the 'right' in comparison to the 'left'-wing
radicalism of the Mensheviks. In reality his views only served to show
that for him there existed no differences of opinion within Western
European Social-Democracy. His dislike of all forms of non-Russian
socialism in 1905 was so profound that confronted with it all disputes
over matters of policy between radicals and revisionists disappeared. In
1905 Lenin championed a revolutionary and democratic dictatorship of the
proletariat and the peasantry. This was a genuine Marxian conception
which could not have been formulated by even the most radical
Social-Democrat in the Western Europe of those days. Lenin wrote:

>Wherein lies the cause of the Martynov chaos? In mistaken notions of
>the democratic and the socialist revolution, in forgetfulness of the
>part played by that section of the people standing between the
>proletariat and the middle class -- the partly lower-middle-class,
>partly working-class inhabitants of poor districts in the towns and the
>country, in a misunderstanding of the true meaning of our minimal
>programme. [This programme contained the demands made by socialism of
>the middle-class state.] ... It is only necessary to recollect the
>political and economic reforms contained in their programme -- demands
>for a republic, for the right to carry arms, for the disestablishment
>of the church, for full democratic liberty, for radical economic
>reforms. Is it not clear that the fulfilment of these demands is
>impossible in a middle-class order of society without a revolutionary
>and democratic dictatorship of the lower classes? Is it not clear that
>this is not a question of the difference between proletariat and middle
>class but of the entire lower class which gives the impulse to every
>democratic revolution? These lower classes are the proletariat with the
>addition of millions and millions of poor townspeople and villagers
>whose mode of life is just above that of the very lowest.

The difference between Lenin and all other Social-Democrats consists in
his including in his plans, in addition to the proletariat and the
middle class, the immensely powerful class lying between them. He
believed that this intermediate class under the leadership of the
proletariat could be won over to revolutionary democracy although not to
socialism. Lenin thus revealed his comprehension of the paradox of a
middle-class revolution against the middle class which had been in 1848
the basic principle of Marx and Engels.

Sincere socialists have always been agreed that a national revolution is
only possible if supported by the majority of the nation. Among the
great powers in 1905 it was only in England that the industrial workers
formed the majority of the nation; they were a powerful minority in the
United States and Germany; whilst in France, Italy, Russia,
Austria-Hungary and Japan they formed only a relatively small minority.
Apart from England, where special conditions obtained, the working class
could only attain to power by allying themselves to the other classes in
the nation. Such an alliance existed, or at least seemed possible, in
1848, under the common banner of democracy. The disappearance of
revolution from the Continent about the year 1850 dissolved this
alliance. The peasantry and the middle-class townsfolk joined with the
middle-class parties or even with agrarian feudalism. It thus came about
that extreme socialists in Western Europe saw the 'one reactionary body'
in everything that was not socialist and proletarian, and any pact
concluded with any part of this composite body appeared in their eyes to
be tantamount to desertion to the ranks of their class enemy, the middle
class.

In contrast to this situation in the rest of Europe there still existed
in 1905, in Russia, an enormous intermediate class capable of
revolution. This was, above all, true of the millions of peasants. In so
far as they were capable of political thought these millions looked upon
the _Narodniki_, Social Revolutionaries, etc, as their mouthpieces. Only
if this army of millions could be mobilised would the overthrow of
Tsarism be possible in Lenin's view, since the army was for the most
part recruited from the peasantry -- and unless it mutinied no
revolution could be successful. In company with such allies private
property could not indeed be abolished. But the great landlords and the
church could be dispossessed of their property, the old Tsarist
authority destroyed, and the radical-democratic republic set up in its
place. With such an aim in sight, it was not possible to shrink from an
alliance with these democratic intermediate classes, even when men like
Gapon appeared as leaders of the 'popular' movement. If this coalition
were to prove victorious, Social-Democracy need have no anxiety in
taking over the government in company with revolutionary democracy. Nor
need it become fearful if the upper middle class returned to Tsarism and
feudalism in its terror of naked democracy; for the working class in
alliance with the peasantry, manual workers and soldiers would be
capable of destroying such an enemy. It is true that this would not mean
the introduction of socialism into Russia, and the country would still
be living under the economic laws arising out of the right to private
ownership of property. Nevertheless, the establishment of pure democracy
would in itself mean a great achievement on the part of the working
class and would provide the best foundation for future development along
socialist lines. There can be little doubt that in those early days
Lenin had already formed in secret the belief that the well-disciplined
and purposeful Bolsheviks would be able, within the limits of such a
coalition, to oust from power both the vague and romantic Social
Revolutionaries, and the weak and helpless Mensheviks. The Bolsheviks
would then become sole rulers of the democratic republic.

It is clear that the difference between Bolshevism and Menshevism is not
to be defined by such phrases as 'right' or 'left', 'radical' or
'moderate'. The Mensheviks in 1905 were modern and Western European in
their ideas. The Bolsheviks were thinking in the terms of 1848. Only the
future could reveal which of the two was right. It alone could show
whether the lower middle classes in Russia were prepared to join in a
democratic revolution against the middle class as well as against the
Tsar. Was not, perhaps, the dictatorship of the working class and the
peasantry a mere figment of an overheated imagination? Would not the
peasantry repudiate their alliance with the proletariat the moment that
they became owners of their farms and therefore citizens? Would not the
workman advance still farther along the path that led to socialism the
moment he had the reins of government in his hands? Was not Lenin's
theory of democratic stages between the various classes a dream that
could not be reconciled with the intensification of class divisions
everywhere? These questions could not be answered in 1905.

With brilliant revolutionary eloquence Lenin defended his theory against
his Menshevik critics:

>Let us take another remark of _Iskra_ [the newspaper of the Mensheviks]
>on the subject of the war-cry 'Long live the provisional revolutionary
>government'. _Iskra_ says significantly: 'The combination of the words
>"long live" and "government" is blasphemy.' Is not that empty
>phraseology? They talk of overthrowing absolutism and at the same time
>are afraid to sully their tongues with a salutation to the
>revolutionary government... Just think of it! The revolt of the St
>Petersburg workmen has proved victorious. Absolutism has been
>overthrown. A provisional revolutionary government has been proclaimed.
>The workmen are joining in cries of 'Long live the provisional
>revolutionary government!' with their weapons still in their hands.
>Among them stand the staff of the _Iskra_, turning their tearful eyes
>up to heaven, beating their breasts in self-righteousness and crying
>aloud: 'We thank Thee, O Lord God, that we are not as these sinners and
>that we do not sully our lips with these words!' It is a marvel that
>these people are not afraid to sully their lips with cheers for the
>republic. The republic presupposes a government and -- of this no
>Social-Democrat has ever been for a moment in doubt -- a middle-class
>government. What then is the difference between cheering for the
>provisional revolutionary government and for the democratic republic?
>No. A thousand times No, Comrades! Do not be afraid of defaming
>yourselves by supporting a republican revolution to the uttermost of
>your power in common with revolutionary, middle-class democracy... If
>the Russian working class was able after 9 January, under conditions of
>political slavery, to mobilise more than a million of the proletariat
>for a resolute and deliberate collective action, we shall be able under
>a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship not only to mobilise millions
>and millions of the non-propertied classes in the towns and in the
>country but also to make the Russian political revolution the prelude
>to a European socialist revolution.

For the present Lenin's hope that the victory of the democratic
revolution in Russia would prove the prelude to that of socialism
throughout Western Europe was compelled to await fulfilment in the
future; for the defeat of the Russian Revolution in 1906-07 made an end
to all these plans.

Lenin bore the defeat of his hopes with unshakable calm. Once more he
was forced to continue his work beyond the Russian frontier. Throughout
the years 1912-14 he directed the activities of his party from his place
of refuge in Galicia, close to the Russian frontier. He taught his
supporters to fill in the days of the counter-revolution with such
activities as were legally permissible. The Bolsheviks published daily
newspapers that sought to evade the watchful censorship and they were
represented in the Duma by half a dozen deputies. At the same time they
organised illegal and subversive associations. They bided their time
until the outbreak of the World War in 1914 once again resuscitated the
possibility of a Russian Revolution.

## Chapter 03: The World War, August 1914 to February 1917

On the outbreak of the World War Lenin left Galicia and took up his
residence in Zürich on the neutral soil of Switzerland. He was
accompanied by his colleague Zinoviev, a brilliant orator and writer,
but not his equal in political ability. From November 1914 to the
beginning of 1917 Lenin and Zinoviev collaborated in editing and
publishing a Russian newspaper called _The Social-Democrat_.

Lenin was convinced that Russia's participation in the war was only the
prelude to the revolution in Russia itself. Since, however, the
revolution would arise out of special conditions created by the war, it
was necessary for him to study carefully the war and its effects upon
society at large, and then to draw the necessary conclusions. Lenin was
successful in bringing his study of the war to an end within a few
months of its outbreak. The result of his meditations and studies was
the brilliant essay that appeared in the spring of 1915 entitled
_Imperialism as the Latest Stage in Capitalism_. In order that this
pamphlet might evade the Russian censorship Lenin expressed himself with
great caution. The reader was left to glimpse its revolutionary purport
between the lines. If read in conjunction with his other writings at
this period, this essay on imperialism affords a clear insight into
Lenin's opinions.

Lenin distinguished between two stages in the development of capitalism.
Early capitalism was based upon free competition. This was replaced in
the later stages by trusts, cartels and syndicates. The production of
vital necessities for entire countries, and even for an entire
hemisphere, was concentrated in a single organisation. Free competition
had been superseded by monopolies. In early capitalism the industrialist
had been the propulsive element; now he was replaced by the great banks
and financial concerns. The industrial trusts allied themselves with the
great banks. Production became secondary to the financing of production.
Thus the typical capitalist of the later stages in capitalist
development was no longer the industrial pioneer but the wealthy
speculator. Capitalism had brought into existence a parasitic class of
_rentiers_ living upon tribute exacted from humanity at large. The
progressive element in capitalism came to an end with the emergence of
this parasitic monopolism. Capitalism no longer had any interest in
increasing production and was content to assure itself of its profits by
forcible methods. A modern great power is nothing but a collection of
great financial institutions within national frontiers. Modern
international politics are no more than the struggle between these
centres of financial power for domination over all countries and all
races.

The appearance of monopolistic capitalism destroyed the liberal and
tolerant character of the capitalistic middle class. Moreover, the state
as an expression of monopolistic capitalism can only maintain itself
internally and externally by an unscrupulous use of force. The newest
form of capitalism involved of necessity the maintenance of great armies
and navies. It compromised with the monarchical system of government; it
enlisted into its service the bureaucratic civil service; and it turned
to its own account the last vestiges of feudalism.

Thus it came about that an agriculturally backward state like Tsarist
Russia fitted in admirably with the modern imperialist system. For
during the years 1906-14 that saw the counter-revolution in Russia
industrial and financial capitalism made mighty strides forward in that
country and were helped in their advance not a little by the millions
loaned by France to Russia. The corrupt and avaricious ruling class was
now composed both of the old feudal elements and the new financiers and
industrialists. The Duma was the scene of a compromise between these two
forces. In Russian eyes the World War was a predatory expedition on the
part of this imperialist ruling class from which the nobles hoped to
gain new estates and the financiers still greater profits.

The outbreak of war seemed superficially to strengthen immeasurably the
power of capitalism. In Lenin's opinion, however, it also created
entirely new possibilities for revolution. At first the war united all
forces in the nation in the hands of the ruling caste. Wartime economics
meant the triumph of the monopoly system. The entire economic life of
the country was absorbed into one gigantic organisation which controlled
everything, according to definite regulations, from St Petersburg down
to the tiniest village. The state had become the finished and most
complete expression of centralised authority and could not tolerate any
form of 'freedom' within its boundaries.

In the Anglo-Saxon countries the middle-class order of society had up to
this allowed the individual a certain liberty of movement and thought.
The war made an end to this in England and later in the United States,
both of which became centralised governmental machines under the
political dictatorship of capitalism and the all-powerful unitary system
of wartime economy. The imperialist ring round the world had been
completed and no longer showed a single gap. Each month of war, however,
saw an intensification of the burden placed by monopolistic capitalism
upon the masses. In times of peace capitalism had been able to
distribute largesse to the populace from its ample profits. Indeed, in
countries like England and Germany, the profits earned by the great
capitalist organisations were so great that it was possible to admit the
intellectual and official classes, the agriculturists, and even some of
the industrial proletariat, to a share in them. This had the result, in
Lenin's opinion, of raising the standard of living of these classes and
of giving them an interest in the continuance and prosperity of
imperialism.

The war dissolved these illusions. The vast majority of the townsfolk
and the peasantry were driven into the trenches and forced to sacrifice
their lives on a scale unprecedented in history. At the same time food
control and famine made their appearance among the civilian populations.
The oppression of the masses on the part of capitalism knew no limits
and became unbearable. The only road to salvation left to the
proletariat was revolution.

These theories on being applied to Russia strengthened Lenin in the
beliefs he had entertained in 1905. The alliance between the working
class and the lower middle class for the purpose of achieving a
democratic revolution had become closer than ever before. The whole
burden of the war was borne by the villages and the peasant-soldiery. If
the revolutionary proletariat pointed the way to salvation, it would be
followed by the entire nation. The gulf separating the workman at a
machine and the workman behind a plough, the poverty-stricken man
deprived of all means of production and the poverty-stricken man in
possession of only the barest possible means of production -- this gulf
had been bridged by their common misery. And they possessed in common
one single enemy -- the Tsar and the imperialist ruling class.

The Russian socialist workers' party could only lead a successful
national revolution on condition that it did not allow itself to become
enmeshed in the imperialist machinery of war. This machinery embraced
the army, the administration and the entire economic life of Russia; and
it had its own peculiar ideology -- that of the defence of the
fatherland and of a political truce between the parties. The ruling and
imperialist class taught the masses of the people that they must obey
and suffer for the sake of the fatherland. If they were to refuse to
obey, then the defence of the country would no longer be possible and
the country itself would become a prey to the enemy. Every individual
Russian would in that event find himself in such a condition of misery
that it would make the sufferings of war appear as nothing by
comparison.

Lenin combated this imperialist ideology with might and main. He staked
his all upon the argument that in an imperialist war Social-Democracy
must overthrow the government in every country and transform the war
against the external foe into a war against the enemy within the gates.
How is this extremist notion to be reconciled with the acceptance of
nationalism by Marx in 1848 -- that Marx to whom Lenin looked as to his
great exemplar? In 1848 Marx and Engels did not advocate the defeat of
Germany; they demanded, on the contrary, the victory of Germany in a
revolutionary war against Russia. What, then, was Lenin's attitude to
the problem of nationality during the years 1914 to 1917? It is obvious
that the greatest figure and leader of the Russian democratic revolution
must accept the Russian nation. Here Lenin could not divest himself of
the pure and original Marxist doctrine. On 12 December 1914, Lenin wrote
a brilliant article, 'The National Pride of the Greater Russians', in
which he said _inter alia_:

>Is the emotion of national pride foreign to the Greater Russian
>class-conscious proletariat? Certainly not. We love our language and
>our native land. It is we who strive most strenuously to uplift her
>[Greater Russia's] workers, that is, nine-tenths of her population, to
>living the class-conscious existence of class-conscious socialists. It
>is we who are most distressed by beholding our native country subjected
>to the violence and oppression of Tsarist hangmen, landowners and
>capitalists. We are proud that this violation should have met with
>resistance in our midst, in the heart of Greater Russia... that the
>large Russian working class has organised a powerful revolutionary
>party out of the masses, and that the peasant in Greater Russia has at
>the same time begun to become democratic and to free himself from the
>priests and the landowners.
>
>We are filled with national pride and it is for that reason especially
>that we regard with a peculiar hatred our past of serfdom... our
>present serfdom... A nation cannot itself be free whilst it oppresses
>other peoples -- such was the teaching of the great representatives of
>logical democracy in the nineteenth century, Marx and Engels, who have
>become the teachers of the revolutionary proletariat. And we Greater
>Russian workmen, because we are filled with national pride, want to see
>a free and independent, a democratic and republican and proud Greater
>Russia whose relations with its neighbours shall be inspired by the
>humanitarian principle of equality and not by the servile principle of
>prior or exclusive rights degrading to every great nation.

Here Lenin is speaking the language of national revolution, the language
of the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_, and that of the revolution of 1905. It
is clear that the theories Lenin built up from his observation of the
World War are not to be explained by his rejection of the principle of
nationality any more than it is possible to give a moral content to
Bolshevik wartime policy. It was not moral indignation with imperialism
and its allies that caused Lenin to demand the overthrow of his own
government. Lenin invariably regarded political problems from a
realistic standpoint and in his eyes the end justified the means. He
would have allied himself with the Devil in order to serve the cause of
the revolution. And it is nothing less than absurd to declare that Lenin
advocated the dissolution of the International out of moral indignation
with the patriotic socialists. For the same reason Lenin steadily
refused to be associated with so-called pacifism in so far as that
implied the rejection of the use of force in disputes. Like Marx and
Engels, Lenin was an advocate of the use of force and weapons to the end
of his life. Hence it is impossible to explain Lenin's attitude during
the World War on any other than the realist ground of the interests of
revolution and more especially of the Russian Revolution. Lenin did not
work for the downfall of his own government -- the Tsarist government --
because it was a bad government or because the war it was waging was an
indefensible war. He sought to effect its overthrow because without that
there was no possibility of success for revolution.

A party that adopts the motto 'Down with the Government' in a country
that is waging war without at the same time possessing the means and the
energy to accomplish a revolution is acting foolishly. It is merely
helping the enemy to conquer its own country. If in a world war powerful
political parties in every belligerent country were to proclaim the same
end without seeking to promote a revolution their action would amount to
criminal folly. If all states were to 'lose' in the war, what would be
the ultimate outcome? Lenin's action would have been senseless if it had
not been the first step to revolution. A party cannot carry out a
revolution in time of war without overthrowing its own government and
the administrative and military machine of that government. To do that
is tantamount to promoting the defeat of its own country, or at least
its temporary defeat, by disorganisation of the conduct of the war. Such
a result is the inevitable consequence of such an action. At the time of
the French Revolution the Mountain risked the defeat of France in
overthrowing the Girondist government. It was only thanks to the feeble
resistance offered to the Mountain by the Girondins that the defence of
the country did not collapse. If in 1848-49 the German democrats had
successfully carried out the revolution preached by Marx and Engels the
resultant problem would have been the same. The military and civil
administration of Prussia and Austria would first have been destroyed.
Since Prussia was then at war with Denmark and also engaged in putting
down a Polish rebellion, and since Austria was fighting against Italy
and Hungary, this would have involved the defeat of both those
countries. After their seizure of power the revolutionaries cannot at
first alter the situation.

Suppose that a revolutionary party accuses the government of conducting
war badly and half-heartedly and declares that were it to come to power
matters would take on a very different aspect. It is always possible for
the government to retort that the activities of the party itself have
paralysed the military conduct of the war, and that notwithstanding
their loud protestations of patriotism, they themselves have been guilty
of treason and of bringing the possibility of defeat upon their own
country. Similar reproaches can be brought by a government in time of
war against such groups in the opposition as criticise the actions of
the government and continue their political activity even without
entertaining any revolutionary plans. These groups can be accused of
disseminating mistrust, promoting civil dissension, and destroying the
will of the people to prosecute the war. The whole object of a political
truce in time of war is to heighten the national determination to pursue
the struggle by artificially suppressing all political differences of
opinion within the nation. Every opposition, or indeed revolutionary
party, in a belligerent state must be prepared to take upon itself the
responsibility for a disturbance of the political truce that may result
in paralysing the military conduct of the war and even lead to national
defeat. Every determined oppositional group in a belligerent state acts
at least temporarily as if no war were in progress. For the overthrow of
the government can only be effected by breaking the political truce and
ignoring the patriotic obligations imposed upon all parties by the
existence of a state of war. When Lenin as a Russian came forward in
1914 with his battle-cry 'Down with the Tsar', that did not mean that he
desired the victory of William II in any form whatsoever. It did mean
that in Lenin's opinion the real interests of the Russian nation
demanded that the revolt against the Tsar should be carried on at this
instant by every possible means.

If the defeat of the Russian armies should result from this
revolutionary action, such a defeat must be regarded as the lesser of
two evils; and in any case the victorious Russian revolution would
subsequently settle accounts with the German emperor under very
different circumstances.

There is indeed another way in which a revolutionary party can seize the
reins of government in time of war. It can support the conduct of the
war and participate in it to such an extent that it eventually excludes
all other elements in the nation from the control of the nation's
destiny. This would seem to be the way in which Engels visualised the
German Social-Democrats seizing power in the course of a world war. Many
liberals and democrats in Russia entertained similar notions long before
the outbreak of the World War and therefore sought to incite the Tsarist
government to the pursuit of an aggressive foreign policy and even to
war. In such an event they believed that the Tsar at any rate would be
overthrown. If Russia were to suffer a defeat, the government would
collapse. It was only necessary to recall what had happened after the
Russo-Japanese War. Even if the war were to end in a Russian victory, it
would nevertheless involve the entire nation in such an expenditure of
blood and energy, and impose such a strain upon all the national forces,
that the Russian people would no longer tolerate the old type of Tsarist
government. The transformation of Russia into a middle-class and liberal
state would be the inevitable consequence of such a tremendous conflict.
For this reason far-sighted Russian conservatives invariably advocated a
pacific policy in the interests of Tsarism and feudalism and declared
that the Pan-Slav movement was nothing else than a revolutionary
movement in disguise. The fact that during the World War the entire
liberal middle class, virtually the whole of the completely democratic
'popular' movement, and also some Social-Democrats, ardently supported
the prosecution of the war and the defence of the country did not mean
that they did not believe that in any eventuality Tsarism was doomed.
Nevertheless, Lenin resolutely refused in 1914 and the succeeding years
to have anything to do with this plan of achieving a revolution by
prosecuting the war to a successful end. According to Lenin it was
imperative to distinguish sharply between nationalism and imperialism
and between nationalist wars and imperialist wars.

It is clear that the Russian nation, the French nation, the British
nation, etc, existed as such in 1914. Nevertheless, they were to some
extent the prisoners of the imperialist system. The war which was
conducted by the imperialist machine was not a war of nations; it was a
war of conquest on the part of the ruling classes. Once more the phrase
'A workman has no country' acquired fresh meaning since the imperialists
'had' a country. A national war on the part of Germany or Russia would
only be possible after the mass of the population had regained their
country through revolution. Moreover, the imperialist war-machine could
only be broken by those who refused to become involved in its cogs.
Anyone who allowed himself to be captivated by the imperialist ideology
became the prisoner of the imperialist system. In Lenin's opinion it was
impossible for a labour leader to aid in defending his country in an
imperialist war and at the same time organise a revolution. For with
every revolutionary action he injured that effective defence of his
country which he held to be of primary importance. Lenin indeed thought
that the Russian proletariat should refuse its support to all who
assisted in the defence of the country or the maintenance of the
political truce throughout the World War. A supporter of the war was in
Lenin's eyes identical with a counter-revolutionary. Hence he preached a
ruthless crusade against the _Narodniki_ and those Social-Democrats who
supported the political truce. Nor was he any less rigorously opposed to
the Mensheviks and the group led by Trotsky, who refused to participate
in a fight to the finish with the democrats and the socialist supporters
of the political truce, although they themselves were opposed to this
truce.

A new grouping of the left parties in Russia resulted from the outbreak
of the World War. In 1905 the Mensheviks refused to participate in a
democratic revolutionary government, in contrast to the Bolsheviks, who
were prepared to cooperate. Now, in 1914-15, the position was reversed
-- the Bolsheviks stood alone and the Mensheviks were prepared to
cooperate with the socialist supporters of the political truce, and,
above all, with the democrats. In 1905 Lenin's conception of the path to
be followed by the revolution was wholly different from that which he
entertained in 1914-16. In 1905 he believed that the overthrow of the
Tsar could be effected by means of a great coalition of the democratic
and _Narodniki_ parties. In the World War he believed that the
supporters of the political truce had become prisoners of imperialism
and therefore were no longer capable of revolution. It remained for the
Bolsheviks to set aside the democratic leaders and to obtain control
over the masses themselves.

The Mensheviks indeed never assigned to themselves, either in 1905 or
subsequently, the leadership of the Russian revolution. In 1905 they
were prepared to fight in the revolutionary ranks and to leave to the
middle class the task of governing the middle-class and democratic state
that was to be established on the ruins of Tsarism. During the World War
the old and recognised Menshevik leaders living in exile carried on
their struggle against Tsarism. The Mensheviks who continued to work
within Russia itself were divided in their opinions. Although the
Menshevik leaders were determined to support with all their might any
new revolution that might occur as a result of the war, they refused on
account of the different opinions held as to the nature of the war
itself to split the Russian working class into two inimical camps. Nor
did the difference between the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks undergo any
real change; it merely took on new guises at different times for
tactical reasons. The Mensheviks felt themselves to be representative of
the Russian working class with their small range of influence in
relation to the political life of the vast Tsarist empire. The
Bolsheviks felt themselves to be the leaders of a national Russian
revolution. When, in February 1917, the revolution overthrew the Tsar,
the great majority of the Russian nation, including the Russian working
class, followed the lead of the Mensheviks and _Narodniki_; and despite
the possibility that was now theirs of indulging freely in propaganda,
the Bolsheviks remained in the minority. It was the fateful course taken
by events in 1917 that first placed Lenin at the head of a majority of
the Russian nation.

On 11 October 1915, Zinoviev published an important article entitled
'The War and the Revolutionary Crisis in Russia'. Throughout the entire
period of their sojourn in Switzerland from 1914 to 1917 Zinoviev was
Lenin's mouthpiece and never once wrote anything that did not tally
completely with Lenin's opinions. In this article Zinoviev drew up a
balance-sheet for the fifteen months of war. He began by showing how the
victory of Russian arms in Galicia in 1914 increased the authority of
the Tsar and promoted the idea of a political truce. In 1915 came a
change. That year saw an overwhelming defeat of the Russians by the
German armies, the loss of Galicia, and the conquest of Poland and
Vilna. The immediate result was an outbreak of violent recriminations
between the Russian government and the liberals. Strikes took place and
the peasantry rose in rebellion. Some democratic leaders like Kerensky
and Plekhanov raised the battle-cry 'Revolution for Victory'. In those
days Kerensky was the most respected and powerful man in the _Narodniki_
movement, and Plekhanov was a celebrated Social-Democrat, a founder of
Russian Social-Democracy, who before 1914 had on many occasions
collaborated with Lenin. On the outbreak of the war Plekhanov declared
himself in favour of defending his country from its enemies.
Thenceforward Lenin regarded him with irreconcilable enmity. Kerensky
and Plekhanov were of the opinion in 1915 that Tsarism could be
destroyed by being made to appear as the chief obstacle to victory and
that Russia could only be saved from defeat by revolutionary democracy.
On the subject of their views Zinoviev wrote: 'Kerensky and Plekhanov
raise the cry of "Revolt for Victory," clothe themselves in the toga of
revolutionary Jacobinism, and light-heartedly summon from the shades the
ghosts of the great leaders of the Wars of Revolution. But in truth they
are bondmen of the Tsar.'

Such tactics during an imperialistic war were in Lenin's opinion sheer
folly and those who pursued them became the slaves of the imperialistic
system. The Mensheviks had put forward their plan of a constituent
national assembly which received Zinoviev's approval with the
reservation that it did not go far enough. Now was the time in which to
set the goal of a republic and an expropriation of the great estates
before the masses of the people. Zinoviev concluded his article by
saying:

>Today as yesterday revolutionary socialist democracy continues the
>struggle for a democratic revolution in Russia. The imperialistic World
>War has indissolubly united the cause of revolution in Russia with that
>of the growing proletarian socialist revolutionary movement in the
>West... The interests of the millions of lower middle classes and
>semi-proletarian classes in Russia are irreconcilable with monarchy and
>with a landed aristocracy that is a relic of the age of serfdom... It
>is not the task of the proletariat to neglect the democratic interests
>of the masses but to free the masses from the influence of the middle
>class and to confute former liberal and present-day patriotic illusions
>by the teachings of experience. Long live the second democratic
>revolution in Russia that opens the age of the proletarian world
>revolution! Long live the victory over the Tsar that leads to the
>continuance of the proletarian and socialist revolution in the West and
>not to victory over Germany! These are the mottoes inscribed on the
>banners of Russian Revolutionary Socialist Democracy.

On 13 October 1915, Lenin took up his pen and beneath the modest title
'Some Ideas' laid down eleven principles that should serve as
guiding-lines in the work of Russian revolutionaries. This essay ranks
among the greatest of Lenin's writings.

As his first principle he declared that a 'constituent assembly' alone
did not suffice as a solution of the revolutionary problem. It depended
upon who was to elect this constituent assembly. If, for example, the
possibility was left open to the Tsar himself of calling a national
assembly into life, then that would place an obstacle in the path of the
revolution. Instead of adopting a constituent assembly as the
revolutionary motto Lenin advised the adoption of the three demands: a
democratic republic, confiscation of great estates, and an eight-hour
working day.

His second principle was that the workers should not participate in the
committees that had been set up with a view to speeding up production in
munition factories and other industries supplying war materials.

In his third principle Lenin advocated the extension of Social-Democrat
propaganda to the agricultural proletariat, the poor peasantry and the
army. Moreover, strikes must be encouraged and a demand made for the
immediate conclusion of peace. Among other demands put forward by the
proletariat must be one for the liberation of the Bolshevik members of
the Duma whom the government had banished to Siberia shortly after the
outbreak of the war.

His fourth principle ran:

>Councils of workers' delegates and similar bodies must be looked upon
>as instruments of revolt and of revolutionary power. These bodies can
>only be of use in conjunction with a development of political strikes
>on a large scale and with revolts, and only in proportion to the
>preparation, development and progress of each individual strike or
>revolt.

It is clear that Lenin did not at that time entertain any notions that
the councils would become the organic bodies in a future democratic or
even socialist state.

The fifth and sixth principles were concerned with the social character
of the coming revolution. Lenin remained faithful to the convictions he
had held in 1905, that the coming revolution in Russia must be of a
middle-class character and not destructive of the right to private
ownership.

In his seventh and eighth principles Lenin sought to make clear to his
party in Russia the reasons that had led him to alter his theory of a
possible coalition that he had held in 1905:

>It is to be regarded as permissible for Social-Democracy to enter a
>provisional revolutionary government in company with the democratic
>lower middle classes; but not with the chauvinists of the revolutionary
>movement... Revolutionary chauvinism is based upon the situation of the
>lower middle class as a class. This class always fluctuates between the
>middle class and the proletariat. At the present moment it is
>hesitating between chauvinism and proletarian internationalism -- and
>it prevents the former from being truly revolutionary in the sense of a
>democratic republic.

Thus the Bolsheviks might enter into a coalition with the democratic
parties only upon the condition that these parties were opposed to
chauvinism, that is, the imperialist system. In the then circumstances
this amounted to a refusal to join a coalition, since the _Narodniki_,
as well as the Social-Democrats under Plekhanov, favoured the
prosecution of the war and the Mensheviks would not participate in any
government whose policy was directed against the other democratic
parties. By ignoring the actual facts Lenin thus daringly designated his
own supporters as the only true proletarians in Russia and branded the
Mensheviks, Plekhanov's party, etc, as lower-middle-class. In reality,
both then and until 1917, the majority of the Russian proletariat were
members of the so-called lower-middle-class parties, while the
intellectual strength of Bolshevism itself was not among the workmen but
in a small circle of revolutionary intellectuals.

The events of 1917 lend a great importance to Lenin's ninth principle:

>If the revolutionary chauvinists were to gain the upper hand in Russia,
>we should be opposed to a defence of their country in this war. Our
>battle-cry is 'Down with the chauvinists, even if they are also
>revolutionaries and republicans; and support for the union of the
>proletarians of the nations in the name of the socialist revolution!'

Lenin here takes into consideration the possibility that a revolution in
Russia might not only destroy the Tsardom but also the liberal middle
class. The government would then fall into the hands of the _Narodniki_,
Kerensky's party, the Social Revolutionaries, etc. In 1905, and indeed
in any similar situation up to 1913, Lenin would have welcomed such a
government and have offered to cooperate with it. Now he was prepared to
fight it as he fought the Tsarist government. Before the war a coalition
government of _Narodniki_ and socialists would have been the expression
of a true revolution and have signified the assumption of power by the
broad masses of the people. A democratic government, however, at the
time of the World War, that simply continued to wage war, seemed in
Lenin's eyes to be a pure farce.

For such a government would be forced in the defence of the country to
collaborate with the former Tsarist officers and the industrialists. It
would be compelled to maintain law and order by means of the former
Tsarist police force and it could not attempt to carry out any serious
democratic reforms. For this reason Lenin saw in such a government only
a screen behind which the feudal and capitalistic imperialist system
would continue to govern. Hence the necessity for combating it like
every other imperialist Russian government.

If the situation as between the various parties in Russia were actually
as depicted by Lenin, then the Bolsheviks would obviously have to reckon
seriously with the possibility that they would have to effect a
democratic revolution alone and in opposition to every other party.
Hence Lenin in his tenth principle says: 'To the question whether it is
possible for the proletariat to play a leading part in a middle-class
revolution in Russia the answer must be as follows. Yes, it is possible.
But only if the lower middle class inclines towards the left at the
decisive moment.' As a political force the proletariat is here
identified by Lenin with the Bolsheviks. A movement towards the left on
the part of the lower middle class would mean that the peasantry would
abandon the _Narodniki_ and join themselves to the Bolsheviks in some
way or other.

The last and eleventh principle already contains the entire plan for a
so-called world revolution:

>To the question what would be the attitude of the proletarian party in
>the event of its attaining to power through a revolution during the
>present war, the answer must be: we would propose peace to all
>belligerents on condition that all colonies and all oppressed, enslaved
>and dependent nations received their freedom. Under their present
>governments neither Germany nor England nor France would accept this
>condition. As a consequence of their refusal we would be forced to
>prepare and wage a revolutionary war. In other words -- we would not
>only carry out with the most ruthless methods the least part of our
>programme [the demands put forward by Russian Social-Democracy for the
>creation of a democratic republic], but we would stir up all the
>peoples oppressed by Greater Russia as well as all colonies and
>dependencies in Asia, India, China, Persia, etc, and, above all, incite
>the socialist proletariat of Europe, in spite of the chauvinists among
>it, to rebellion against its governments.

It is first of all necessary to explain here in what fashion the
revolutionary war which Lenin proposed to wage as a consequence of the
rejection of his peace proposal by Germany and the other powers, differs
from that which Kerensky and Plekhanov were then engaged in preaching.
For Lenin himself thought of Russia as a radical middle-class democratic
state and not as a socialist state. And in this he was in agreement with
Kerensky and Plekhanov. The fact that events followed another course
after the assumption of power by the Bolsheviks in 1918 is not of
material importance here. Even Lenin in 1915 only contemplated achieving
a middle-class revolution in Russia. The difference between Lenin's
revolutionary war and that of Kerensky is to be explained as follows. On
taking over the reins of government Lenin proposed to destroy completely
the whole imperial system of government with its officers, civil
servants, police and war organisations, even at the risk of temporarily
paralysing the further conduct of the war. On the other hand, Kerensky
and Plekhanov wished to continue the fight with the old governmental
machine in order to avoid any breakdown in the military apparatus. It
would in that event be impossible for them to revolutionise Russia.
After their own victory Russian democracy would have to fight two
imperialistic groups of powers -- Germany and the Entente. In order to
do this it would be necessary for them to secure the help of two allies
-- the oppressed nations of the East and the socialist workmen of the
West. Far from repudiating the idea of nationality Lenin desired to make
of it the chief weapon in his warfare. And in this he reveals himself a
true middle-class revolutionary of the 1848 type.

In the first place Lenin proposed to raise in rebellion the oppressed
peoples of Tsarist Russia -- Ukrainians, Poles, Finns, Caucasians,
Turkistanis -- and to make of the middle classes in all these nations
(peasants, manual labourers, _intelligentsia_, etc) allies of the great
Russian democracy. A renunciation of the forcible methods of government
employed by the Tsars would not injure Greater Russia in a national
sense, since she would occupy a far more secure position than formerly
at the head of a federation of liberated peoples.
Revolutionary-democratic movements had followed in Asia upon the Russian
Revolution of 1905 that had for their common characteristic a
nationalist opposition to European rule. China became a republic.
Parliaments were set up in Persia and Turkey. In India opposition to
English rule increased. After the fall of the Tsar, and in the crisis
produced by the World War, these movements would be reduplicated. In all
Asiatic lands, however, only nationalist and democratic, and nowhere
proletarian and socialist, revolutions were possible. The revolt of the
millions of Asia would, nevertheless, strike at the heart of European
imperialism. For such a revolt would mean the loss to the parasitic
monopolistic capitalists, especially in England, of the tribute which
they had hitherto drawn from the East. Here Lenin's theory of
imperialism as the latest manifestation of the capitalistic age once
more reveals itself. The tribute-paying slaves of imperialism are not
only the European factory-hands but 90 per cent of mankind. Hence
imperialism could only be overthrown by a world revolution that would
only be proletarian in a small degree.

According to Lenin it was the task of Russian democracy to organise a
world revolution against imperialism. The nationalist peasantry of
Russia were to attract to their side the Asiatic peoples, and the
Russian proletariat was to make allies of the Western European working
class. The idea of a European revolution current in 1848 had developed
by 1915 into that of a world revolution. The basic ideal remained
unchanged -- the liberation of mankind. The proletarian class interests
of the Western European working class were satisfied with common action
with the working class in Russia, India and China. It is indeed open to
question whether the European working class is called upon to sacrifice
itself for the establishment of middle-class nationalist states in Asia
or for the prosperity of the Russian peasantry. Such problems, however,
were in 1915 only matters of academic interest for Lenin and the
Bolsheviks. The immediate task was the overthrow of Tsarism -- all else
must be left to the future. Throughout the years 1914-17, in which he
was in Switzerland, Lenin was denied all opportunity for conducting a
propagandist campaign in Asia. But he was in the centre of Western
Europe and therefore devoted his energies, in addition to planning the
Russian revolution, to indoctrinating Western European socialism with
his ideas. It will be necessary in the next chapter to examine the
extent of the success which attended Lenin's endeavours in this sphere
of action.

Although the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks were strongly opposed to each
other from 1903 to 1917, they shared the conviction that the coming
revolution in Russia could only be a middle-class revolution; and this
opinion was also held by the Russian Social-Democrats who supported the
prosecution of the war. There was, however, another and very remarkable
socialist theory as to the form to be assumed by the approaching
revolution in Russia; its spokesman was Trotsky.

In the course of the nineteenth century Marxism had undergone two
changes. The first was the organisation of the workers for the purpose
of completing the middle-class democratic revolution. At this stage in
the development of Marxism the working class acted under the direction
of a small group of professional revolutionaries sprung from the radical
middle-class _intelligentsia_. This was the Marx-Engels and Bolshevik
type of revolution. In the next stage the working class had so far
developed as to have a voice in their own organisations and to seek to
improve their condition as a class within the middle-class and
capitalistic organisation of society. The revolutionary ideal faded into
the background and, in countries in which a middle-class revolution was
imminent, the working class followed in the footsteps of the middle
class. This type of revolutionary movement is represented by the Western
European groups in the Second International and by the Mensheviks in
Russia. A logical forecast of the further development of the proletarian
movement leads to a third stage in which the working class consciously
determines its own fate. It is now no longer concerned with the
improvement of its condition within middle-class society and seeks to
attain to power through revolution. This revolution, however, is no
longer the radical democratic revolution of the first stage; it is now a
socialist revolution with the object of substituting communal for
private ownership of property. In such a revolution the workers would
not merely execute the commands of their party leaders but would act on
their own independent initiative.

This third stage is the realisation of the Marxist ideal. It is the
fulfilment of Marx's dream of a society freed from class distinctions.
In order to render the attainment of this third stage possible an
immense development of capitalism must first take place, and those
classes that stand between the middle class and the proletariat must
also be destroyed. The disappearance of these plebeian classes renders
unnecessary the pursuit on the part of the proletariat of a policy of
cooperation on a nationalist and democratic basis, and leaves the tiny
minority of capitalist exploiters face to face with the overwhelming
majority of the exploited. Moreover, the attainment of this third stage
necessitates the development of a very highly-trained proletariat
capable through intelligence and self-discipline of building up a new
world for themselves.

The European working class at the time of the World War was not yet
capable of achieving this third stage. For this reason the idealists and
political leaders who were the embodiment of this third stage were only
able to gather round them a very small band of supporters. These leaders
and their groups were in Russia, Trotsky; among the Polish and German
Social-Democrats, Rosa Luxemburg and her followers; and, finally,
Gorter's band of Marxists in Holland. All the great working-class
parties in Central and Western Europe were at this time led by men
embodying the second stage in development, whilst it was men of the
first stage who achieved the middle-class revolution in Russia. Since
the historic task of the proletariat is to progress from the second to
the third stage in development (it is impossible today to say when and
in what manner this advance will be made), the idealists who embody this
third stage play a very important part in the evolutionary process. For
despite the many ideological and political mistakes they may make
individually these men are the living presentation of its future to the
present-day proletariat. It is indeed true that in the future the task
of the historian in judging Trotsky will be rendered more difficult by
the fact that in 1917 he became formally a member of the Bolshevik
Party. Some years later occurred the inevitable break between Trotsky
and the party leaders. Since then Trotsky has maintained that he, and
not the rulers of Russia, represents true Bolshevism. This thesis
advanced by Trotsky for reasons of political tactics cannot seriously
affect the judgement of history.

As early as the Russian Revolution in 1905 and as late as 1917 Trotsky
maintained that no truly revolutionary element existed in Russia outside
the proletariat. He believed that the liberal middle class would at once
combine with the forces of Tsarism were a radical revolution likely to
prove victorious. The _Narodniki_ democracy was equally an illusion
since its sole support was in the backward and divided peasantry which
was incapable of conducting a revolution by itself. Hence there were in
Trotsky's opinion only two real political forces in Russia: the Tsar
with his feudal and capitalistic supporters and the socialist working
class. And if the latter were successful in overthrowing the former it
should not pursue the phantom of a democratic dictatorship and a
middle-class revolution but should immediately set up a truly socialist
state in Russia. In an article which he wrote in 1909 Trotsky made clear
his attitude towards this problem:

>The Mensheviks have never clearly defined their attitude towards the
>Russian revolution as a whole. In common with the Bolsheviks they speak
>of carrying out the revolution to its conclusion, which both interpret
>to mean in a purely formal sense the achievement of our minimal
>programme, after which an epoch should follow of capitalist
>exploitation under a democratic organisation of society. The carrying
>out of the revolution to its conclusion presupposes the defeat of
>Tsarism and the seizure of power in the state by a revolutionary class.
>Which? The Menshevik answer is 'the middle-class democracy'. The
>Bolshevik answer is 'the proletariat and the peasantry'. What is this
>'middle-class democracy' of which the Mensheviks speak? This is no
>definite, tangible and actually existent force. It is a category
>unknown to history and evolved by journalists by means of deduction and
>analogy!'

The Menshevik theory would mean in practice that the workers would
become the hangers-on of middle-class liberalism in a revolution and
would therefore be incapable of achieving anything. The theory put
forward by Lenin was, in Trotsky's opinion, no less mistaken. According
to Lenin, the working class was to seize power without making any use of
it and to content itself with the achievement of middle-class reforms.
Such an act of renunciation on the part of a victorious proletariat
Trotsky regarded as an absurdity, and he believed Lenin's ideal of a
democratic dictatorship would reveal itself within a few days after the
victory of the revolution as impracticable. Strikes would be the
immediate consequence of a successful revolution on the part of the
Social-Democrats. Employers would close their factories and lock out the
work-people. Factory-owners would say to themselves: 'Our property is
not in danger since it is clear that the proletariat is for the moment
bent on setting up a democratic dictatorship and not a socialist state.'
Would a victorious proletariat be content to be shut out from
employment? Would it not forcibly open the factories and work them
itself to the exclusion of capitalist owners? If, for example, a
coalition government in the sense envisaged by Lenin were established in
which democratic representatives of the peasantry sat side by side with
Social-Democrats, it is clear that the moment the nationalisation of
industry was proposed a life and death struggle would begin between the
workers and the peasants. Either the peasants, and with them the
counter-revolution, would triumph, or the work-people and socialism. In
no circumstances would Lenin's 'democratic dictatorship of workers and
peasants' prove workable.

Trotsky indeed admitted that in a backward agricultural country like
Russia the victorious socialist workers could not alone and permanently
maintain themselves in power as against the enormous majority of
peasants and lower middle class. From this dilemma only one way of
escape remained -- the extension of the socialist revolution to Western
Europe. If the socialist workers' revolution is confined to a single
country, it is doomed; it can only maintain itself by advancing from
country to country. That is Trotsky's famous theory of the permanent
revolution. In 1909 Trotsky wrote:

>As the result of a victorious revolution power must come to those
>parties whose support is in the armed populations of the towns -- the
>proletarian militia. On attaining to power Social-Democracy finds
>itself confronted by a profound paradox that is not to be overcome by a
>simple statement that it is a purely democratic dictatorship. A policy
>of renunciation on the part of the workers' government for the purpose
>of establishing a republic would be tantamount to a betrayal of the
>unemployed, of the strikers, and, finally, of the proletariat as a
>whole. The victorious revolutionaries will find themselves confronted
>by definite socialist tasks whose execution will of necessity bring
>them at a certain point into conflict with the economic backwardness of
>the country. A national revolution provides no way of escape from this
>conflict of interests. From the day of its accession to power the
>workers' government is faced with the task of uniting all its forces
>with those of the socialist proletariat in Western Europe. It is only
>in this way that its temporary revolutionary rule will prove to be the
>prelude to a socialist dictatorship. The permanent revolution is
>necessary in order that the Russian proletariat may defend itself as a
>class.

About the time that Lenin drew up his principles for revolutionary
activity in Russia, Trotsky was also formulating his standpoint. On 17
October 1915, in the Russian newspaper _Nash Slovo_, published in Paris,
Trotsky wrote as follows:

>In any debate on the subject of the character of the revolution, and
>the tactics to be pursued by the proletariat, the chief historical
>question to be discussed is: is middle-class democracy in Russia
>stronger or weaker than it was in 1905? ... Our reply is: a national
>middle-class revolution is an impossibility in a Russia in which there
>is no true revolutionary middle-class democracy. The age of national
>revolutions, like that of national wars, is past in Europe... The
>longer deceit, enfeeblement, discontent and embitterment are permitted
>to continue among the lower classes of townsfolk and peasantry, the
>worse will be the results. That does not, however, signify that the
>independent force of revolutionary democracy would be serviceable
>alongside the proletariat. Neither the leaders nor the social material
>for such a democracy are to hand. It is, nevertheless, indisputable
>that the profound discontent of the lower classes will spur on the
>proletariat in its revolutionary offensive. An ever-increasing
>discontent exists among the townspeople and the peasantry. But as a
>revolutionary force capable of utilising this discontent there is only
>the proletariat -- and in a far higher degree than in 1905... Hence it
>is not simply a question of setting up a temporary revolutionary
>government -- a shapeless block that will at some later date in
>evolution be given form -- but of establishing a revolutionary workers'
>government in order to secure power for the proletariat in Russia.

Ever since 1903 Trotsky had been at variance with other members of the
Bolshevik Party in questions of organisation. Thus he was opposed to the
dictatorship of a small circle of leaders over the workers. Lenin,
however, had not adopted this method out of any love of power, but
because it was necessary to effect a coalition of the workers with the
lower middle classes in a middle-class democratic revolution. Only a
trained and autocratic body of leaders, and not the masses themselves,
could carry out so complicated a revolution. Trotsky for his part did
not believe in the capacity for revolution of these lower middle classes
any more than he believed in the appeal of the ideal of nationality --
an ideal that he held to be outworn in an imperialist age. Trotsky is a
pure proletarian internationalist. If the workers could carry through
their revolution alone and without the help of the peasantry and the
inspiration of the national democratic ideal, and solely inspired by
their own socialist ideal, then there would be no need for a
dictatorship on the part of their leaders. Trotsky favoured democracy
among the workers at the same time as he advocated the suppression of
all other classes by the proletariat. Lenin favoured a broad national
Russian democracy within the limits considered desirable by the leaders
of the governing Bolshevik Party.

Moreover, Lenin and Trotsky were at variance in their opinions as to the
position of a revolutionary Russia in the comity of nations. In
Trotsky's opinion the Russian revolution was a failure if the permanent
revolution was not a success, and if it was not possible to accomplish a
victorious revolution on the part of the Western European workers. In
event of that failure the revolution in Russia must collapse. Lenin saw
a way of escape from the consequences of this eventuality. It is true
that a democratic and republican Russia, in the form desired by the
Bolsheviks, would have been isolated among the imperialistic powers and
would have been confronted with many difficulties. Nevertheless, there
was no _a priori_ reason why such a democratic dictatorship of peasants
and workers should not be able to maintain itself in a middle-class
order of society in the event of the defeat of the world revolution.
Thus Lenin was ready with plans for retreat in face of a defeat of the
world revolution. Trotsky had none.

## Chapter 04: The Third International, August 1914 to February 1917

At the time that Lenin parted company from the other Russian socialists
and democrats he also broke with the Socialist International for similar
reasons. In consequence of the rupture of his relations with the
International, Lenin sought to inculcate his views into the non-Russian
labouring classes in order to obtain sympathisers with the Bolshevik
Party beyond the Russian frontiers and to establish a new -- Third --
International. Throughout the years 1903 to 1914 the existence of the
Bolshevik Party within the Second International had only been rendered
possible by maintaining the fiction that the leading groups in the
International were of as revolutionary a character as were the
Bolsheviks. After 1914 this fiction could no longer be maintained.

The so-called break-up of the Second International in 1914 was not
indeed due to the fact that the socialist working class was unable to
prevent the outbreak of war. The war would have come even if the
Social-Democrat parties in all the eight great powers had been led by
heroic revolutionaries. For in 1914 there did not exist in Japan, Great
Britain or the United States any great socialist parties. In France,
Austria-Hungary and Italy the socialists formed only a small minority of
the population. In Russia, as long as the Tsar maintained his rule, the
socialists were powerless. Although the Social-Democrats in Germany were
supported by a good third of the parliamentary voters, they were
powerless when confronted with a middle-class majority supported by the
great Prussian military and police system. In not a single one of the
eight great powers, in July 1914, was a socialist government in power,
nor were any of the eight governments dependent for their parliamentary
existence upon the socialist vote. Hence the socialists were powerless
to prevent the war. The International cannot be condemned on this count
and its break-up must not be ascribed to its inability to prevent the
outbreak of war. Nevertheless, the International was forced in August
1914 to discard the revolutionary mask that it had been wearing, and
this action seemed tantamount to its own dissolution.

An organisation can only be looked upon as revolutionary when it has for
its avowed and sole object the accomplishment of the overthrow of the
existing order within a measurable space of time. If judged by this --
the only just -- criterion, the groups composing the Second
International were not revolutionary and their place is in the second
category in the classification attempted in the previous chapter. They
accepted the existence of the capitalist state and sought to improve the
condition of the working class within its limits. In consequence they
were forced into a position incompatible with their own beliefs. For the
theories of Marx, which they had made their own, called for revolution.
There were, indeed, two ways in which they could attempt to evade this
contradiction between their professed beliefs and their actions. The
first way was an open and sincere confession that Marx's theories must
be altered to suit changed circumstances, and that Social-Democracy,
even possibly in alliance with middle-class opinion and abandoning an
ideology dominated by its final aim, must seek to accomplish definite
reforms. Those who believed in this course became known as revisionists
(IIa). The second way was that of continuing to accord the chief place
in agitation and propaganda to the final aim, rejection of reforms,
refusal to cooperate in the peaceful promotion of better conditions and
to compromise with middle-class political parties and governments. At
the same time there was to be no action of a revolutionary nature, and
the small successes won for the working class by the 'reformist' trade
unions were to be regarded secretly as matters for rejoicing. This
course was adopted by the radicals, who were in general the leaders of
the Second International (IIb).

There can be no question that up to 1914 the revisionists had a far
better knowledge of actual political and economic conditions than had
the so-called radicals. The revisionists could accomplish more for the
working class and could gain greater influence over governments by means
of their association with non-socialist parties. Radicalism, however,
afforded the working man comfort and hope in his miserable daily life.
It increased his class-consciousness and opened his eyes to the gulf
between him and the middle class. Nevertheless, radicalism of the type
IIb must of necessity break down at a time of great political crisis;
for it could neither act in a revolutionary sense nor pursue a tactical
policy of reform. It needed, indeed, the powerful authority of the
middle-class state that actually protected it from the consequences of
its own 'revolutionary' speeches. A sincere revisionist could more
easily accommodate himself to a difficult situation than could a
traditional radical of this type.

Another contradiction must be examined in considering the differences
between radicals and revisionists. The socialists were in the minority
in all countries. And it was radicalism that demanded the seizure of
political power. Now the socialists could only achieve that power by
cooperation with a part of the middle class, that is, by 'revisionist'
tactics. The radicals by refusing to enter into any compromise postponed
the acquisition of power to a time so distant that it ceased to be
within the realm of actual politics.

A party in the sense of category I -- Social-Democracy as a
revolutionary party aiming at completing the middle-class revolution --
did not then exist outside the ranks of the Russian Bolsheviks. It would
have been Bolshevism, for example, if prior to 1914 the German
Social-Democrats had proclaimed a revolutionary war against the
Hohenzollerns and the Prussian junkers, if they had set up an illegal
organisation with its centre in Switzerland, and if they had
enthusiastically promoted an alliance with the Catholic Centre and the
liberals against the Prussian conservatives. In those days, however,
nobody in any country outside Russia dreamed of pursuing such strategy
and tactics. It is true that Wilhelm Liebknecht played with such ideas
from 1866 to 1870 at the time when he laid stress upon the need for a
revolutionary struggle with Bismarck and Prussianism, and was prepared
to enter into an alliance for that purpose with all middle-class,
_grossdeutsche_ enemies of Prussia and even with the clerical
particularists. That, however, remained an episode in the history of
German Social-Democracy without further consequences.

In prewar Europe there was also to be found the small group of socialist
intellectuals which has been classified under category III above. These
men were convinced that the age of peaceful capitalism would shortly be
succeeded by one filled with terrible wars and convulsions of society.
Hence the necessity in their opinion for the working man to turn his
back upon reform and high-sounding phrases and return to the ways of
revolution. This revolution could only be a socialist workmen's
revolution in consequence of the tremendous development of modern
capitalism and the destruction of the lower middle class. As has already
been pointed out in the previous chapter, this theory met with little
support in Poland, Germany or Holland.

What was the attitude adopted by Bolshevism before 1914 towards the
various groups within the International? Apart from the Bolsheviks there
were to be found in Russia representatives -- naturally in a Russian
dress -- of all the different tendencies in European socialism. Thus the
revisionists (IIa) were represented in Russia about 1900 by the
so-called economists, who believed that Social-Democracy should only
occupy itself with the purely economic interests of the working classes,
and, after the failure of the revolution in 1905, by the so-called
liquidators, who looked upon the existence of the illegal
Social-Democrat organisations as superfluous. The Mensheviks were
representative of Western European radicalism (IIb) and Trotsky of
category III.

In the eyes of Russian working men the socialist International possessed
great authority. They felt themselves strengthened in their desperate
conflict with Tsarism and in the persecution which they had to endure at
its hands by the feeling of unity with class-conscious workers in all
other countries. Thus Lenin was forced to make common cause with those
groups -- the radicals -- in the International who advocated revolution
in their speeches and resolutions. Indeed it would seem that prior to
1914 Lenin looked upon the German Social-Democrat Party with its radical
leaders as an organisation somewhat resembling Bolshevism. He believed
that a party led by Bebel and whose programme was laid down by Kautsky
would at the given moment lead a revolution against Wilhelm II and
German capitalism. Moreover, he noted the strict discipline governing
the party and that a certain group of leaders continuously maintained
their authority over it. Nor did complaints against the autocratic
methods of the party committee escape his notice. Thus he came to
believe sincerely that Bebel and his friends were a German counterpart
of the dictatorship exercised by the Bolshevik Party over the working
men.

That was a grave error. For if in Western European parties and trade
unions the power of the leaders was great, and at times the opposition
had good reasons for complaining that it was abused, the leaders
themselves depended in the last resort upon the suffrages of the members
and could not therefore indefinitely maintain themselves in office
against the will of the workers who had elected them. If Lenin (as
certain of his prewar utterances would lead one to suppose) really
looked upon German Social-Democracy as a form of Bolshevism, it was
unquestionably a mistake on his part. The fanatical personal hatred with
which Lenin pursued Karl Kautsky after August 1914 cannot be explained
simply on grounds of differences of opinion. Such hatred can only be
entertained by a person who has formerly loved greatly. After 1914 Lenin
sought to revenge himself upon Kautsky for having mistakenly admired his
ideas and organisation for twenty years past.

Although in matters of principle he was for the most part in
disagreement with them, Lenin admired Rosa Luxemburg and her followers
for their revolutionary enthusiasm. As early as 1903 Rosa Luxemburg had
raised her voice in protest against Lenin's theory of revolutionary
organisation. She refused to accept his conception of a dictatorship
over the proletariat and she could only conceive of a great revolution
as spontaneous action on the part of the working classes. This notion of
spontaneity appeared in Lenin's eyes to be the purest nonsense.
Moreover, Rosa Luxemburg rejected Lenin's proposed alliance between the
proletariat and the lower middle classes; and she did not agree with
Lenin as to the importance to be attached to the problems of the
peasantry and nationalism.

In 1912 Rosa Luxemburg's famous book _The Accumulation of Capital_ was
published, in which she propounded the theory that capitalism can only
continue to exist for so long as non-capitalist countries and classes
remain open to its exploitation. The mad struggle between the
imperialistic states for colonies was motivated by the desire to exploit
the last remaining non-capitalist territories on the surface of the
globe. In a short time the process of dividing up the world among
capitalist states would have reached its culmination. Capitalism would
find itself faced with destruction. The proletariat would everywhere
rise in victorious revolution. Thus in 1912 Rosa Luxemburg already
proclaimed the coming world revolution. This revolution, however, was to
be a purely socialist revolution and not the partially middle-class
revolution which Lenin was to announce in 1915. Lenin rejected
absolutely Rosa Luxemburg's theories of imperialism. In the essay on
imperialism, which he published in 1915, Lenin praised the book on
financial capitalism written by the Austrian socialist Hilferding, and
did not even mention Rosa Luxemburg's work. The notion that capitalism
would one day automatically break down was in Lenin's opinion a
dangerous illusion. Unless the revolution itself overthrew them, the
capitalists always had a way of escape from the gravest danger; and the
revolution could not be organised according to Rosa Luxemburg's theories
of a purely proletarian movement that took no account of the peasants,
etc. Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky were nearer to each other in their ideas
than were Rosa Luxemburg and Lenin. In 1903 Trotsky, like Rosa
Luxemburg, had emphatically rejected Lenin's theory of the necessity for
organisation. In 1909 Trotsky published an article in Rosa Luxemburg's
Polish newspaper setting forth his ideas on the coming Russian
revolution, and in 1915 he agreed with her in insisting that national
wars were no longer possible in an imperialistic age.

Then came August 1914. Unable to prevent the outbreak of war, the
socialist parties in Germany, France, Austria and Belgium proclaimed
their willingness to assist in the defence of their respective
countries; and their attitude was defensible from a Marxist standpoint
inasmuch as neither Marx nor Engels had denied the idea of nationality.
Nevertheless, it was not incumbent upon these socialist parties to agree
to a political truce in their several countries. They might without risk
have maintained the individual position of the proletariat in both
political and economic life and have attempted to pursue an independent
socialist and internationalist policy. The moment the radical groups in
the Second International agreed to participate in the defence of their
countries they were forced to abandon the attitude of irreconcilability
in which they had hitherto persisted. Their freedom of action was lost
to them and they became the prisoners of the political truce. To the
outside world this seemed tantamount to a complete collapse. The
tendencies classified above under categories IIa and IIb became
indistinguishable from each other. When, however, the workmen and
members of the socialist movement began to criticise their own actions
and those of their leaders, many outstanding personalities among both
the revisionists and the radicals opposed the official party policy of
supporting the political truce -- thus, for example, in Germany,
Bernstein, the formulator of the revisionist theory, and Kautsky, the
adviser of the party committee until 1914, both went into opposition to
the official party leaders.

In August 1914 Lenin recognised the non-revolutionary character of the
Second International and abandoned it as valueless for his purpose. He
hoped, nevertheless, that the convulsion of the World War would result
in the creation of new revolutionary groups of workmen in the various
European states. As early as 1 November 1914, Lenin demanded the
creation of a Third International in an article in which he wrote:

>Opportunism has triumphed over the Second International and it is
>dead... The Second International accomplished its share of the
>necessary preliminary work of organising the proletarian masses
>throughout the long and peaceful period of cruel capitalistic
>enslavement and swift capitalistic development in the last third of the
>nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries. The Third
>International is confronted with the task of organising the proletariat
>for a revolutionary attack upon capitalist governments, for civil war
>with the middle class in all countries to achieve political power, and
>for the victory of socialism.

Lenin also endeavoured to find a scientific explanation for the moral
collapse of the International and made use for this purpose of his basic
principle of imperialism. He dubbed the policy of support for the middle
class on the part of the socialists in time of war 'socialist
chauvinism'. Moreover, he maintained the identity of these socialist
chauvinists with the opportunists or prewar revisionists. Nor could the
exclusion of a few individuals affect the validity of this theory. After
all opportunism was a result of imperialism.

The capitalistic middle class were enabled by the vast profits they made
abroad, in colonies, etc, to throw a sop to the working men. This sop
took the form of the higher wages paid to skilled workmen. There arose
in this manner in America and in Europe a sort of working-class
aristocracy composed of work-people who had become identified with the
life of the lower middle classes and who felt themselves in sympathy
with and dependent upon the economic organisation of their countries.
This 'aristocratic' class of work-people dominated the Social-Democrat
party organisations in Europe in alliance with a bureaucracy composed of
the party officials and trade-union officials. The revolutionary spirit
and ideal had long ceased to animate them; they were the formulators and
executants of opportunist and socialist-chauvinist policy. The sweated
masses of poor and miserably-paid workmen hated this policy in their
hearts. They were radical and revolutionary. At the same time they were
not organised because the party machinery was in the hands of the
opportunists who denied the revolutionary workmen all opportunity for
expressing their wishes. Hence the task confronting revolutionary
socialism in every country was to organise the revolutionary masses and
lead them in an attack upon the 'aristocratic' workmen and the middle
class.

This theory of an aristocracy of working men contained an element of
truth. Nevertheless, its universal application was indefensible and had
dangerous consequences for the international labour movement. It is
unquestionably true that groups of workers whose incomes far exceed a
living wage, and whose habits of life are barely distinguishable from
those of the lower or even upper middle class, can only with difficulty
attain to a proletarian class-consciousness. It is for this reason that
even today the chief elements in the American working class are opposed
to socialism. Marxism, however, proves that the existence of such
elements within the system of wage-labour can only be in the nature of
exceptions. It would, for example, be a wild exaggeration to call the
standard of life in 1913 of skilled metal-workers in Germany, Austria
and France, non-proletarian. If the restricted living conditions which
had been obtained by 1913 for the German metal-workers as the result of
protracted struggles on the part of the trade unions had sufficed to
render them indifferent to real socialism, then socialism would have
been proved bankrupt both as a political movement and as a conception of
the ordering of society. The fact that the raising of wages by a few
marks sufficed to turn the workers into counter-revolutionaries and
middle-class citizens would have deprived socialism of all meaning.
Revolutionary socialists would in that case have been forced to watch
anxiously for any rise in wages that might send the workmen into the
enemy's camp.

Any attempt on the part of Lenin's followers at a future time to found
new revolutionary labour parties in Central and Western Europe in
accordance with this principle would mean that the poorly-paid workers
and the unemployed would have to be roused against their skilled and
better-paid fellows. This would give rise to mutual hatred and cause a
wide gulf to open between the various elements in the proletariat. Any
possibility of a successful revolution would thereby be automatically
destroyed. The working class on the European continent could only
achieve power by gaining a large body of middle-class opinion for their
cause. Although Lenin's theory of revolution demanded a popular
revolution led by the workers against imperialism at the time of the
World War, it is clear that his theory of a working-class aristocracy
implied that skilled turners and carpenters were to be included in the
ranks of the enemies of the working class. All employees, officials and
peasants must in that case be looked upon as the enemies of the
proletariat. The new revolutionary socialist party would then be nothing
more than a sect of the poorest workers, influenced emotionally by the
unemployed, filled with hatred for everyone who had been more
successful, and completely incapable of ever achieving political power.

This profound irreconcilability in the doctrines of Lenin when applied
to Western Europe did not become evident until after the World War. As
early as 1914 Lenin had set different aims before his followers within
and without Russia. His followers in Russia were to work for the
realisation of the middle-class revolution while those in Western Europe
sought to bring about a socialist revolution. Out of this difference in
aims arose later certain differences within the body of doctrine known
as Bolshevism.

It was Lenin's belief that the socialists could have prevented the
catastrophe of 1914 if they had chosen the right moment to exclude from
their ranks the opportunists -- the clique of working-class aristocrats
and their doctrinaire leaders. In support of his belief Lenin compared
conditions in Russia and Italy with those obtaining in Germany, Austria,
France and Belgium. Opportunists and true socialists were united in the
same party in the four latter countries. On the occurrence of the crisis
the opportunists secured control of the party organisations. In Russia,
on the other hand, the Bolsheviks had separated themselves from the
Mensheviks in time; and in consequence the outbreak of war found the
Russian proletariat strong and prepared for battle. In Italy in like
manner the opportunists under Bissolati had been excluded from the
Social-Democrat Party before the World War. Bissolati's ostracism was
followed by that of the socialist-chauvinist Mussolini soon after the
outbreak of war. Hence the Italian Social-Democrats were in a position
to offer a determined opposition to the militarist policy of their
government.

In truth, however, the Italian Socialists were a typical Second
International group composed of a mixture of categories IIa and IIb.
They were no more revolutionary than were the German Social-Democrats.
The difference lay rather in the fact that in Italy, as distinct from
Germany and France, in the years 1914 and 1915 national opinion was not
solidly in favour of war. A great body of middle-class and
lower-middle-class opinion was opposed to Italy's allying herself with
the Entente. For this reason it was far easier for the Italian
Socialists to oppose a warlike policy on the part of the Italian
government than it was, for example, for the Belgian Socialists. Hence
it came about that in 1914-15 Italian Social-Democracy appeared more
revolutionary than it really was at heart. This illusory condition led
to tragic consequences.

The dissatisfaction of socialists throughout Europe with the policy of
maintaining a political truce steadily increased during the first years
of the war. Demands were put forward for renewed liberty of action on
the part of the labour parties, for a policy of opposition to the
governments in power, and for the opening of negotiations for peace.
Nevertheless, those who put forward these demands did not contemplate
revolutionary action and did not see any prospect of its meeting with
success. A general pacification was their principal demand. As a
revolutionary Lenin detested this 'middle' group of pacifists and
followers of Kautsky as much as he detested the socialist chauvinists.
For Lenin was not willing to contemplate a peace concluded between
imperialistic governments and resulting in the strengthening of
imperialism. Civil war and not peace was what he desired; and in peace
propaganda he saw only a means to the confusion and paralysis of the
revolutionary proletariat.

An international conference of socialist opponents of the policy of a
political truce was held at Zimmerwald in Switzerland from 5 to 8
September 1915, for the purpose of working out a common policy. The
conference was summoned on the initiative of Italian and Swiss
socialists and Germany was represented by ten delegates. Of these, six
represented the opinions held by the group that later became known as
'Independent' Social-Democrats. These six were led by Ledebour and Adolf
Hoffmann. Rosa Luxemburg's Spartacist Union was represented by three
delegates. Julian Borchardt came to voice the views of a small private
body of opinion. Two delegates came from France. The delegates from
England were refused their passports. Other countries represented were
Bulgaria, Romania, Sweden, Norway and Holland. Russia was represented by
the following delegates: Lenin and Zinoviev represented the Bolsheviks;
Martov and Axelrod, the Mensheviks; Trotsky, his own group; two
delegates, the Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries; and, finally, left-wing
socialists from Poland and Latvia.

It quickly became evident that the majority in the conference supported
Kautsky rather than Lenin. Resolutions were passed denouncing the
political truce and demanding the pursuit of a policy of opposition to
existing governments for the purpose of forcing them to make peace. In
accordance with the traditions of socialism in Western Europe the
conference rejected all proposals for revolutionary action and refused
to recognise the existence of a cleavage of opinion within the ranks of
the International. Out of thirty votes Lenin's proposals only received
the support of seven. Apart from his own and Zinoviev's, he was
supported by the votes of a Lett and a Pole (Radek) as well as by those
of the two Scandinavian delegates. (In view of the completely
non-revolutionary conditions obtaining in Norway and Sweden the support
given by these delegates to a policy of civil war was purely
theoretical.) The seventh vote cast for Lenin was that of Borchardt.
Even the Spartacists did not vote in his favour. Lenin thus encountered
defeat on the platform of the Zimmerwald Conference at the hands of the
opposition among the international socialists. If the voting is
analysed, according to countries, it becomes clear that Lenin had no
supporters in France, England or Italy, and only a few isolated
individuals followed his lead in Germany -- all these being countries of
the utmost importance from a socialist standpoint. The Bolsheviks indeed
did not wax enthusiastic over the conference in Zimmerwald. In a
critical appreciation of its work Zinoviev wrote:

>The conference only took a first and hesitating step along the path on
>which we wish to lead international socialism. The conference did not
>above all wish to pass any precise and unmistakable resolution dealing
>with the crisis. It did not want to declare open war upon opportunism
>and hold up, even in theory, the flag of Marxism. Its attitude was
>perhaps unavoidable in present circumstances. Events move with
>exceeding slowness; nevertheless they move... It is only necessary to
>take as an example the question of the Third International. The
>conveners of the conference -- the majority in the conference --
>declared and continue to declare that they will not set up a Third
>International. The Italian paper _Avanti_ and the _Berner Tagwacht_,
>the organ of R Grimm (the leader of the Swiss Socialists), endeavour to
>prove that the 'International Socialist Commission' created by the
>conference is not intended in any way to replace the old 'International
>Socialist Bureau' and must indeed result in its resuscitation.
>Nevertheless there is a logic of events... The day will come when all
>true socialists will join with us in crying: 'The Second International
>is dead and was destroyed by the opportunists. Hurrah for the Third
>International free from opportunism!'

In his own observations on the conference Lenin admitted the weakness of
the Left at the same time that he claimed a 'success' for it. He wrote:

>The success of our policy is unquestionable. It is only necessary to
>study the facts. In September 1914, when it issued its manifesto, our
>Central Committee was in a similarly isolated position. In January 1915
>the International Women's Conference passed its miserable pacifist
>resolution... In September 1915 we united to form a single group out of
>the left wing of international socialism, adopted our own tactics,
>proclaimed our fundamental principles in a common manifesto, and
>assisted, despite the opposition of the old bureau and by means of a
>manifesto which condemned its policy, in establishing an International
>Socialist Commission which is in fact a new International Socialist
>Bureau... As early as 1912-14 an overwhelming majority of the Russian
>workers already supported our party and its Central Committee. Their
>experience of the international socialist movement will now demonstrate
>to them that our policy will soon come to have a broader basis and that
>our principles will be shared by an ever-increasing proportion of the
>best elements in the international proletariat.

A very important idea for the first time makes its appearance here:
Lenin is determined to show his supporters among the Russian workmen
that they have sympathisers and allies outside Russia, and he is
prepared to prove this to them by placing a tortuous construction upon
events.

The report on the Zimmerwald Conference contained in the illegal
'Spartacus Letter', circulated in November 1915 by Rosa Luxemburg and
her followers, is very typical of the attitude then prevailing towards
Lenin and his ideas. In a report covering almost four pages of print
only a single passing reference is made to Lenin and his supporters: 'An
alternative draft for the projected manifesto was put forward by the
Russian members of the Central Committee, a Polish delegate and the
Norwegian and Swedish delegates. The great majority of the conference
rejected the draft as a tactical error.' Nothing more. The Spartacists
-- followers of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg -- were then the most
extreme socialists in Europe. It is obvious that they regarded the
Bolsheviks as an insignificant minority in the ranks of the
international opposition to the prosecution of the war.

In prewar days the 'International Socialist Bureau' typified the
international solidarity of the labour movement. The war paralysed its
activities. The question therefore became one of what were the aims to
be pursued by the opponents of the political truce and the war itself:
should they restore the old International or destroy it and found a new
one? Those who supported the resuscitation of an international bureau on
the old model were thereby supporting the continued existence of the
Second International. The majority in the Zimmerwald Conference were
opposed to a cleavage and expressly announced that the new executive
organ they had called into being -- actually an Italo-Swiss
international commission -- was not intended to replace the old bureau
but only to act temporarily as its substitute.

At Easter 1916, the members of the Zimmerwald Conference met for a
second time at Kienthal in Switzerland, the composition of the
conference being little changed from what it had been on the former
occasion. Representatives of the movement later known as the USPD,
delegates from the Spartacus Union and a representative -- Paul Frölich
-- of a left-wing radical group in Bremen came from Germany. Russian and
Polish, Swiss and Italian delegates were present. France and Serbia were
also represented. The left wing of the Zimmerwald Conference was
represented by the Bolsheviks, their Polish sympathisers, Paul Frölich
and a few Swiss delegates. In his attack on pacifism, however, Lenin
found himself supported by some members of the majority in the
conference. In the decisive issue of support for the Second or for a
Third International, that is, the establishment of an international
socialist bureau, the voting led to no conclusive result. Ultimately the
conference passed a non-committal resolution, in which it declared its
resolve not to demand the establishment of the bureau but left it to the
individual socialist groups to demand it. In other words, the majority
of the conference remained faithful to the Second International. Even
after the Kienthal Conference Lenin had no real following in England,
France or Italy, and in Germany his supporters were confined to isolated
individuals or small local groups. His views did not gain the support of
any one of the great German proletarian movements. This lack of sympathy
with Bolshevism outside Russia continued to exist until the triumph of
the revolution in Russia.

Zinoviev expressed himself as follows on the subject of the Kienthal
Conference:

>The second [Kienthal] conference unquestionably marks a step forwards.
>The influence of the left wing was greater than it had been in the
>conference at Zimmerwald. Prejudice against the left has diminished in
>strength. Is it possible, however, to affirm that the Rubicon has been
>crossed? Can one say that the conference has finally decided upon a
>breach with the official socialist parties? Is Kienthal the birth-place
>of a Third International? No! That cannot conscientiously be
>maintained... Let there be no illusions! A strong right wing exists
>among the members of the conference. Nobody can prophesy if it will
>remain on our side... What then? Fight on for our ideals! Fight on for
>the cause of revolutionary socialist democracy! Fight on for the Third
>International!

Although they themselves were under no illusions, Lenin and Zinoviev
upheld for the sake of their Russian supporters the fiction that they
were the leaders of a great international proletarian movement. After
the Kienthal Conference, however, the 'Spartacus Letters' prove that the
resolutions and votes in conferences of party leaders are worthless and
that any great mass movement is of more value than any number of
conferences. Nevertheless, these conferences at Zimmerwald and Kienthal
saw the birth of the Third International.

The smaller his success in Western Europe the greater became Lenin's
personal hatred of the working-class aristocracy and its leaders.
Ill-success only spurred him on in his fight with them. All who stood in
his way became his enemies. He hated the Russian patriotic socialists as
much as pacifists, Kautsky's supporters, and the right wing in the
conference. In a word, all socialists who refused to organise revolution
and dissension while condemning the prosecution of the war. In an
article written in October 1916, Lenin cited certain sayings of Marx and
Engels, in which they had spoken very correctly of the transformation of
a part of the English working class of their day into members of the
middle class. Lenin proceeded to generalise from their statements. He
declared that the appearance of 'middle-class labour parties' had become
typical of all imperialistic countries -- parties whose members were
infected by the virus of imperialism. Comfortable and lucrative
positions had been created for peaceful, patriotic workmen and officials
who were content with reforms. In this manner an imperialistic middle
class tempted and rewarded supporters of the 'middle-class' labour
movement:

>It is a fact that a middle-class labour party has made its appearance
>as a political factor in all progressive capitalist countries. Hence it
>is useless to talk of a war against imperialism, or of Marxism and a
>socialist labour movement, without being prepared for a ruthless
>struggle with these parties... Nothing leads us to suppose that these
>parties will disappear without a socialist revolution.

Kautsky and his supporters did not indeed constitute an independent
movement. Their ideas were rooted neither in the masses nor in the
privileged class of those workers who had deserted to the middle class.
The danger implicit in Kautsky's programme lay in his attempt to
reconcile the proletariat with the middle-class labour movement in order
to increase the authority of the latter movement: 'If we wish to remain
socialists, it is our duty to descend to the true masses. It is for that
reason that we wage war on opportunism.'

It has already been pointed out above what consequences were entailed in
this descent to the 'true masses' on the part of Lenin and his
followers. A party might in this fashion be kept in existence. The
control of the state machinery could never be won. Of course, it is
possible that for the moment Lenin was chiefly concerned to gain
supporters in Western Europe for the idea of a world revolution and to
put forward any sort of plan in opposition to the programme of the old
official Social-Democrat Party. Mistakes in tactics and errors in
doctrine on the part of these non-Russian revolutionary parties could
later be corrected by the central authority directing the world
revolution. Lenin certainly did not overestimate the rate of progress of
the revolutionary socialist movement in Central and Western Europe. In a
speech which he delivered to young Swiss working men on 22 January 1917,
Lenin said: 'We who are already old may perhaps not live to participate
in the decisive battle of the coming revolution.' Nevertheless, he hoped
that the young European socialists would prove victorious in the coming
proletarian revolution.

Two months later Russian workmen deposed the Tsar.

## Chapter 05: March to October 1917

After two years of war the economic life of Tsarist Russia was
completely destroyed, the authority of the ruling caste undermined, and
the revolution inevitable. The state finances had been disorganised by
the enormous war expenditure and the country was drowning in a flood of
paper roubles. Millions of workmen and peasants were continually being
withdrawn from their factory benches and fields to make good the wastage
in the armies. Food supplies steadily diminished. Rolling stock on the
railroads was destroyed through excessive usage and gradually became
unobtainable. Despite the assistance received from the Entente powers,
Russian industry was in a far less developed state than that of other
countries and was scarcely in a position to keep the armies at the front
supplied with munitions. In the factories, as on the railroads, raw
materials were used up carelessly and extravagantly. Shortage of
supplies and difficulties of transport brought starvation and lack of
fuel to the great cities. The peasantry were war-weary and desperate;
and the feeling engendered in the villages gradually infected the
millions of peasants composing the army.

The support of the majority of the army had enabled the Tsarist
government in 1905 to stamp out the revolutionary movement. Now hardly a
single regiment remained loyal to the Tsar and his government. The
populace was resolved on revolution for the purpose of making an end
simultaneously of Tsarism and the war. The propertied middle class were
also prepared to revolt for an exactly contrary reason. The middle class
recognised that the corrupt and incapable Tsarist regime was leading
Russia to a catastrophe. The defeats and setbacks of the first three
years of war aroused in them the fear that Russia would collapse
entirely if Nicholas II and his courtiers remained in control of
affairs. Even the reactionary clique surrounding the Tsar gradually came
to see that a continuance of the war meant the destruction of all
conservative and traditional authority in Russia. From 1916 onwards they
strove to achieve a separate peace with Germany.

The liberal upper middle class refused to contemplate peace. After all
the sacrifices which the war had entailed upon Russia it was imperative
that her war aims should be fulfilled. Instead of retiring from the
contest Russia must hold out until the expected victory of the Entente
powers brought her Constantinople and the Straits. If, however, the Tsar
was planning the betrayal of his country for feudal and dynastic
reasons, the middle class would rather overthrow the dynasty than give
up its hopes of victory.

The ambassadors of the Entente powers in Petrograd did nothing to oppose
a revolution. For a revolution would liberate the middle-class
democracies in France and England from their compromising ally, Nicholas
II, whose downfall was in any case inevitable. Moreover, the Entente
might reasonably hope that a middle-class and liberal Russia would
continue to wage war with renewed energy and without any thoughts of
concluding a separate peace. Thus it came about that two revolutionary
streams merged in the events of March 1917: from below came the movement
of peasants, soldiers and workers yearning for peace and for bread; from
above that of the liberal middle class seeking victory and conquests.
The workmen's revolution in Petrograd was the signal for a revolt of the
entire garrison. In a few days the revolution had spread victoriously
over the whole country and reached the armies at the front. The workers
and soldiers overthrew the Tsar; the liberal middle class assumed the
reins of government. The fall of the monarchy legally involved that of
the Russian parliament -- the Duma -- which was elected in accordance
with a cleverly devised reactionary franchise. The liberal members of
the Duma, however, set up a committee that immediately became a
rallying-point for the middle-class movement. The victorious workers and
soldiers in Petrograd established soldiers' and workers' councils in
accordance with the tradition of 1905. The soviet thus became the
rallying-point of the democrats and socialists. Hence the struggle
between the two contending currents in the revolution took the form of a
struggle for power between the Duma committee and the workers' and
soldiers' councils.

In March 1917, Russia was divided politically as follows. The
conservative classes -- landowners, nobles, officers and high officials
-- were to be found in the ranks of the liberal middle-class movement.
Reactionaries and liberals were now allies in a battle for the retention
of private property and the prosecution of the war to a victorious
conclusion. The peasantry and the soldiers, who, being for the most part
peasants, shared in their traditions and ideals, supported the
_Narodniki_. The Social Revolutionaries were the leading party in the
popular movement. The industrial workers were divided in support of the
Mensheviks and Bolsheviks. No mention need be made here of the smaller
groups and parties. The vast majority of the nation, and its physical
force in the form of the army, stood behind the Social Revolutionaries.
On their right stood the middle class and on their left the socialist
minority. Notwithstanding their power the Social Revolutionaries did not
seize the reins of government. Like the Russian Social-Democrats, the
Social Revolutionaries were convinced that the Russian revolution must
be a middle-class revolution; and for that reason they were prepared to
accord the governmental authority to the liberal middle class. They
themselves were content to adopt the role of a friendly opposition
criticising and controlling the actions of the government and acting as
a propulsive democratic force.

The attitude adopted in this question by the Social Revolutionaries was
identical with that adopted in 1905 by the Mensheviks. The workers' and
soldiers' councils were to act as a form of democratic control over the
actions of the government and were to be established throughout Russia
after the model of the parent council in Petrograd. Workers' and
soldiers' councils were to be set up in the towns, peasants' councils in
the villages, and soldiers' councils at the front.

The identity of views between the Social Revolutionaries and the
Mensheviks also extended to cover the all-important question of a
continuance of the war. The Russian republic was to adopt the solution
propounded by the majority in the Zimmerwald Conference, as
representative of the socialist opposition in Europe, namely, a peace by
mutual agreement without annexations or war indemnities. Russia was to
exert her influence in this sense with the Entente nations, as well as
with Germany and Austria, in order to restore peace to the world in
alliance with international socialism. A one-sided and separate peace on
the part of Russia was inadmissible. For such a peace would bring in its
train the danger that German militarism would overrun Europe. Hence
republican Russia must continue to wage war upon William II and his
army. The Russian people must defend their revolutionary gains until a
general pacification had taken place.

Thus it came about that the majority in the soviets was composed of the
Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks. In its capacity as
representative of all other councils the workers' and soldiers' council
in Petrograd concluded with the liberal Duma committee a compromise that
paved the way towards the establishment of a provisional government.
This government took the form of a liberal middle-class cabinet.
Although he did not belong to it as an official representative of the
soviets, Kerensky, the well-known member of the _Narodniki_ party,
joined it on personal grounds. Ever since March 1917, the executive
authority in Russia had found itself in a remarkable situation. The old
police force had everywhere been abolished by the mutinous soldiery. All
power was in the hands of armed workers and soldiers under the
leadership of the soviets. Nevertheless, the former bureaucratic
administration continued to exist and found itself confronted with the
problem of carrying out the terms of the agreement between the new
government and the soviets. The same situation existed at the front as
between officers and soldiers' councils. If the war was to be prosecuted
further, then it would be necessary either to restore the authority of
the former Tsarist officers as against that of the councils or to create
an entirely new body of officers. The work of reconstruction and of
creating a new Russia was left to a constituent national assembly in
accordance with the ideal striven for by Russian revolutionaries for
years past. The dates of the election and assembly of this constituent
assembly were left open.

What was the attitude of the Bolsheviks to this early stage of the
middle-class revolution in Russia? It soon became evident that Lenin had
been mistaken in his belief that it would be possible for him to control
his supporters in Russia from his exile in Switzerland across a barrier
of contending armies. The fateful changes that Lenin had introduced into
the old theory of Bolshevism since 1914 had hardly reached the ears of
his followers in Russia; and what had come to their knowledge had been
by no means acceptable to them. In these days Kamenev was the most
important member of the Bolshevik Party in Russia. In common with the
Bolshevik deputies in the Duma, Kamenev was sent to Siberia in November
1914, whence he returned to Petrograd after the revolution to edit the
Bolshevik newspaper _Pravda_.

Kamenev and his intimate friends still thought in terms of the old
Bolshevism that had inspired the party up to the outbreak of the war. He
was utterly opposed to the new theories propounded by Lenin. His aim
continued to be the continuance of the revolution in Russia from its
initial liberal middle-class stage to a democratic dictatorship on the
part of the workers and peasants. In other words -- to the establishment
of a 'popular' socialist coalition government whose task would be the
realisation of the democratic ideal. Since the end of 1914 Lenin had for
his part refused to hear of the establishment of such a coalition
government. Kamenev and his friends still remained in favour of a united
front of the entire Russian democracy, and they attached little or no
importance to the various attitudes adopted towards the war by the
individual democratic parties. On the other hand, Lenin wanted to use
the question of the war as a means to sow dissension among the Russian
democracy and was not afraid of single-handed action on the part of the
Bolsheviks for this purpose.

It was not until Lenin succeeded in reaching Russia in April 1917 that
he secured effective control over the party and wrested the leadership
from Kamenev and his followers after a series of violent debates. These
debates and Lenin's leadership of the party did not, however, make an
end to his conflict with the old Bolsheviks. Their polemic continued
throughout the entire year 1917 and blazed up again with especial fury
at the very moment when the Bolsheviks attained to power. Lenin was on
his return to Russia accompanied by Zinoviev. A remarkable change came
over their relations the moment Zinoviev once more felt the soil of
Russia beneath his feet. This man, who had worked in closest cooperation
with Lenin throughout their common exile, who had formulated and
elucidated the Bolshevik doctrines in brilliant articles published
between 1914 and 1916, now wavered in his allegiance. He deserted Lenin
for Kamenev, disapproved of the Bolshevik seizure of power in the state,
and conducted a violent opposition to Lenin's policy in October and
November 1917. It will presently be shown what reasons induced the
ablest and most experienced brains in the Bolshevik Party to turn
against Lenin at the very moment of the party's triumph.

In March 1917, on receiving in Switzerland the first authentic news of
the revolution in Russia, Lenin made a fateful discovery. He became
convinced that the system of soldiers' and workers' councils -- soviets
-- was the modern expression of the inevitable socialist-democratic
revolution. If, however, the history of the Bolshevik movement from 1903
onwards be studied, it at once becomes clear that for fourteen years the
soviet system had played no part whatever in its programme. And if one
goes still farther back to the arrival of Lenin in St Petersburg
(Petrograd) in 1893, it is true to say that for twenty-four years the
soviet system had not formed an integral part of the Bolshevik doctrine.
But Lenin relied consistently upon the teachings of experience both in
theory and practice. He never once hesitated to alter his beliefs to
conform with new facts. In this Lenin and Marx were in full agreement.
For Marx as for Lenin the revolution was not only the realisation of the
revolutionary doctrine but also the expression of its evolutionary
development.

The peculiarity in the situation in Russia in March 1917 that
immediately attracted the notice of Lenin was the twofold character of
governmental authority. On the one hand there was the liberal
Provisional Government that was nothing but the customary type of
imperialist government and was only differentiated from similar
governments in England, France and Germany by the circumstance that it
did not control the lesser executive organisations such as the police,
etc. On the other hand a new power confronted this middle-class
government -- the soviet. And in the soviet Lenin recognised the
existence in a weak and elementary form of an entirely new type of
working-class government which could only be compared historically with
the Paris Commune of 1871. His study of the soviet convinced Lenin that
everything which Marx had said in his famous essay on the constitutional
and political aspects of the Paris Commune applied with equal truth to
the Russian soviet in 1917. The typical modern form of the state was a
centralised governmental apparatus ruling by force alone. This was the
type then prevalent all over Europe and that came into being in England
and America during the World War. The imperialistic World War resulted
in an enormous increase in the efficiency with which this governmental
apparatus worked and in the perfection of its machinery. At the very
moment when the apparatus was attaining its maximum efficiency in other
countries the Russian people spontaneously began to destroy their own
governmental machine. The whole military apparatus of imperialism came
to a standstill in Russia as soon as the soldiers ceased to obey their
officers and transferred their allegiance to the soldiers' councils. In
a similar manner the civil apparatus of government ceased to operate the
moment the armed workmen took the place of the police and only obeyed
the orders of their soviets. The essence of the centralised feudal and
middle-class state was the separation of the ruling classes from the
masses of the nation. The authority of the state was represented on the
streets by an armed, uniformed policeman whose behests must be obeyed by
the unarmed, civilian population. The manner in which the police
discharged their duties in the several states varied greatly, being
determined by the differences in the social and legal organisation of
the states themselves. Thus the police in Tsarist Russia behaved very
differently from those in England or France. Nevertheless, the police
forces of all countries possessed a common characteristic: their
membership of an administrative organisation standing apart from the
masses of the population and incorporating in their eyes the authority
of the state.

In a communist state police and nation are identical. The population is
armed and responsible to itself alone for the maintenance of law and
order. In a similar way the old type of army no longer exists. The armed
working classes are themselves the army. Administrative functions in
towns and villages are carried out by officials possessing the
confidence of the populace. These officials are indistinguishable from
the other members of the community in regard to income and manner of
life. They are continually under the control of the populace and can be
dismissed from their posts at any moment.

A communal system of this type implies the destruction and disappearance
of the old form of state. It was the ideal which Marx in common with the
anarchists set before him. On every occasion in history when the
populace sought to destroy a feudal or centralised authority ruling by
force they did so in seeking to replace it by some such communal
organisation as, for example, the city communes of the Middle Ages, the
Swiss peasant cantons, the early communal type of government in North
America, the Paris Commune of 1871 and, finally, the Russian soviet
of 1917. As will presently be demonstrated in detail, the educated
(so-called) Soviet government that has been in power from 1918 to the
present day has nothing in common with this type of government.

Such a 'communal' or 'soviet' type of government need not necessarily be
socialist. For example, it would be easy to imagine a system of communal
government by means of people's councils established in a peasant canton
in which the right of private ownership was fully preserved. This
extreme form of democracy is, however, according to Marx, the
preliminary condition for socialism inasmuch as socialism can only be
realised in a world enjoying the highest possible measure of individual
freedom.

Lenin was convinced that the unique dual system of government in Russia
could not exist for long. If the Provisional Government was successful
in asserting its authority, then it would be in a position to acquire
control over the whole executive power. The policeman would make his
appearance again in the towns, clad perhaps in a new uniform and with
some other title, but identical in principle with the Tsarist policeman.
The nation would once more be disarmed. The old discipline would be
reintroduced into the army and the authority of the soldiers' councils
would be transferred to the officers. If, however, the soviets were
successful in the struggle for supreme power in the state, then they
would have to be strong enough to dissolve the former ministries and to
remove the higher civil servants and officers from their posts. A
consequence of their disappearance would be the downfall of the
Provisional Government and the field would thus be left open for the
soviets alone.

This train of reasoning brought Lenin to his solution of the problem
confronting Russia: the overthrow of the Provisional Government and the
establishment of the soviets as the sole organs of power. He reasoned
somewhat in this fashion: the Russian democracy, as represented in the
soviets and in a political sense by the Social Revolutionary and
Social-Democrat Parties, desires peace. But the Provisional Government
cannot give it peace since it is an imperialistic government of the
upper middle class and bent on conquest. Russian democracy demands
liberty. Thanks to the soviets a large measure of liberty has been
accorded to it. Nevertheless, the Provisional Government is opposed to
the liberation of the masses of the nation and desires to reconstruct
the old governmental machinery. Further, the Russian peasant cries aloud
for land and the working man for bread. The Provisional Government is
unable to satisfy these demands since it is pledged to defend the right
of private ownership, including the ownership of land, and will never
tolerate any dictatorial interference with the distribution of food
supplies without which famine cannot be overcome. Since the liberal
upper middle class is of necessity unable to fulfil the four great
democratic demands for 'Peace, Liberty, Bread and Land', any toleration
of the Provisional Government by the democratic masses of the nation is
ridiculous. Russian democracy, that is, the soviets, must themselves
seize the reins of government.

Here Lenin revealed himself faithful to his political traditions in
putting forward not socialist but only radical democratic demands.
Moreover, his former ideal of a revolutionary democratic coalition
government again makes its appearance in a fresh and peculiar guise. For
in those days the Bolsheviks formed only a small minority in the soviets
and Lenin's cry of 'All Power for the Soviets' meant in the spring and
summer of 1917 a coalition government of the Social Revolutionaries and
the Mensheviks. Did not this contradict Lenin's own solution of the
problem -- the impossibility of an alliance with chauvinist democracy --
that he had been preaching to his followers since 1914 without
intermission?

It is clear that Lenin distinguished between the active members of the
Social Revolutionary Party and the masses of the soldiers and peasants
who sympathised with the party as a matter of tradition. If the official
democratic parties tolerated an upper middle-class government, the
opposition among a democratic peasantry hungry for land and a democratic
soldiery desirous of peace must grow steadily. If, however, the soviets
obtained control over the state, then the government would not be in the
hands of the Central Committee of the Social Revolutionary Party but in
those of the nation itself, which was revolutionary in a general sense
rather than the devotee of any special party tenets.

The revolution in 1905 had already made the nation acquainted with
revolutionary soviets. If Lenin's ideal of 'All Power for the Soviets'
were now to be realised, the enormous revolutionary force inherent in
the nation would be concentrated in the soviets and the task of
Bolshevism would become that of adopting the right tactics to secure
influence in the soviets. Even in 1917 Lenin did not abandon his
principle of a strong party dictatorship and a centralised party
organisation. In advocating the assumption of the government by the
soviets Lenin was very far from assenting to federalism and the doctrine
of the spontaneous will of the masses. Although he had constructed his
own party machinery, the soviets were not his work; they were created by
the nation itself. All that Lenin desired was to use them in order to
destroy Russian imperialism, which in the situation prevailing in Russia
in 1917 could only be overthrown by the soviets. In the spring and
summer of 1917 Lenin did not give a thought to the problem of how the
centralised and autocratic Bolshevik system was to be reconciled with
the federalist and anarchist ideal of the soviets after Russian
democracy had won a complete victory over its foes.

In the question of a continuance of the war Lenin was in favour of an
immediate rupture with the Entente powers in pursuance of the ideas
which he had held since 1914. The Provisional Government, on the other
hand, under cover of the Petrograd Workers' and Soldiers' Council,
wished to continue the struggle at the side of its allies. In April
1917, the German General Staff permitted Lenin to return across Germany
to Russia in order to strengthen the opposition to the alliance with the
Entente. It was a matter of complete indifference to Lenin with whose
help he regained Russian soil. If his plans proved successful, Lenin
would be a hundred times more dangerous an enemy to Imperial Germany
than the existing government of the Russian republic. Nevertheless he
was forced for some months after his return to endure the reproach that
he was an agent of the German General Staff.

Immediately after his arrival in Petrograd Lenin laid down his views on
the situation in ten important theses published in _Pravda_. The first
thesis showed that, even after the overthrow of the Tsar, the war in
which Russia was still a belligerent continued to be an imperialistic
war of conquest and that no concession should be made to those who
argued that it had become a war of defence. The second thesis demanded
that the revolution having now achieved its first stage must continue to
advance towards the second. In theses III to V Lenin declared:

>No support must be given to the Provisional Government, and their
>promises, especially those respecting a renunciation of a policy of
>annexation, must be exposed as the lies that they are... The fact must
>be recognised that in the majority of workers' soviets our party is in
>the minority, indeed at the moment in a numerically very small
>minority, as compared with the block composed of all lower middle-class
>and opportunist delegates who are subject to the influence of the
>middle class and seek to make that influence felt among the
>proletariat... The masses must be taught to see that the workers'
>soviet is the sole possible form for a revolutionary government and
>that therefore our task must, so long as this government is subject to
>middle-class influences, be resolute, systematic criticism of its
>failures and tactics in accordance with the extremely practical demands
>of the masses. So long as we continue to form the minority we must
>accompany our criticism by a simultaneous insistence upon the necessity
>for placing the entire authority of the state in the hands of the
>workers' soviets in order that the masses may learn through experience
>to avoid their mistakes. Not a parliamentary republic -- to return to
>that from the workers' soviets would be equivalent to making a
>retrograde step -- but an All-Russian Republic of Soviets of Workers,
>Agricultural Labourers and Peasants from the lowest to the highest!

Lenin indeed had little sympathy with the creation of a constituent
national assembly because he looked upon the system of soviets as a
better expression of democracy than parliamentarism. Nevertheless he did
not pronounce himself in 1917 as in principle opposed to a constituent
assembly, and he doubtless thought that this assembly might serve as a
sort of superstructure in a country organised on the soviet system.

His sixth thesis demanded the confiscation of the great estates. Theses
VII and VIII ran as follows: 'The incorporation of all banks in a single
national bank to be placed under the control of the workers' soviets.
Our immediate task is not the "introduction" of socialism but the
acquisition of the control of production and distribution by the
workers' soviets.' Thus Lenin expressly rejected 'socialisation'. He was
prepared to be content for the time being with a control of capitalism
exercised by the working class. He wished to oppose the economic system
of imperialism by one organised in accordance with the interests of the
masses and which did not necessarily imply the disappearance of the
employer.

His ninth thesis demanded an immediate assembly of the Bolshevik Party
congress for the purpose of altering both the name and the programme of
the party. The alterations which Lenin proposed to introduce into the
party's platform were designed to embody his new beliefs in regard to
imperialism and the state. The name of the party was to be changed from
'Social-Democrat' to 'Communist'. This change was of profound symbolical
importance inasmuch as Marx and Engels had styled themselves
'Communists' in the days of the 1848 revolution. The description
'Social-Democrat' had become synonymous with membership of the
non-revolutionary Second International. Lenin intended that in future
his party should indicate in their new designation that they had
returned to the original Marxism of 1848 and that they no longer had
anything in common with the Social-Democrats who were prepared to
compromise. Lenin's tenth thesis demanded a reorganisation of the
International.

It was only with difficulty that Lenin induced the party to accept this
programme in the teeth of the opposition of Bolsheviks of the old type
like Kamenev. The latter was of the opinion that a socialist labour
party which achieved the supreme power in the state by itself and in
opposition to every other group could alone carry out a socialist
revolution. Moreover, he looked upon any attempt to achieve an immediate
socialist revolution in an agrarian country like Russia as incompatible
with the teachings of Bolshevism and highly speculative. For his part
Lenin denied resolutely that he wished to introduce socialism into
Russia and he maintained that a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of
workers and peasants already existed in the soviets and not in some
future illusory coalition of the so-called democratic parties. It was
for that reason -- he contended -- that the Bolsheviks should adopt as
their slogan, 'All Power for the Soviets!'.

The fears entertained by Bolsheviks of the old type were not unfounded
and it is significant that Trotsky chose this very moment to join the
Bolshevik Party. Although his views on the situation were identical with
those of Kamenev, Trotsky drew an exactly contrary deduction: if Lenin
was preparing for a second revolution in which the Bolsheviks should
seize power to the exclusion of all lesser middle-class and peasant
democrats, this was indeed the aim of socialism, irrespective of what
formulas Lenin might choose to use in his programme. In that case
Trotsky was in agreement with Lenin in deed if not in word. Without
abandoning his own beliefs in any way, Trotsky felt that he recognised
in Lenin's tactics since March 1917 an approach to his own former
beliefs, and he therefore felt that he could join the Bolshevik Party
without doing violence to his own conscience. Although Trotsky did not
bring many supporters with him into the Bolshevik Party, his membership
strengthened the party by the addition of a unique revolutionary
personality which was to prove its worth brilliantly in the critical
days to come. Moreover, the greater the opposition encountered by Lenin
from the side of the Bolshevik Old Guard like Kamenev and Zinoviev, the
closer became his friendship with Trotsky, in whose resolute capacity
for action he saw his strongest support. In those days Stalin was still
a Bolshevik official of quite second-rate capacity. All theoretical
differences of opinion between Bolshevism and Trotskyism retreated
temporarily into the background to give place to common revolutionary
work on the part of Lenin and Trotsky.

The middle-class liberal government came into power in March and by May
its resources were exhausted. These months served to reveal the weakness
of middle-class liberalism in Russia. Centuries of organic development
lay behind the middle class in Central and Western Europe and a thousand
ties bound them both to the lower middle class and to the masses. The
middle class in Russia was an excrescence grafted artificially on to the
social body of the nation. It was alien to the masses. As long as the
peasantry and the lower middle class remained inarticulate and obedient,
they continued to be loyal subjects of the Tsar. On attaining to
class-consciousness they became 'red' and revolutionary. In no
circumstances were they ever liberal in thought or spirit. Hence
middle-class liberalism was a weak minority in the Russian nation in
1917 and only achieved power because the socialists and democrats
desired a middle-class government in fulfilment of their theory of a
middle-class revolution. As Lenin had prophesied, however, the political
truce concluded between the government and the Petrograd Soviet proved
useless, since Russian liberalism was incapable of fulfilling the least
of the many demands put forward by the masses. The question of peace led
to ever sharper protests on the part of the workers and soldiers against
the government, and the desire for peace animating the masses was only
strengthened by the government's policy of a prosecution of the war to
victory and territorial conquests.

The growing political tension became acute in May and the Soviet was
confronted with the problem of taking over the reins of government
itself. The liberal phase of the revolution had reached its close. It
was now the turn of the democrats. As the decisive party of the
peasantry and the soldiers, the Social Revolutionaries abandoned their
policy of non-intervention and entered the government. Would their
allies in the soviets -- the Mensheviks -- also accept portfolios?

The traditions animating the Menshevik Party since 1905 forbade their
entry into the government. Nevertheless, they resolved in May not to
dissolve the alliance (with the Social Revolutionaries) which they had
concluded at the beginning of the revolution. In alliance with the
Social Revolutionaries the Mensheviks were in the majority in all the
soviets and the two groups together incorporated the soviet ideal of
Russian democracy. It was their consciousness that they embodied this
ideal that induced the Mensheviks to regard it as their duty to enter
the government in the altered circumstances so as to further the
democratic cause.

The political picture presented by Russia in May 1917 was very different
from that which it had presented in 1905. The Mensheviks now formed part
of a democratic coalition government and the Bolsheviks were in
opposition. Their decision to enter the government proved a fateful one
for the Mensheviks and ultimately led to the doom that overtook them.
For it was from the outset clear that the balance of political power
within the coalition government would give the final voice in affairs to
the Social Revolutionaries. The Mensheviks became the prisoners of
_Narodniki_ tactics. If they could conquer with them, they could also
perish with them. The Bolsheviks followed an all-Russian policy whereas
the Mensheviks pursued only a working-class policy that could be
productive of little result in the special conditions prevalent in
Russia. The Bolsheviks would have been able to maintain themselves in a
democratic coalition government as against its other members. The
Mensheviks were drawn down into the abyss by the Social Revolutionaries.
If the Mensheviks had not entered the government in May, they would not
in October have been powerless as a political party. It is significant
that the most important member of the Menshevik Party, Martov, did not
approve of his party's entering the coalition government. As leader of a
tiny group of Menshevik Internationalists, Martov occupied in 1917 a
sort of intermediary position between the government and the Bolsheviks.
He and his followers, however, never achieved any real influence over
the masses. Since a number of liberals continued to hold office, even
after the reconstitution of the government in May, Russia can be said to
have been ruled until October 1917 by a coalition government composed of
liberals, Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. This is not the place
in which to follow all the domestic changes that occurred within the
government itself from May to October. Power remained in the hands of
the Social Revolutionary members of the cabinet with Kerensky as their
leader.

The political bankruptcy of the _Narodniki_ movement became manifest in
the course of these six months. The criticism levelled by Russian
socialists at the _Narodniki_ in the past was now shown to have been
fully justified. Although individuals of heroic proportions were to be
found among the _Narodniki_, the nebulous romanticism of the movement as
a whole collapsed when confronted with stark reality. The _Narodniki_ in
truth became the prisoners of the imperialistic war. It is undeniable
that their attitude towards the problem of peace or war was at least
arguable: to work for a general pacification while refusing to conclude
a separate peace. It might indeed have been possible to induce the
Russian soldier to hold the front against the attack of the German
armies on the ground that by so doing he was defending the Russian
Revolution against William II. The Kerensky government, however, allowed
itself to be persuaded by the Entente and former Tsarist generals into
believing that the Russian Revolution must show its strength by taking
the offensive. Nevertheless, the decision on the part of the government
in July to order the armies to take the offensive again against the
Germans and Austrians was a capital psychological error in view of the
opinions and _morale_ then prevailing among the armies. Indeed, it was a
mistake that in its immensity and its results is only to be compared
with that made by the German admirals in October 1918, in ordering the
German fleet to put to sea for the purpose of attacking the British
fleet. The Kerensky government squandered its moral authority in
preparing and carrying out the July offensive, which after a few initial
successes ended in complete failure. Its collapse left Russia in ruins.

Kerensky's domestic policy was as great a failure as was his peace
policy. The Social Revolutionaries could not bring themselves to deal
promptly with the agrarian problem. Month succeeded to month while the
peasant waited vainly to see the landowner deprived of his estate. The
working man also waited in vain for measures to be taken against famine
and the economic crisis in general. Since, moreover, they had no
solution for the pressing problems of the day, the Social
Revolutionaries committed a second capital mistake in postponing the
assemblage of the all-Russian national assembly. Their fear, indeed, was
not that they would suffer defeat at the polls but that their victory
would be too great; for a parliamentary election in Russia at that time
would have resulted in a decisive majority for the Social
Revolutionaries. Supported by a large majority of the nation, the Social
Revolutionaries would have been forced to govern Russia by themselves --
a possibility from which they recoiled in alarm. Hence, instead of
holding an election for a national assembly, the government established
all possible forms of conferences, committees, commissions, etc, in
which all sorts of representatives of middle-class organisations sat
side by side with representatives of the soviets. These artificial
creations were utterly lacking in authority. They were, nevertheless,
intended to strengthen the hands of the coalition government. Moreover,
despite the fact that their weakness was patent, the Social
Revolutionaries held firmly to their alliance with the liberals for the
purpose of excusing the inefficiency of the government by the necessity
for preserving the coalition. Of far greater importance than all these
government conferences and commissions was the All-Russian Congress of
Soviets, composed of delegates from every workers', soldiers' and
peasants' soviet within the frontiers of Russia. This congress elected a
permanent executive committee in which the Social Revolutionaries held
the absolute majority throughout the spring and summer of 1917.

The renewal of the offensive succeeded in strengthening the authority of
the Tsarist officers in the armies at the front. In the name of military
discipline revolutionary soldiers were punished and even shot. The
officers soon felt themselves sufficiently masters of the situation to
enable General Kornilov to attempt a counter-revolutionary _coup
d'état_. His attempt was defeated by the determined opposition of the
soldiers' councils. Disaffection became rife throughout the armies. The
soldiers believed that Kornilov's rebellion had only been possible
because of Kerensky's policy, and their trust in the government was
destroyed. The discontent of the peasantry resulted in outbreaks of
disorder of ever-increasing violence in the country districts. The
peasantry began to identify the Kerensky government with the landowners
and to lose their faith in the Social Revolutionaries.

Thus the Kerensky government dug its own grave. Was it inevitable that
events should follow the course they did in Russia during the spring and
summer months of 1917? After the overthrow of Tsarism, landowners and
the upper middle class, a democratic peasant republic was inevitable in
Russia -- not a socialist labour government. The further progress of the
revolution was wholly compatible with a parliamentary constitution and
the retention of the right of private ownership. If the Social
Revolutionaries had held elections promptly for a national assembly,
they would thereby have brought into being a powerful and real
instrument of government. It must never be forgotten that the Bolshevik
October Revolution was not directed against a legal parliamentary
democratic government, but against dictators who had appointed
themselves and who had hitherto prevented the assembly of any form of
parliament. The motto of the Bolshevik revolution was not 'Dictatorship
of the Proletariat! Down with Democracy!' but was its exact contrary:
'Long live Democracy! Down with Dictators!' When Kerensky finally
decided to hold elections for a national assembly, it was too late. If
the Social Revolutionaries had had a national assembly behind them in
the summer of 1917, and had secured from an all-Russian parliament its
assent to the expropriation of landed property, they would in all
probability have maintained themselves in power. In those circumstances
it might even have been possible to maintain the front unbroken during
the winter of 1917-18.

The failure of the Social Revolutionaries left the way open for the
Bolsheviks to complete the Russian Revolution. Ever since the summer of
1917 it had been clear that the revolution could only be led by either
the _Narodniki_ or the Bolsheviks. For neither the liberals nor the
Mensheviks nor any other group exercised sufficient influence over the
masses to qualify them for leadership. The Bolsheviks rescued the
revolution after the collapse of the Social Revolutionaries had
endangered its existence. If Lenin had failed in the autumn of 1917,
Russia would have become a scene of terrible anarchical chaos and not
the theatre of a peaceful democratic development. For the vast Russian
nation was now in movement. The peasants no longer tolerated the
estate-owners; the soldiers refused obedience to their officers; the
workmen wished to abolish capitalists. No power on earth could have
restrained them in their blind fury once the traditional authority of
the Social Revolutionaries had been destroyed. This frenzied chaos would
have ended in the break-up of Russia, in pogroms and in a 'White'
Terror. The Bolsheviks rescued the Russian nation from this danger and
in doing so saved the revolution in Russia, notwithstanding their many
experiments and failures. The Russian Revolution was not the work of the
Bolsheviks. Their service lies in the recognition by Lenin and Trotsky
that at midnight a great anarchical revolt would occur. Five minutes
before midnight Lenin and Trotsky gave the order for a Bolshevik
rebellion and in doing so created the impression that the tremendous
occurrence at midnight was their work. It was in this manner that they
won for themselves the authority necessary to enable them to govern
Russia.

Through their determined opposition to Kerensky's July offensive the
Bolshevik Party attracted to themselves the attention of the masses. In
Petrograd they demonstrated against the government. Kerensky proved
himself the stronger by bringing reliable bodies of troops into the
capital and denouncing the Bolsheviks as German agents and enemies of
the Russian Revolution. The government subjected the party to a ruthless
persecution, arrested its officials and suppressed its newspapers.
Trotsky was imprisoned and Lenin was forced to lead the life of a
conspirator. This persecution produced its martyr. Lenin soon appeared
before the masses as the sole oppositional force in Russia simply
because all other political parties and groups joined the government in
its anti-Bolshevik policy. The more patent the failure of Kerensky, the
Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, the stronger the conviction
in the masses that Lenin was in the right. When Kornilov attempted his
counter-revolutionary _putsch_, Lenin at once called on his supporters
to assist the government against the 'White' general without regard for
past differences. The sailors at Kronstadt -- the Bolshevik storm-troops
-- came to Petrograd to support Kerensky in his fight with Kornilov. The
Bolsheviks thus revealed themselves as unconditional defenders of the
revolution and regained an appearance of legality. Trotsky was
liberated. Lenin, however, was again forced to seek safety in Finland.

The change in public opinion became manifest in September. In Petrograd,
Moscow and many provincial towns, the Bolsheviks gained a majority in
the soviets and the troops went over to them in ever-increasing numbers.
The regiments in Petrograd which had enabled Kerensky to occupy the city
in July had long since transferred their allegiance to the Bolsheviks.
The discontent among the peasants increased from week to week.
Nevertheless, an outward appearance of order was still maintained. But
Lenin recognised that his hour had struck.

In August and September 1917 Lenin once more defined his theory of
communism and Soviet government in a famous pamphlet entitled _The State
and Revolution_. At the same time his mind was preoccupied with the
problems arising out of the appalling economic crisis in Russia, where
all the evils -- famine, failure of transport, diminution in production
-- inherited by the republic from Tsarism had only grown worse with the
passage of time. In September he published a second pamphlet, _The
Imminent Catastrophe -- And How Is It To Be Met?_, which contained the
economic programme of Bolshevism on the eve of its advent to power. In
this pamphlet Lenin regarded the economic situation in Russia from a too
optimistic and agitatist standpoint and ascribed the evils from which
Russia was suffering in great part to sabotage on the part of employers.
While it is undeniable that the radicalisation of the revolution had led
to certain acts of sabotage, Lenin nevertheless exaggerated the evil
intentions of the capitalists and underestimated the real factors that
brought about the economic crisis. It is because he did so that he was
able to advance the opinion that resolute control of production on the
part of the masses would render capitalistic profiteering impossible and
help to restore Russia to normal economic conditions. Lenin went on to
advocate five 'revolutionary-democratic' measures for overcoming the
crisis:

1. The union of all banks in a single organisation and state control of
   their operations, or nationalisation of the banks.
2. Nationalisation of cartels and syndicates, that is, the great
   monopolistic capitalist associations (sugar, naphtha, coal, metal,
   etc).
3. The abolition of trade secrecy.
4. A compulsory syndicalisation, that is, compulsory union in
   associations, of industrialists, traders and proprietors in general.
5. The compulsory enrolment of the populace in consumers' societies, or
   the promotion of such societies and their control by the state.

On the subject of the nationalisation of the banks Lenin wrote:

>The blame for the confusion of nationalisation of banks with
>confiscation of private property lies with the middle-class press whose
>interest it is to deceive the reader. The capital with which the banks
>operate, and which is concentrated in the banks, is assured by means of
>printed and written certificates known as shares, bonds, debentures,
>bills, receipts, etc, etc; and not a single one of these certificates
>is altered in any way or lost in the event of the nationalisation of
>the banks, that is, if all banks are incorporated in a single state
>bank. If anyone has fifteen roubles to his credit in a bank, he remains
>the owner of these fifteen roubles after the nationalisation of the
>banks. If anyone has fifteen million roubles, he will continue to
>possess them after the nationalisation of the banks either in the form
>of shares, debentures, bills or some similar paper.

Then Lenin goes on to say:

>The gain resulting from a nationalisation of the banks would be very
>great for the entire nation and not specially for the working man, who
>has little business with banks. The gain would be great for the
>peasantry and small traders. It would mean a great saving in labour
>and, even if the state retained the services of the present number of
>bank employees, it would mark a great step forward in the universal use
>of banks, in the increase in the number of their branches, and in the
>accessibility of their services, etc. The possibility of obtaining
>credit on easy terms would be enormously increased for the peasants and
>small businessmen.

Thus Lenin was still far removed from the abolition of private property.
The platform of the Bolshevik Party on the eve of the October Revolution
contained a proposal for 'making the acquisition of credit easier for
the small businessman'! Such a proposal might have been found in the
programme of any middle-class party.

Lenin took the naphtha industry as an illustration in support of his
argument for nationalisation of trusts. He said _inter alia_:

>Let us take a glance at the naphtha industry. To an enormous extent it
>has already been 'organised in associations' as a result of the earlier
>evolution of capitalism. A few naphtha 'kings' dispose of millions and
>hundreds of millions, earn fabulous profits from speculation with a
>business that on its technical side is already organised like a great
>city employing hundreds and thousands of workpeople, engineers, etc...
>In order to achieve positive results it is necessary to substitute
>democracy for bureaucracy. This must be done in a truly revolutionary
>manner by declaring war upon the naphtha 'kings' and their
>shareholders, and threatening them with the confiscation of their
>wealth and imprisonment in the event of their placing hindrances in the
>way of a nationalisation of the industry, concealing profits and
>tampering with balance-sheets, interfering with production and failing
>to take measures to increase production. An appeal must be made to the
>initiative of the workers and employees; they must be at once assembled
>in conferences and congresses; and they must be made profit-sharers in
>the industry on condition that they exercise a careful control over the
>industry and take measures for increasing its productiveness.

Hence even the naphtha 'kings' were not in principle to have their
wealth confiscated, but only in cases where they attempted to interfere
with production and the workers' control over the industry.

In support of his argument for the compulsory syndicalisation of
industry Lenin pointed to German industry during the World War. He
continued:

>It must once more be emphasised that syndicalisation does not in the
>least affect conditions of ownership and does not deprive the
>proprietor of a single penny of his money. It is necessary to lay great
>stress upon this fact in consequence of the conduct of the middle-class
>press, which frightens the smaller traders with the threat that
>socialists, and in particular Bolsheviks, desire to 'expropriate' them.
>From a scientific standpoint this is a false argument inasmuch as the
>socialists do not wish to, could not, and will not expropriate the
>small peasantry even in the event of a purely socialist revolution.
>Moreover, we are only discussing the immediate and inevitable measures
>that have already been taken in Western Europe, and that must also be
>taken at once in Russia by even a partially logical democracy, in order
>to combat the menacing and inescapable catastrophe.

All the measures proposed by Lenin in the above-mentioned pamphlet are
radical and democratic and in the nature of state capitalism. They are
not in any way communist. In the dreadful condition of want in which
Russia found itself, the masses of the workpeople and employees were to
take an active part in the control of production. It was for them to
know what went on in their factories and banks and to see that the
common interest was not lost sight of or interfered with. The state was
to unite the individual industries and banks and compel them to work in
accordance with a rational system. A centralised state capitalism of
this kind already marked a step on the road to socialism.

In this connexion Lenin gave a very moderate interpretation of
socialism: 'Socialism is nothing else than the next step forward from
the stage of monopolistic state capitalism. Or -- alternatively:
socialism is nothing else than a capitalistic state monopoly worked in
the interests of the whole nation and therefore no longer a capitalist
monopoly.' In those days Lenin did not propose the abolition of private
ownership in Russia, the expropriation of the middle class, but only a
concentration of economic life for the benefit of the nation in
accordance with the principles of state capitalism. With such an
economic programme Lenin could at that time have found his associates
among left-wing middle-class politicians in Central and Western Europe
and also in Russia -- if his programme had not been bound up with the
ideal of an unrestricted political democratisation and with the
unconditional rule of the armed masses. It was not because of his
proposed control of production and his state capitalism that Lenin was
antagonistic to all other political groups in Russia. It was because of
his battle-cry: 'All Power for the Soviet! The Land for the Peasants! An
End to the Imperialist War!'

Lenin embarked on the October Revolution with the firm resolve not only
to complete the middle-class revolution but to do so in a radical and
logical manner. The masses, however, proved themselves the stronger.
They abandoned the Bolshevik economic theory and acted under the impulse
of the events of the day. In doing so they justified Kamenev's fears and
fulfilled Trotsky's hopes.

## Chapter 06: The Bolshevik Revolution and Wartime Communism, 1917-1921

Ever since September 1917 Lenin had been convinced that the Bolshevik
Party must achieve power by a revolution. In October, from his
hiding-place in Finland, he bombarded the Central Committee of the party
with letters and articles demanding a revolution, examining every
possibility with the greatest care, and suggesting a solution for every
difficulty. These letters are unique in their mixture of burning emotion
and cold-blooded reflection. His chief concern was lest the Kerensky
government should disappear in an anarchical chaos. For that would mean
that the Bolsheviks had missed their opportunity and could never regain
it.

Among the party leaders the followers of Zinoviev and Kamenev were
opposed to a revolution which promised to result in the isolation of the
Bolsheviks, and which therefore seemed to be no more than an experiment
that must end in disaster. Nevertheless, Lenin was successful, with
Trotsky's support, in winning over the party for his plan. On 10 (23)
October Lenin attended the secret sitting of the Central Committee at
which it was resolved that the sole means of saving Russia and the
revolution lay in a Bolshevik revolution for the purpose of placing the
entire executive authority in the hands of the soviets. Only two votes
were cast against a resolution that bound the party to a definite course
of action.

On 25 October (old style; 7 November, new style) the All-Russian
Congress of Soviets was to meet in Petrograd, and it was anticipated
that the Bolsheviks would have a majority in the congress in consequence
of the change that had come over public opinion during the summer. If
the congress resolved that the whole authority in the state should pass
to the soviets, then it must be prepared to take power into its own
hands, that is, to overthrow the Kerensky government. Hence 25 October
(7 November) would be a decisive day in Russian history. It was clear
that it must be the day on which the Bolsheviks raised the standard of
revolt.

Both parties made preparations to secure military control of Petrograd
on this eventful day. Since the regiments in Petrograd were largely
composed of Bolshevik sympathisers, the government ordered a great
number of the troops to entrain for the front. If this order had been
carried out, the government would have been able to dissolve the Soviet
Congress on 25 October (7 November) with the aid of a few companies of
storm-troops composed of officers. At the instigation of the Bolshevik
Party, however, the Petrograd garrison refused to obey the government's
order. The Petrograd Soviet was entirely under the domination of the
Bolshevik Party and proceeded to constitute itself a revolutionary
military committee. The entire garrison declared that it would only obey
the orders of this committee and not those of the General Staff. Trotsky
was the dominating and energising personality among the members of the
committee. This decision on the part of the garrison gave the victory to
the Bolshevik revolution in Petrograd before a shot had been fired. On
24 October (6 November) the committee seized the central telephone
exchange in Petrograd, and during the night other public buildings were
occupied by their orders. On 25 October (7 November) the seat of the
government in the Winter Palace was seized and the members of the
government arrested, with the exception of Kerensky, who saved himself
by flight. On the same day the Soviet Congress held its appointed
meeting. On receiving the news of the capture of the Winter Palace the
minority who supported the Kerensky government rose and left the hall.
The majority thereupon proclaimed the assumption of governmental power
by the congress in accordance with the Bolshevik plan.

Kerensky made an attempt to collect troops in the neighbourhood of
Petrograd and to capture the city by force. He was completely defeated
by the Bolshevik troops and left Russia. Within a few weeks the
Bolsheviks were masters of Russia and wherever opposition raised its
head it was suppressed with ease. Troops, townspeople and the peasants
throughout Russia went over to the Bolshevik cause. It is a fact of
considerable importance that the Bolshevik revolution was able to base
itself upon the sole democratic and national representative body, that
is, the Soviet Congress, then existing in Russia. This congress was
really elected by the masses. In comparison with it the artificial
bodies created by Kerensky lacked popular support. At the close of his
tenure of power Kerensky had finally given orders for the holding of
elections for a national assembly. Since the date of these elections
coincided with that of the Bolshevik revolution, the national assembly
had not come into existence at the critical moment.

The Kamenev-Zinoviev group had opposed the Bolshevik insurrection to the
last and they continued to be pessimistic even after its victory. On 4
(17) November, Zinoviev and Kamenev resigned their membership of the
Central Committee of the party in order to be free to express their own
opinions. They demanded that the Bolsheviks should immediately offer to
come to an arrangement with the Social Revolutionaries and the
Mensheviks in order to construct a government composed of all parties
represented in the soviets. Their proposal was supported by a number of
the older members of the Bolshevik Party. Lozovsky took their part in an
open letter. It is certainly extraordinary that the two men -- Lozovsky
and Zinoviev -- who were subsequently to become respectively Chairmen of
the Communist International and the Red Trade Union International (whose
entire propaganda was founded upon the October Revolution) should have
looked upon this very revolution as a mad adventure at the time of its
occurrence.

The situation on 4 (17) November was still obscure. It was still
uncertain how the troops at the front and the country at large would
react to events in Petrograd. A general strike of officials put a stop
to the activity of the new Bolshevik rulers. Every political party and
group in Russia had declared itself opposed to the Bolshevik
insurrection and their ranks were now joined by an influential group
composed of former members of the Central Committee of the Bolshevik
Party itself. The situation did in fact seem hopeless. Trotsky and Lenin
nevertheless refused to retreat a single step. On 7 (20) November the
_Pravda_ published a remarkable proclamation from the pen of Lenin that
ran:

>Shame upon all ye of little faith, doubters, fearful ones! Shame upon
>all ye who let yourselves be terrified by the middle class and upon all
>ye who hearken to the warnings brought to you directly and indirectly
>by their accomplices! No shadow however slight of a weakening in
>_morale_ is discernible in the masses of the workers and soldiers in
>Petrograd, Moscow and elsewhere. Our party stands firm like a sentry at
>his post and defends the authority of the soviets and the interests of
>all toilers and especially of the working men and the poorest peasants.

The situation cleared up rapidly. The extent of the Bolshevik victory
throughout the country became evident, the strike of officials
collapsed, and the Zinoviev-Kamenev group returned to the party fold.
The conduct of Zinoviev and Kamenev in these critical weeks reveals
clearly how firmly rooted the ideal of a democratic dictatorship of
workers and peasants was in the Bolshevik Party. These old Bolsheviks
could not conceive of a Russian revolution as other than a middle-class
democratic revolution carried out by a coalition of all democratic and
socialist parties. It was in the name of this ideal that they rebelled
against Lenin in the very days that are among the greatest in Bolshevik
history.

His superb common sense induced Lenin to entrust Zinoviev and Kamenev
with the most important tasks after their rebellion without ever
reproaching them for their vacillations. In a similar manner Lenin
looked upon his years of conflict with Trotsky as ended at the moment
when Trotsky declared himself ready to support Lenin's policy.

The mass sympathies that lay behind the Bolshevik movement in those days
served to prevent its political isolation. The chief enemies of the
Bolsheviks -- the Social Revolutionaries -- split up into two groups and
the new party of the Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries rendered Soviet
Russia great services in the first six months of its existence. It has
already been shown that the masses of the peasants were bitterly
disappointed with the Kerensky government. They had expected from this
Social Revolutionary government that it would dispossess the
estate-owners, and it had instead protected them with the authority of
the state. The local Social Revolutionary peasant leaders rebelled
against the Central Committee of the party and it was not long before
the opposition was joined by leading party officials. At the time of the
Bolshevik insurrection the Social Revolutionaries split up into a right
wing that remained faithful to Kerensky and into a left wing that
demanded the expropriation of the estates and the transference of
authority in the state to the soviets. On 25 October (8 November), when
the All-Russian Soviet Congress was confronted with the necessity of
declaring itself for or against the Bolshevik insurrection, the
Right-Wing Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks left the hall
whilst the Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries remained behind with the
Bolsheviks and assisted them in building up the new Soviet authority.
Certain leaders of the Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries subsequently
entered the Council of People's Commissars -- the new revolutionary
government. It was not until after their breach with the Bolsheviks over
the peace of Brest-Litovsk that the Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries
dissolved their coalition with the Bolsheviks and went into
irreconcilable opposition.

It was thus possible for Lenin at least in the early months of the
Soviet revolution to realise his former programme and to conclude an
alliance with a revolutionary and democratic, but not chauvinist,
peasant party. While the masses of the troops and the workers went over
to Bolshevism in the months of July-October 1917, the majority of the
peasants remained Social Revolutionaries. Nevertheless, they changed
from Social Revolutionaries friendly to the government into Social
Revolutionaries in fanatical opposition to it. It is true that when the
various parties put forward their lists of candidates for the election
for the National Assembly, shortly before the October Revolution, the
Social Revolutionaries were still undivided and both Right-Wing and
Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries -- Kerensky's supporters and Lenin's
supporters -- appeared together on the same list. The elections for the
Constituent Assembly thus led to a singular result. Although he had lost
all popularity with the masses of the people, Kerensky obtained a
majority of votes. Out of a total of 36 million votes cast in the
election the Bolsheviks received nine million, the Mensheviks 700,000
without counting the Caucasus and 1,400,000 including the Caucasus,
where they enjoyed much popularity among the Georgians, various
middle-class parties five million, and the Social Revolutionaries 21
million. The vast numbers of peasants who voted for the Social
Revolutionary candidates did so because they believed they were voting
for expropriation of the estates and not out of sympathy for Kerensky.
Since, however, Kerensky's followers almost invariably headed the list
of candidates, they obtained their mandates. When the National Assembly
met in January 1918, Lenin was determined to oppose it because he did
not wish the gains acquired by a successful revolution to be spoilt by a
parliamentary majority that did not even truly represent the majority of
the nation.

The Soviet government demanded that the National Assembly should
recognise the October Revolution and support the new government and its
policy. On the rejection of this demand by the majority in the National
Assembly, the Bolsheviks and Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries left the
hall. The permanent committee of the All-Russian Soviet Congress -- the
Central Executive Committee -- thereupon ordered the dissolution of the
National Assembly and this rump parliament was forcibly dispersed. If
Lenin had ordered the holding of new elections, there can be no doubt
that the Soviet government would have obtained an overwhelming majority
at the polls. He did not do so and in the new Russian constitution there
was no mention of a parliament. Lenin and the Bolsheviks regarded the
soviets as a better expression of democratic government, and to have
established a parliament in addition to the All-Russian Soviet Congress
would have been superfluous.

The Bolsheviks had promised the Russian nation bread and peace, liberty
and land, before their advent to power. They lost no time in seeking to
fulfil their promises. The Bolshevik government dismissed all the former
officials and officers and placed the executive power wholly in the
hands of the soviets. Liberty was thus to become an accomplished fact.
The new government placed the factories under the control of the workmen
in order to revive production and to supply the towns with food and
other necessities of life. They offered to make peace with their
external enemies and they authorised the peasants to dispossess the
landowners of their estates. How was this programme of the Soviet
government carried out in practice? In the first place Lenin's plan for
a supervision of production proved unworkable. Armed workmen intoxicated
by their revolutionary victory were not to be kept within the bounds of
such a moderate scheme of reform. Instead they took possession
themselves of the factories and drove out their employers. Thus
Trotsky's prophecy of spontaneous action on the part of the workers was
fulfilled to the letter. This spontaneous action on the part of the
workers in the towns and industrial areas at once out-distanced the
middle-class revolution.

Lenin gradually reconciled himself to the new situation. The
'Declaration of the Rights of Industrial and Exploited Peoples' adopted
by the All-Russian Soviet Congress in January 1918, still contains a
formula embodying a compromise:

>The Soviet law regulating the exercise of control by the workers and
>the activities of the Supreme National Economic Council is hereby
>approved as the first step towards the complete acquisition by the
>Soviet Republic of Workers and Peasants of all factories, works, mines,
>railways and other means of production and transport, and towards the
>establishment of the rule of the industrial workers over their
>exploiters.

Thus the 'first step' towards the expropriation of industry was taken on
paper at a time when in reality expropriation was already an
accomplished fact. And it was not until 28 June (11 July) 1918 that the
'Decree for the Nationalisation of All Heavy Industries' was published.
It is interesting for the purposes of comparison to note that the decree
abolishing the right to private ownership on the part of estate-owners
had already been published on the very first day of the revolution, 26
October (8 November) 1917.

In an official Soviet publication entitled _Economic Life and Economic
Development in Soviet Russia from 1917 to 1920_, from the pens of Larin
and Kritzmann, it is stated that:

>Hardly anyone can now be found to argue that the revolution was
>organised artificially. It was an irresistible and elemental movement.
>The moment the political power of the middle class was swept away at
>the close of 1917, the class feeling of the proletariat was no longer
>to be restrained by forcible measures and found expression in a
>forcible expulsion of employers and in confiscation of the factories. A
>necessary consequence of this action was the breakdown of the former
>economic organisation and very often the closing down of the factories.
>The workers who had been appointed by their comrades to manage the
>factories, and especially those who had been spontaneously placed in
>authority by their co-workers in the same factory, proved themselves in
>many cases to be incapable of carrying out their duties for the simple
>reason that capacity only comes with experience. The work accomplished
>in the economic sphere by the Soviet authorities consists for the most
>part in introducing discipline and organisation into the spontaneous
>movement of the proletarian and peasant masses.

In another place the authors write:

>The proletarian solution [of the industrial problem] consisted in the
>exercise of a control on the part of the workpeople over the employers
>in such fashion that the employers could not act before receiving the
>approval of the workers' council for their proposals. The events of
>November were an attempt to put this solution into practice. The Soviet
>decree ordered employers to place their factories under the control of
>the employees. Meanwhile the system of control by the workers revealed
>itself to be a half-measure and therefore incapable of execution. The
>system of control by the workers expressed the growing and at the same
>time still insufficient authority of the proletariat, that is, the
>weakness that had not yet been eradicated from the movement. The
>employer was not willing to conduct his business merely in order that
>he should teach it to his workpeople (this was the secret aim
>underlying control by the workers after the events of November). The
>workers for their part were filled with a hatred of capitalism and were
>unwilling to remain voluntarily as objects for exploitation. It was for
>these reasons, and notwithstanding insufficient preparations, that it
>was found necessary to allow the proletariat to take over the conduct
>of industry even in cases where there nominally existed a system of
>control by the workers.

It is clear from this account that the Bolsheviks did not expropriate
Russian employers but that it was accomplished as the result of
spontaneous action on the part of the workers and against the will of
the Bolsheviks. Lenin was thus left with no other alternative than
reluctantly to legalise the action of the workers. The Soviet government
then set to work to unite the individual expropriated businesses, to
establish economic organs of control and management for the various
industries, and to attempt in this way to organise production on a
systematic basis.

The government found itself confronted with enormous difficulties in its
work of reconstruction. The economic condition of Russia had been
serious in 1917, and by 1918-19 had reached a catastrophic state. The
conclusion of a separate peace deprived Russia of the economic support
of the Entente powers and resulted instead in the blockade of her coasts
by the Entente fleets and her isolation from the outside world. The
Germans occupied the Ukraine in 1918 and Soviet Russia was in
consequence cut off from her supplies of coal from the Don Basin and of
naphtha from the Caucasus. Lack of raw materials and outworn machinery
compelled the majority of Russian industries to close down. Everywhere
factories stood idle and factory-hands returned to their native
villages. The appalling want of transport and the disorder prevalent
throughout the country resulted in a shortage of food-supplies for the
towns. The town population of Russia starved from 1918 to 1920. Wealth
in the form of valueless paper roubles did not furnish its possessor
with the means to improve his condition. All distinctions of class and
wealth vanished in the towns. The equality of man was achieved through
communism in starvation. The hopes of an economic restoration of Russia
which had found expression in Lenin's pamphlets in the autumn of 1917
had not been realised. But the blame for their failure did not lie with
Lenin and his party: it was a consequence of the World War and the
destructive civil war which succeeded it in Russia.

Four social classes -- estate-owners, wealthy peasants or kulaks, small
peasants, and agricultural labourers -- inhabited the country districts
in Russia at the time of the Bolshevik revolution. Since the abolition
of serfdom, and more especially since the 1905 Revolution, the
estate-owners had disposed of a part of their property to the wealthier
peasants. As a result there had come into existence a class of
well-to-do peasants between the poorer peasants and the nobles. These
wealthier peasants also acted as village money-lenders. Agricultural
labourers were employed both by the wealthier peasants and by those of
the estate-owners who still worked their estates. It is, however, true
that the great majority of the estates were not directly cultivated by
their owners and were rented in smallholdings to poor peasants whose
condition -- oppressed as they were by all manner of taxes and dues --
was miserable in the extreme. It was these small peasants and the
agricultural labourers who were the supporters of a social revolution
among the country populace. The estate-owners and the wealthier peasants
were opposed to revolution. As a result of the revolution the estates
were expropriated without exception and the wealthier peasants were also
forced to surrender a large part of their land to the poorer peasants.
The agricultural labourers as a whole became landed proprietors. Thus
two out of the four pre-revolutionary classes in the country population
disappeared and the two surviving classes -- the rich and poor peasants
-- tended to merge into one another. When about 1919 the results of the
agrarian revolution in Russia began to be perceptible, it was seen that
the country was now populated by small peasants each owning
approximately the same amount of land. These peasants knew that they had
cause to be grateful to the Bolshevik revolution and were prepared to
sacrifice their lives in preventing a return to the old conditions. It
was the willing assistance of the masses of the peasantry that rendered
possible the creation of the Red Army and the victory of the Soviet over
the White army. Nevertheless, the peasants remained faithful to their
egotistic standpoint in economic questions. Under the Tsars and
throughout the war they had often enough suffered the pangs of hunger.
Now they wanted to eat their fill and were only prepared to supply food
to the towns in return for adequate compensation. Payment in valueless
paper roubles failed to tempt the peasants either to produce or to sell
their produce.

The Soviet government sent all the wares that could be manufactured by
the hastily reorganised Russian factories to the country in exchange for
the peasants' produce. The supply of bread nevertheless continued
inadequate for the needs of the town population. The government was
therefore obliged to resort to requisitioning in order to feed the Red
Army and to obtain at least sufficient food for the factory workers. The
peasant lost his pleasure in his new possessions through not being able
to make an economic use of them. The lack of money with a fixed value
and the absence of free trade prevented him from selling his surplus
produce. If, however, he was discovered to be in possession of a
surplus, it was forcibly taken from him. Although town and country,
peasant and factory-worker, made common cause from 1918 to 1920 against
the aristocratic counter-revolution, they were completely separated from
each other in a psychological and economic sense; and the Soviet
government was not in a position to bridge the gap.

Immediately after its seizure of power the Bolshevik government
addressed proposals for peace to all the belligerents. The Entente
powers ignored proposals emanating from a 'traitor', while Germany and
Austria-Hungary were glad to conclude an armistice with Bolshevik Russia
and to open in Brest-Litovsk negotiations for peace. The military
helplessness of Russia was clearly shown in the course of these
negotiations. Her utterly demoralised army fell to pieces. The peasants
hurried home to their villages in order to be present at the
distribution of the expropriated lands. The German Supreme Command --
the real governing authority in Germany -- ruthlessly took advantage of
Russia's weakness. A peace was forced upon a defeated Russia that
permanently deprived her of the means of existence. The importance of
this treaty did not lie in the severance from Russia of Poland, Finland
and her Baltic provinces; it lay in her cession of the entire south of
Russia -- the Ukraine. The loss of the Ukraine meant the loss of
Russia's grain treasury, her most important coal-mines and naphtha
springs, and her withdrawal from the Black Sea. The so-called
independent Ukraine and all the country up to the Caucasus was occupied
by German troops and all that remained to Soviet Russia of territory was
shut in on the south and west by German armies. It seemed to be only a
matter of time before General Ludendorff gave order for the occupation
of Moscow.

A terrible national disaster had thus overwhelmed Russia in the spring
of 1918. It is -- humanly speaking -- not difficult to understand that
many influential Bolsheviks and Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries
preferred to die fighting rather than to put their signatures to such a
peace. Nevertheless, Lenin fought with all his authority and strength
for the ratification of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk. He was actuated in
doing so by the belief that an unarmed man cannot wage war and that
theatrical gestures cannot avail to alter facts. Soviet Russia must
accept even terms so drastic as were those of the Treaty of
Brest-Litovsk in order to gain time. The time so gained must be used to
strengthen Russia in an economic and military sense and to enable her to
wait for the coming revolution in Germany. Ever since he had pronounced
himself in favour of an immediate cessation of the imperialistic war
Lenin had been forced to take into his calculations the risk of a peace
such as the Peace of Brest-Litovsk. The complete collapse of Russia's
defensive resources might confront the new revolutionary government with
a situation in which they were powerless. It was to avoid a peace like
that of Brest-Litovsk that Kerensky and his followers had prosecuted the
war and even risked the notorious July offensive. Anyone refusing to
adopt these methods of defence must be prepared to accept the
consequences. Thus Lenin's attitude was completely logical and he
succeeded after a heated discussion in persuading the Bolshevik Party
that no other policy was possible.

The military defeat of Germany in the summer and autumn of 1918, and the
subsequent revolution in November, freed Russia from the German menace.
At the same time it increased the danger threatening Soviet Russia from
the side of the Entente powers, who had come to regard the Bolshevik
state as their enemy since its conclusion of a separate peace with
Germany. The Czechoslovakian Legionaries revolted as early as the summer
of 1918. These legionaries were composed of Czech soldiers who had been
captured when fighting in the Austrian armies and who had subsequently
been voluntarily formed into regiments by the Tsarist government. They
continued to look upon themselves as a part of the Entente armies and
the military weakness of the Soviet government enabled them to establish
themselves along the line of the Volga. Here they began to make
preparations for marching on Moscow. By dint of extraordinary efforts
the Soviet government succeeded in raising and equipping a number of
trained troops. Trotsky was appointed People's Commissar for War and
devoted his entire energy to the creation of a Red Army. In September
the Red troops captured Kazan and drove the Czechoslovaks away from the
Volga. This was the first success won by the Red Army in serious
warfare. After the collapse of Germany the Entente powers redoubled
their endeavours to defeat Russia. Former Tsarist generals were financed
and supplied with munitions of war by England, France and Japan. From
the Black Sea and the White Sea, from the Baltic and the Pacific, White
Guards advanced in 1919 with the help of the Entente against Soviet
Russia. The most dangerous foes of the Soviet were Admiral Kolchak in
the east and General Denikin in the south.

The Civil War was accompanied by the most terrible cruelties. The White
Guards endeavoured to intimidate the workers and peasants by mass
shootings and terror of all kinds. The Bolsheviks opposed the White
Terror with the Red Terror. Wide differences of opinion will always
exist as to the forcible methods employed by the Soviet government --
mass shootings, etc -- in the course of the Civil War. From an
historical standpoint, and viewed as a whole, the Russian nation was
defending itself at that time against a cruel counter-revolution. After
a long struggle that lasted until 1920, and in which fortune favoured
now one side and now the other, the Red Army was finally victorious on
all fronts. The Soviet government found itself once more in possession
of the Asiatic countries which had formed part of the empire of the
Tsars. Its power again extended over the Caucasus, the Ukraine and the
coasts of the Black Sea. Only Finland, Poland and the Baltic States
retained their independence. Moreover, their military successes from
1918 to 1920 gave the Bolshevik government enormous prestige within
Russia itself. The stain of Brest-Litovsk had been wiped out. The
Russian workers and peasants could pride themselves that they had
successfully repulsed the attack of all the imperialistic great powers.
From that time onwards 'Bolshevism' and 'Russian Revolution' were
identical terms in the mouths of the masses. The Bolsheviks had fought
the decisive battle with the Tsarist officers and the landowners to a
triumphant end. Trotsky and Lenin had defeated Kolchak and Denikin. All
the other political parties in Russia -- liberals, Mensheviks, Social
Revolutionaries -- were ground to pieces between the two belligerents.
The Bolsheviks were animated throughout the Civil War by the principle
that whoever was not on their side was against them. Moreover, they
succeeded in instilling in the masses the conviction that all
non-Bolshevik parties were equally counter-revolutionary.

At the close of the Civil War the revolution in Russia had triumphed
over its enemies. At the same time the Russian nation had lost its
newly-won freedom as embodied in the soviets and its place had been
taken by an omnipotent dictatorship of the Bolshevik Party extending
from Petrograd to the Pacific.

The events of 1918 had shown that Soviet Russia depended for its
existence upon an efficient army. Such an army demands for its
successful operation unity of command and strict discipline. No regiment
could fight well if its colonel were forced to consult a dozen soldiers'
councils before giving an order. It was for this reason that Trotsky
abolished the soldiers' councils in building up the Red Army. A number
of former Tsarist officers were given posts of command and placed under
the control of Bolshevik commissars. A young, truly revolutionary body
of officers gradually came into being with the passage of time. The
first Red troops consisted of volunteers. Subsequently, however,
compulsory military service was enforced. The creation of the Red Army
was a vital necessity for Russia in those days. Nevertheless, it marked
the first definite and decisive breach with the soviet system. One of
the chief benefits of the soviet system, according to Lenin, was the
fact that it abolished the army as a separate entity placed in
opposition to the civilian populace. But now there was once more in
Russia a centralised standing army isolated from the populace and
composed in part of professional soldiers. As early as 1918 the local
soviets in places where detachments of the Red Army were garrisoned or
temporarily quartered could not interfere in any way with the
dispositions of the regimental commanders. This meant the reconstruction
of an important part of the edifice of the authoritarian middle-class
state.

It is worthy of mention that this departure from soviet practice was
observed by a great body of Russian opinion and that the creation of the
Red Army encountered opposition in the nation itself. In his book
entitled _The Birth of the Red Army_, which was published in 1922,
Trotsky wrote:

>Left to itself, the peasantry is incapable of creating a centralised
>army. Nothing is achieved but the formation of local bodies of armed
>peasants whose primitive 'democracy' is customarily used as a cover for
>the personal dictatorship of their leader. These partisan tendencies
>reflect peasant nature and found their fullest expression in the
>Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries and anarchists. At the same time they
>animated a considerable number of Communists and especially of peasant
>Communists who had served as soldiers and NCOs... Indignation with the
>bureaucratic centralisation of Tsarist Russia was a principal cause of
>the revolution. District administrations, local governments,
>municipalities, devoted their energies to proving their independence.
>The ideal of 'local government' took on an extraordinarily diverse
>aspect in the early period [of the revolution]. The Left-Wing Social
>Revolutionaries and anarchists associated this ideal with reactionary
>federalist doctrines. In the broad masses of the people it became an
>inevitable and healthy reaction against a regime that had been opposed
>to all initiative. At any rate from a certain moment onwards, and in
>close association with the counter-revolution and the growing danger
>from abroad, primitive autonomist tendencies became more and more
>dangerous both in a political and also -- and more especially -- in a
>military sense. This question will unquestionably play a great part in
>the future in Western Europe, and nowhere more so than in France, where
>prejudices in favour of autonomy and federalism are stronger than in
>any other country. A speedy liberation from these prejudices on the
>part of those serving under the banner of revolutionary proletarian
>centralism is a necessary preliminary to the coming victory over the
>middle class... The oppositional and 'left' (in reality
>intellectual-agrarian) tendencies sought for themselves a universal
>theoretical formula to cover the creation of the army. A centralised
>army was declared to be the army of an imperialistic state. In
>conformity with its character the revolution must not only break with a
>war of position (war on definite fronts) but also with a centralised
>army. The revolution depends solely upon mobility, clever tactics and
>skill in manoeuvring. Its striking force is the small independent body
>of troops composed of soldiers from all arms, acting independently of
>its base, relying upon the sympathies of the populace, attacking the
>enemy from the rear, etc. In brief, the tactics of guerrilla warfare
>are raised to the dignity of revolutionary tactics. The experience of
>the Civil War quickly made away with these prejudices.

Trotsky favoured a centralised Red Army both for reasons of military
efficiency and because he saw in it a means by which the chaotic masses
of the peasantry might be wrought under the leadership of the socialist
proletariat. The enemies of the Red Army were in his eyes 'reactionary
federalists', anarchists and Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries. He forgot
that the Commune in 1871 was the work of anarchical federalists and that
the soviet system of 1917 in its essence was also anarchical, anti-state
and anti-centralist. 'Revolutionary proletarian centralism' may perhaps
be necessary in a time of revolution and civil war. Its forebears,
however, are the French terrorists of 1793 and it has nothing in common
with the soviet system.

The reconstruction of the army was accompanied during the years 1918-20
by a return to state centralisation in all departments of public life.
The struggle with the conspirators of the counter-revolution
necessitated the creation of a political police endowed with
far-reaching powers and a highly centralised organisation. This force
was the much-talked-of Cheka that subsequently became known as the GPU.
Many wild tales have been told about the activities of this force. It is
only necessary here to emphasise the fact that the Cheka has invariably
proved itself a trustworthy servant of the centralised state. The Cheka
is only an executive organ of the government, that is, of the Bolshevik
Party. On no single occasion has the Cheka pursued a different political
policy from that of the government, and at no time has it been in
possession of a political authority different from that of the party
leaders. The responsibility for the actions -- good or evil -- of the
GPU is borne solely by the Bolshevik Party itself and not by some
special secret body.

A centralised economic organisation took its place beside the
centralised army and centralised police. All three were isolated from
the masses of the nation. Every industry, and every branch of an
industry, throughout Russia was combined in a trust for the purpose of
systematising production. In addition to this trust there were
centralised organisations for the control of trade, transport, banking
and the entire economic life of the country. Similarly the civil
services, justice and education were organised on a centralised basis.
All important matters were regulated by government ordinances having the
force of law.

In 1917 the local soviets destroyed the old Tsarist state. Now a new and
far more powerful state had risen in their midst and had deprived them
of all authority beyond that of a parish council. Was not, however, this
mighty centralised government machinery at least subject to a democratic
control exercised by the All-Russian Soviet Congress? Ever since 1918 it
was evident that government by soviets had become an illusion in Russia
-- an illusion that exists to the present day. It is true that in a
formal and constitutional sense the government of Russia is in the hands
of the soviets. The lowest organs of governmental authority are the
local soviets in the villages and towns. The district and provincial
soviets are composed of delegates chosen by the local soviets. The
supreme power in the state is vested in the All-Russian Soviet Congress,
and in the intervals between its sessions that power is delegated to a
committee of the congress -- the Central Executive Committee. The
Central Executive Committee elects the Council of People's Commissars.
The Council of People's Commissars is the Russian soviet equivalent for
a European cabinet.

This extremely complicated system is in reality only a cloak for the
dictatorship of the Bolshevik Party. Free elections are the life-blood
of a soviet system of government. The electorate must be left free to
choose between various candidates and these candidates must be given
every opportunity for placing their views before the electorate at
public meetings and in the press. Electoral freedom gradually
disappeared in Russia during the Civil War. The first step taken by the
Bolsheviks on attaining to power was to suppress the middle-class
parties as counter-revolutionary. Next came the prohibition of the
Kerensky party, the Right-Wing Social Revolutionaries and the
Mensheviks. By the early months of 1918 only two legal political parties
remained in existence in Soviet Russia -- the Bolsheviks and the
Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries. These latter could have secured the
support of the revolutionary peasants and organised them into a
political force. If that had been done, a two-party system would have
been evolved in which the Social Revolutionary Peasant Party would have
been a counterweight to a Bolshevik Party composed of the industrial
population of the towns. The competition between these two parties would
have kept democracy alive within the soviets. Unhappily the tragic fate
that overtook the whole _Narodniki_ movement also overtook the Left-Wing
Social Revolutionaries. They proved incapable of retaining the strong
hold over the peasantry which they had at first possessed and in a short
time they had become little more than the camp-followers of the
Bolsheviks. After the signature of the peace of Brest-Litovsk the
Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries broke up their coalition with the
Bolsheviks. After attempted assassinations and revolts on the part of
individual Left-Wing Social Revolutionaries in the summer of 1918 had
failed to achieve the overthrow of the Bolshevik government, the party
was suppressed and within a short time completely dissolved.

From the summer of 1918 until the present day the Bolshevik Party has
been the sole political party in Russia enjoying a legal existence. This
state of affairs has brought about the death of soviet democracy. In
elections for the soviets the choice of the electors is confined to
Bolsheviks or independents who are pledged to support the Bolshevik
government. Thus all freedom of choice is taken from the elector and he
is the prisoner of the government. Every Bolshevik member of the soviet
is, moreover, pledged to act in strict accordance with the order of his
party leaders. The Bolshevik members of a soviet constitute a 'Bolshevik
cell' and must invariably vote in conformity with the instructions they
receive from the permanent officials of the party. There are in reality
two political edifices in Russia that rise parallel to one another: the
shadow government of the soviets; and the _de facto_ government of the
Bolshevik Party. The local party organisations elect the members of the
party congress. The party congress lays down lines of policy and elects
the party committee. This party committee exercises a dictatorial
control over the entire party organisation. The overthrow of the Central
Committee of the Bolshevik Party would therefore be tantamount to a
revolution. Up to the present the party congress has never been
successful in overthrowing the Central Committee by a vote of want of
confidence.

The Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party is the true Russian
government. It takes all important decisions. The Council of People's
Commissars is simply the executive agent of the Central Committee. It
was thus that the Bolshevik Party was successful within a few months of
the October Revolution in excluding the soviets from the exercise of all
real power. In their capacity as organs of the spontaneous will of the
masses the soviets were from the very beginning an unwelcome and
extraneous element in Bolshevik doctrine. In 1917 Lenin used the soviets
to destroy Tsarism. Once that had been accomplished he created his own
state machinery after the true Bolshevik pattern, that is, the rule of a
small disciplined minority of professional revolutionaries over the
great and undisciplined masses. Although from a technical standpoint it
would have presented no difficulty, the Bolsheviks nevertheless did not
abolish the soviets and instead retained and used them as the decorative
outward symbol of their authority. It was through their symbolic use by
the Bolsheviks in 1918 and the succeeding years that the soviets were
first brought into a position irreconcilable with true democracy. There
can be no more truly democratic institution than a real and efficiently
working soviet. The Bolshevik soviets, on the other hand, have been
since 1918 no more than symbols of the rule of a small minority over the
broad masses of the nation. The same fate overtook the ideal of a
'dictatorship of the proletariat'. The old ideal of a proletarian
dictatorship implied the rule of the great majority of the poor and
working-class population over the small minority of the rich and the
profiteers -- an ideal identical with proletarian democracy. Although
the Bolsheviks have called their rule in Russia since 1918 a
dictatorship of the proletariat, it is in reality a dictatorship of the
Bolshevik Party or -- better said -- of the Central Committee of the
party over the proletariat and the entire nation. Lenin sought to
justify this dictatorship of the Bolshevik Party in Russia since 1918 by
the existence of the Civil War, and also by the special conditions
obtaining in Russia, which rendered it impossible to find any form of
compromise between the vast majority of the peasant population and the
proletarian minority. Trotsky also excused the policy thus pursued by
the Bolsheviks by the necessity for defeating the White Guards and for
holding down the peasants.

The membership of the Bolshevik Party in March 1917 did not exceed a few
thousand. After the October Revolution the membership rose by hundreds
of thousands. The Central Committee consequently took measures to
control and to stem the rush of applications for membership. It was
clear to them that the great advantages accruing from membership of the
dominant party would cause the influx of many possible rivals. Moreover,
Trotsky and Lenin were in full agreement in ascribing a great historical
importance to the party and its work. Their outlooks were nevertheless
not entirely identical. Lenin and the older Bolsheviks identified the
party with the 'Old Guard' who were now its rulers. Trotsky saw the
'party' in the masses of organised workers. This division of opinion was
bridged for so long as Lenin with his unrivalled authority stood between
the party machine and the vast body of its members. After his death the
conflict became acute.

The Bolsheviks stood to the various Russian nationalities in the same
relationship as they stood to the soviets after their seizure of power.
In loyal adherence to his programme Lenin had accorded complete
independence to all the various nationalities in Russia in 1917
and 1918. The Ukrainians, the Caucasian races, the inhabitants of
Turkistan, etc, all received autonomous government. They were permitted
the unrestricted use of their mother tongues and the free development of
their national traditions. Nor was any attempt made to 'Russify' them.
All these countries became independent Soviet republics that joined the
Greater Russia in forming the Union of Soviet Republics. Nevertheless,
the real power in all these Soviet republics was in the hands of the
local Communist organisations. The local Communist Parties in Georgia,
Ukraine, etc, were, and continue to be, subject unconditionally to the
authority of the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party in Moscow.
Although the individual nationalities in Russia retain their cultural
independence, they dare not act in any way contrary to the wishes of the
Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party. In the case of the various
nationalities in Russia democratic self-government is as much an
illusion as it is in Greater Russia itself.

In the years 1918-20 the working class in Russia suffered from famine.
The Civil War imposed terrible burdens and sacrifices upon them. Soviet
democracy had hardly been won by them before it was lost again. A single
gain, however, compensated them for all their suffering and created in
them a feeling of intense pride. To preserve this gain they were willing
to sacrifice themselves to the uttermost. In the memory of mankind there
had always been poor and rich, masters and servants. All these
distinctions had been abolished by the common want arising out of the
Civil War. The middle class no longer existed. In the towns scattered
over the face of Russia all men were equal and must contrive to exist on
the same scanty rations. If, indeed, any man was more favoured than his
fellow, it was the workman himself. All notions of value had been
destroyed. Money had become worthless. Although the peasant could indeed
boast in his village that he was the owner of his land, he could in
reality make nothing out of his property. He could neither buy nor sell
and his produce was requisitioned. It was thus made to appear that
Soviet Russia had not only been socialised in the restricted sense,
given to the term by Lenin, of the nationalisation of industries, banks,
etc, but that the highest type of communism -- the equality of rights
and uses, the disappearance of class distinctions, and the abolition of
money -- had been achieved. That he should have lived through the
greatest revolution in history appeared in the eyes of the Russian
workman like a glorious vision. As soon as the Civil War and the
miseries to which it had given rise had passed away the road would be
open for the free development of the paradise of a society freed from
class distinctions.

The communist intoxication of the Russian proletariat was at once the
cause of great strength and great peril to the rulers of Russia. These
enthusiastic workmen could be relied upon to accomplish any task in
their belief in their historic mission. If, however, their illusions
were once shattered by the impact of hard facts, then the consequences
would indeed be incalculable. Lenin had not foreseen this development in
communism at the time of his accession to power; nor had the
transformation of Russian Social-Democracy into the Communist Party been
motivated by the ideas underlying this development. Throughout the years
1918-20 the Soviet government did indeed emphasise strongly in its
official pronouncements its socialist mission, the destruction of the
middle class and the liberation of the workers. Nevertheless, Lenin
himself continued to be sceptical as to the positive results that had
been achieved. In 1920 Lenin wrote in a critical essay:

>In Russia we are experiencing (in the third year after the downfall of
>the middle class) the first stage in the changeover from capitalism to
>socialism, or to the lowest type of communism. Class distinctions still
>exist and will continue to exist for years after the proletariat has
>achieved power. It is possible that this period will be shorter in
>England, where there are no peasants though a class of smallholders
>exists. The destruction of class distinctions implies not only the
>abolition of the landowner and the capitalist (we have already achieved
>their destruction with comparative ease), but also that of the small
>producers who cannot either be destroyed or suppressed, and with whom
>one must make a compromise. Then they can and must be changed and
>educated up to new ideas carefully and slowly.

Lenin recognised that the millions of small peasants in Russia continued
to exist notwithstanding all the forcible measures employed against them
by a militarist communism, and that these small peasants formed part of
the middle class and not of the proletarian state. This policy of force
directed against the peasants was perhaps necessary in a period of war
and famine. It could not be permanently used by the Soviet government.
Lenin was prepared to seek a compromise with the peasants after the
restoration of peace. There was, however, throughout the years 1918-20
little hope of a cessation of hostilities. The iron hand of German
militarism rested heavily upon Russia. After it had been removed danger
threatened from the side of the Entente. And all the time the Russian
government was confronted in its own country with the presence of
millions of untrustworthy peasants. If a great Anglo-French army were
one day to march upon Moscow, would the peasant soldiers in the Red Army
be willing to fight?

It was thus that the Bolsheviks were led, contrary to their own plans,
to create a socialist state in Russia after Trotsky's model. In doing so
they had to face the consequences foreseen by Trotsky, namely, that a
Russian proletarian revolution could only be maintained in existence by
a proletarian revolution throughout Europe. During the years 1918-20
Lenin and all the leaders of Bolshevism acted in accordance with
Trotsky's theory of the permanent revolution. They devoted all their
energies to promoting revolution in Central and Western Europe in the
hope that they would find allies in the victorious revolutionary
governments in Europe who would assist them to save the cause of
revolution in Russia. Thus in the years 1918-20 the success of the Third
International became a matter of life and death for the Bolsheviks.

## Chapter 07: The Third International at the Height of its Revolutionary Power, 1919-1921

As early as 1914 Lenin had announced the Third International.
Nevertheless, as has already been shown above, the proposal found little
acceptance among the working-class masses in Europe until 1917. On the
victory of the Bolshevik revolution the situation underwent a complete
change. The middle-class revolution in Russia made little impression
upon the European working class. A far deeper impression was made by the
fact that the Bolsheviks were the first of all governments to make
peace. And the news of the socialisation of Russia ran through the
proletarian masses in all countries like an earth-tremor.

The revolution which had been dreamed of for decades by the working
class suddenly became an accomplished fact. Proof was given that it was
possible to expropriate the capitalist, to abolish the use of money, and
to hand over the factories to the proletariat. Lenin's early ideal -- a
middle-class revolution in Russia and a socialist revolution in Western
Europe -- could not have been expected to meet with much sympathy from
the European workers. To advise German and English working men to adopt
socialism at the same time that he himself embarked on capitalism may
have been defensible from a theoretical standpoint. It did not provide a
platform for a European mass movement. The European working man might
very well have replied to Bolshevik agitators that they had better first
practise at home the socialism they preached abroad. It was thanks to
the resolute action of the Russian working men who in the winter of
1917-18, and against the will of Lenin, seized the factories, that the
ground was made ready for the Third International as a mass movement.

As long as wartime legislation prevented independent action on the part
of European working men the profound inward change that had come over
the European proletariat was not manifest. After the conclusion of the
war it revealed itself with elemental force in the years 1919-20 in the
desertion by millions of European workers of their old leaders,
traditions and organisations, and in their turning for guidance to
Moscow. Under the immediate influence of the war and the subsequent
economic crisis these working men believed in an early breakdown of
capitalism and a victorious world revolution. The three categories into
which European socialism was divided in prewar days have already been
enumerated: on the right the revisionist minority (IIa), in the centre
the great movement of official radicalism (IIb), and on the left the
small revolutionary groups round Rosa Luxemburg, Gorter and others
(III). The World War resulted in the moral bankruptcy of official
radicalism, and at the same time the supporters of the old right and
centre had indiscriminately divided themselves between the two new
groups of those who supported national defence and those who did not. In
the years 1919 and 1920 millions of socialist workmen joined the ranks
of the revolutionary left. They did not, however, remain constant to the
ideals of Rosa Luxemburg but went farther to join the Bolsheviks. Their
desire was to serve under Russian leadership and to complete the work of
the revolution under the orders of Lenin and Trotsky.

The old leaders of the European socialist left wing recognised the
achievement of the Bolsheviks and were prepared to cooperate with them
in the cause of revolution. Nevertheless they remained critical in
matters of detail. They never lost sight for an instant of the
difference between Bolshevik theory and their own ideals. This statement
is as true of the Spartacists as of the Dutch left-wing socialists.
During her imprisonment in the autumn of 1918 Rosa Luxemburg wrote a
series of critical articles on the Russian Revolution in which all her
old differences of opinion with Lenin once more make their appearance.
She pointed out the use made by Lenin of the ideal of nationality and
his spoliation of the peasants as well as the destruction in Russia not
only of middle-class but also of proletarian democracy. In these
circumstances, she argued, socialism could only be realised by a unique
display of energy and spirit on the part of the masses -- qualities
which could only be developed under conditions of perfect freedom. Rosa
Luxemburg added:

>The suppression of all political life throughout Russia must also
>result in paralysing the activity of the soviets. Without universal
>suffrage, liberty of the press and of public meeting, and freedom of
>debate, public institutions will atrophy and take on a shadow existence
>so that powers remain with the bureaucracy alone. Nothing and nobody is
>exempt from the action of this law. Public life gradually ceases. A few
>dozen party leaders possessed of tireless energy and inspired by
>boundless idealism direct and control everything. In reality a dozen of
>the most outstanding intellects among them take charge of affairs. A
>selected number of workmen are from time to time summoned to meetings
>in order to applaud the speeches of their leaders and to pass
>unanimously resolutions that are laid before them. In fact it is
>government by a clique -- a dictatorship, and not the dictatorship of
>the proletariat, but the dictatorship of a handful of politicians, that
>is, a middle-class dictatorship like that of the Jacobins.

It was the middle-class and Jacobin aspects of Bolshevism that specially
attracted the attention of Rosa Luxemburg and Gorter and caused them to
reject its teachings. On the other hand the broad masses of the people
saw only what had been achieved in Russia in the way of socialism and
wanted to copy it in their own countries. Their experience during the
war had lessened the fondness of the continental workmen for democracy.
The middle-class parliamentary system no longer found acceptance in
their eyes and the democratic right to a controlling voice in their own
proletarian organisations had proved itself to be of little value. If it
would lead to socialism they were ready to accept a stern dictatorship
after the Russian pattern. There can indeed be little question that in
the years 1919-20 the majority of socialist workmen in France and Italy,
Germany and the former Austro-Hungarian countries, favoured an alliance
with Bolshevism. Strong Bolshevik sympathies also existed in the Balkan
states, Scandinavia, Poland and the Baltic States. The socialist
proletariat saw in the Bolsheviks men called to be their leaders in a
successful attempt to organise humanity in accordance with socialist
ideals. They neither saw nor understood the middle-class revolutionary
character of Russian Bolshevism.

What was the attitude at that time of the non-socialist workmen in
Europe to the Russian Revolution? The majority of workmen in Spain were
followers of the anarchists and syndicalists, who also commanded a
certain following in Italy and France. Although they were socialistic in
aim, they refused to recognise the authority of the state and the
employment of force even when used in the name of socialism. They
rejected parliamentarism and the political party system. Their ideal was
to organise the masses in revolutionary trade unions wholly distinct
from the Social-Democrat trade unions. Although the authoritarianism and
political party system characteristic of Soviet Russia was unwelcome to
them, they nevertheless sought under the influence of the magnetism
exercised by the Russian Revolution to ally themselves with Moscow, and
hoped to achieve a compromise with the Bolsheviks over matters of
principle.

The great majority of workmen in England up to 1914 were politically
supporters of the middle-class parties. Although millions of English
workmen were organised in trade unions, only a few small groups
professed socialism before the outbreak of the World War. A great change
came over England during the years of the war and the socialist Labour
Party gained millions of members. Lively sympathy was felt by English
workmen after 1918 for Soviet Russia. Nevertheless, there was little
disposition to adopt a Bolshevik revolutionary policy.

A section of the Christian socialist and conservative workmen on the
Continent was also borne along on the wave of enthusiasm for Bolshevism.
It is only necessary to recall the conduct of the miners in the Mansfeld
and Saar districts, in the Ruhr and in Upper Silesia after 1918.

Another movement of opinion among the working class, in addition to the
Marxist-socialist, anarchic-syndicalist and middle-class tendencies,
must be commented upon here. Although this fourth tendency had no
organised existence, it nevertheless bore a highly individualised
character. It can perhaps be best described under the name of utopian
radicalism. Its followers were to be found among the very poorest,
desperate and embittered workmen. These men were animated by a
passionate hatred not only for middle-class society but for any one more
fortunate than themselves. They refused all negotiation and compromise
and would only be content with an extreme form of action. A fanatical
mistrust of all organisation and leaders filled their minds and they
felt themselves betrayed by anyone who sought to impose discipline upon
them or to advise moderation. There was much in common between this
utopian radicalism and syndicalism. Nevertheless, the two must be
clearly distinguished from each other. It is incontestable that
syndicalism -- the question whether its doctrines are false or true does
not arise here -- is a precise philosophy of life founded upon
scientific arguments and pursuing definite aims by means of a formulated
policy. On the other hand utopian radicalism is a purely emotional state
and as such incapable of systematisation or coherence. The utopian
radicals among the workers also turned towards Bolshevism.

The November Revolution in 1918 and the consequent collapse of the
militaristic monarchies in Germany and Austria-Hungary appeared to
fulfil Bolshevik prophecies. Workers' and soldiers' councils established
in the seats of the German Kaisers in Berlin and Potsdam now issued
orders in their stead. It seemed as if the World War had really set in
motion the world revolution and that the movement which had started in
October 1917 in Petrograd was spreading irresistibly from country to
country. It was not long, however, before it became clear that
notwithstanding workers' and soldiers' councils, the middle-class
revolution alone had proved victorious in Germany. The history of the
revolution in Germany clearly proves that the soviet system is not
necessarily identical with socialism. An attempt on the part of extreme
working-class elements to turn the middle-class into a socialist
revolution in Germany led to the disaster of 1919 and the assassination
of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. At the same time it is easy to
understand why the Ebert-Scheidemann government was looked upon in
Russia as a sort of German Kerensky government and the same fate
prophesied for it that befell Kerensky and his followers. Moreover,
Italy found herself involved in a serious domestic crisis, disturbance
was rife in all the succession states, in the Balkans, in the Baltic
States; and in France and England extremist tendencies were openly
manifesting themselves in the proletarian masses of the population. The
spring of 1919 saw the temporary establishment of soviet republics in
Hungary and Bavaria. Thus the ground was prepared for giving practical
expression to the ideal of a Third International.

The Third International was formally established in March 1919 at a
meeting held in Moscow for that purpose. The difficulties then attendant
upon a journey to Russia prevented the arrival of more than a few
foreign delegates. This First World Congress was only a beginning. The
Second World Congress in July-August 1920 was thoroughly representative
of the majority of European workmen and also included important
delegations from other parts of the world. At this congress the
Communist International was for the first time given a definite
programme and a definite political stamp.

From the very outset the Socialist parties in Italy -- filled with pride
for the loyal adherence to their principles throughout the war -- had
joined the Third International to a man. The majority of the Socialist
parties in France were also prepared to cooperate in its work. Among
German Socialists the first to join the Third International was the
Spartacist Union, which had changed its title towards the end of 1918
into that of German Communist Party (KPD). In the days of the World War
the small group of Marxist leaders centred round Rosa Luxemburg in the
Spartacist Union had been opposed by a membership that was largely
utopian radical in its opinions. It was contrary to the wishes of Rosa
Luxemburg that the party had been compelled as the result of a poll of
its members to take part in the unsuccessful fighting in January 1919.
After the deaths of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, Paul Levi took
over the leadership of the KPD. At a party congress held in Heidelberg
Levi resolutely carried out the exclusion from the Spartacist Union of
the utopian radical workmen. As a result his party was reduced heavily
in numbers. The ostracised workmen in common with a number of
doctrinaires holding syndicalist views founded the German Communist
Labour Party (KAPD). Its members formed only a small minority of the
German proletariat.

The majority of the German socialist workmen in 1920 were members of the
German Independent Social-Democrat Party (USPD). This party won greater
and greater successes in its struggle with the old Majority Socialists.
While the Majority Socialists wished for the time being to content
themselves with a middle-class democratic republic, the USPD demanded
the establishment of a socialist state. The USPD was prepared to join
the Third International. The KAPD did not wish to sever its relations
with Moscow.

The majority of workmen in the Balkan states, in Czechoslovakia and in
Norway were also in sympathy with the Third International. There was
indeed hardly a country in the world in which a more or less powerful
Communist Party had not been established. The Second International was
completely disorganised and the leadership of the world proletariat
seemed to have passed finally into the hands of the Bolshevik Party in
Moscow. Lenin and the Bolsheviks, however, were little concerned in 1920
with securing the moral support of the international proletariat. That
could be of little use to them. Their aim was to direct a socialist
revolution to victory as speedily as possible in one or more of the
greater states of Europe. If they succeeded in achieving their aim, the
encirclement of Soviet Russia by the capitalist powers would be broken;
and the Bolsheviks would receive from the new labour governments in
Europe the economic, moral and, perhaps, even military assistance that
was necessary to enable them to defend socialism in Russia against the
attack of the peasants. A successful working-class revolution seemed
easiest of achievement in Germany and Italy, where the majority of the
proletariat had openly declared themselves in support of the Third
International and the existing middle-class organisation of society was
manifestly crumbling to pieces. If soviet republics could be established
in Germany and Italy, the victory of communism would be assured in the
countries that lay between them and Russia -- Poland, the Baltic States,
the succession states and the Balkan states. The Union of Soviet
Republics would then extend from Russia to the Rhine and the Alps.

The task confronting the Communist parties, especially in Germany and
Italy, would in this eventuality be no light one. Indeed, it would be a
task of exceptional difficulty inasmuch as trained revolutionary parties
like those in Russia did not exist in Europe. Lenin was fully cognisant
of these difficulties. He had, however, no time to lose. Communist
parties must be set up in all the more important European countries as
quickly as possible and must be thrown into the battle. From the moment
when Lenin seriously resolved upon the preparation of a working-class
revolution in Europe he abandoned all purely agitatist catchwords and
occupied himself with a sober calculation of facts and forces. A
preliminary to victory was that the revolutionary Communist party should
in each country win the support of all or almost all the proletariat.
Such a proceeding was obviously irreconcilable with the theory of the
existence of a working-class aristocracy. Although Lenin remained
faithful in theory to a conception that he had evolved during the war,
he abandoned it in practice. In 1920 he wrote:

>Socialism inevitably inherits from capitalism on the one hand the old
>differences between the workers (differences that arose out of those
>between the various trades and handicrafts and that have evolved
>through centuries) and on the other hand associations of trade unions
>that have slowly and after many years developed -- and are continuing
>to develop -- into broader industrial associations less reminiscent of
>guilds and embracing not merely trades, crafts and professions but
>entire industries. Thanks to these industrial associations the trade
>unions will further develop into organisations for abolishing division
>of labour and for educating and training all-round men and women -- men
>and women capable of undertaking any task. This is the goal towards
>which communism is striving and to which it will attain only after the
>lapse of many years. To attempt today to anticipate the achievements of
>a perfected and mature communism is like attempting to teach higher
>mathematics to a four-year-old child. We can and must begin to build up
>the edifice of socialism with the materials left to us by capitalism
>and not with some human compound that is our own special discovery.
>This will unquestionably be very 'difficult'. All other solutions to
>the problem are nevertheless so vain that they are not worthy of
>discussion.

Lenin here admits after sober reflection the existence of differences
between the various types of European workmen. It does not, however,
follow that the poorest workmen should therefore attack and destroy
their more fortunate fellows. On the contrary they should build up
socialism together under the leadership of the Communist Party. The
great majority of the skilled workers in Europe are organised in trade
unions. Hence if the Communist Party desires to secure control over the
masses, it must, according to Lenin, obtain a foothold in the existing
trade unions. Nor must it allow itself to be influenced by the
consideration that the leaders of these trade unions are for the most
part 'reactionaries' -- enemies of the revolution and the Third
International. In no circumstances must the Communists abandon their
activities in the trade unions. For if they withdraw with revolutionary
speeches from reactionary associations, they surrender their chances of
winning over the masses and of leading the revolution to victory. Thus
Lenin was led to refuse categorically any cooperation with utopian
radicalism and any recognition for certain syndicalist ideals. The
trade-union question is indeed one of the most fateful problems
confronting modern labour. It constitutes the acid test of whether a
party is really prepared to lead the proletariat or whether it is no
more than a sect content with pseudo-radical doctrines. In placing
before the Communists, as one of their chief tasks, the seizure of
control over the trade unions, Lenin showed his recognition of the
importance of the skilled and better-paid workman for the proletariat as
a whole; and he thereby refused to build up the Communist party solely
out of the unemployed and the very poorest class of workpeople. Nor did
Lenin in those days contemplate this seizure of control over the trade
unions by the Communists as a long process of careful organisation
extending over many years. There was indeed no time to spare. He foresaw
instead a violent change in the character of the old Social-Democrat
trade unions as a result of a revolution.

In 1920 Lenin published a pamphlet specially devoted to an attack on
utopian radicalism and syndicalism. In this pamphlet, entitled
_Communism and the Infantile Disease of Radicalism_, Lenin demanded
categorically that Communists should participate in parliamentary
elections and in political life generally, and, above all, that they
should define their attitude as a political party to all political
issues arising in their country. The Communist party was to refrain from
a reckless policy and from rushing wildly at its objective. It must
learn to conclude alliances and compromises, and even to retreat if the
occasion demanded it. This pamphlet was written with the deliberate
intention of provoking and alienating utopian radicals. Lenin was well
aware that an unrestrained, emotional radicalism on the part of the
proletariat could only lead to anarchy, and that it could not be used
for constructive and practical purposes. Every movement animated by the
spirit of utopian radicalism was at once deprived of all serious
political purpose and aroused mistrust in the broad masses of the
people. Thus, for example, Lenin would rather have lost the support of
fifty thousand working-class members of the KAPD than risk losing that
of the five million members of the USPD through shaping his policy to
accord with the views of the fifty thousand. The attack led by Paul Levi
in 1919 against the KAPD was fully in accord with Lenin's own views. If,
however, the KAPD and the syndicalists were to recognise the error of
their ways, then they should be welcomed back to the fold. Their ideals
must, nevertheless, meet with no response in the Communist
International.

The Communists in Europe were not only to obtain control over the
proletariat but also over the peasants and lower middle classes. If they
could not win these latter over to their side, they were at least to
avoid rousing their hostility. Neither in the towns nor in the country
was the property of these classes to be expropriated. A socialist
revolution in Europe was conceived by Lenin in 1920 solely as the
nationalisation of the great monopolies and as the expropriation by the
working-class state of the great trusts, companies and banks. Lenin
remained faithful to his principle of state capitalism and economic
centralisation as realised in the World War and was content to remove
the handful of plutocratic capitalists from all control over this
centralised economic system. A revolution this type would indeed have
been possible in Europe in 1920 in an era of distress, crises and
conflicts. There is not the slightest exaggeration in the analysis of
world conditions made by Lenin in those days.

At the first session of the Second World Congress of the Communist
International (July 1920) Lenin delivered a speech in which he adapted
his theory of imperialism to the new conditions obtaining in the world.
Once again he spoke of a small number of parasitic imperialistic nations
living by the spoliation of other peoples. Among these exploited
colonial areas Lenin reckoned also countries like China or the South
American states, which enjoyed a nominal independence. A principal
result of the World War, in Lenin's opinion, was the reduction of
Germany and the states formerly comprising Austria-Hungary to the level
of protectorates exploited by the victorious powers. The Entente had
intended to mete out the same fate to Russia. Who derived profit from
the appalling misery of the world? Lenin calculated as follows: the
United States has a population of 100 million, Japan of 50 million, and
England also of 50 million. If to these figures there be added those of
the smaller neutral states who grew rich through the World War, the
total will amount to some 250 million people. Since France and Italy
were at that time indebted to America and England, Lenin did not reckon
these two powers among the real victors of the World War. The picture of
the world as it presented itself to Lenin's eyes was that of 1500
million people driven desperate through exploitation at the hands of 250
million. Nor do the 250 million of the so-called victors constitute an
entity. In these countries, as elsewhere, the vast mass of the
population was subject to a small group of financial magnates. Since,
however, impoverishment and indebtedness on a vast scale had overwhelmed
the whole world, the victorious powers could not find a market for their
products; and thus unemployment and a rise in prices occurred within
their own frontiers. Debts and the devalorisation of money had caused
the complete breakdown of the machinery of the capitalist system
throughout the world.

Nevertheless, Lenin refused to abandon his belief that it was impossible
to expect an automatic collapse of capitalism. Unless they were
overthrown by a deliberate and organised revolution on the part of the
oppressed peoples, the imperialists would still be able to find a way of
escape from their present dilemma. And this revolution must be prepared
by a collaboration between the exploited peoples and the proletariat:
'In this congress the revolutionary proletariat from highly-developed
capitalist states meets together with the revolutionary peoples of those
countries in which there is no, or virtually no, proletariat -- the
inhabitants of the exploited countries of the East.' Indians and Chinese
would rise against imperialism. The problem was one of finding a footing
for Communism in the non-capitalist countries. 'Here there will be no
workers' councils. There will be peasants' councils or councils of
active individuals.' The world revolution then as always was, in Lenin's
eyes, not solely an affair of the proletariat but a democratic rising of
humanity against imperialism.

The great revolutions in Asia and Africa that would have brought relief
to Soviet Russia were certainly not likely to occur in the immediate
future. Help could only come quickly through an extension of the
revolution to Central Europe. Lenin advised the German working class in
1920 in the event of a successful revolution to accept temporarily the
Treaty of Versailles, after the fashion in which Russia had been forced
to submit to the peace of Brest-Litovsk. A Soviet Germany would thus
secure a breathing-space in which to carry on its work of domestic
reconstruction. The Italian workmen should ally themselves with the
small peasantry and leaseholders in order to achieve power. In the event
of a successful revolution on the part of the Italian workers and
peasants, Lenin reckoned on a blockade of Italy by France and England.
At the same time he believed himself to be in a position to assure
Soviet Italy reliable assistance -- probably by an advance on the part
of the Red Army through Hungary to the Adriatic.

In England Lenin did not expect a communist revolution in the immediate
future. He anticipated a socialist victory at the polls and the advent
to power of a Labour government in a constitutional manner. The various
tiny Communist groups in England must unite to form a single party and
support the Labour Party in its struggle with the middle-class parties
in parliament. The Communists would not take the place now occupied by
the Labour Party until a much later stage of development had been
reached. Lenin was also right in assuming as he did that the existence
of a socialist Labour government in England would make the international
situation of Russia easier.

An attempt has been made above to describe the way in which workmen
belonging to all parties in Europe turned in the years 1919 and 1920
towards the Third International. By the side of these workmen, inspired
by a belief in the necessity for a speedy communist revolution led by
Bolsheviks, stood the utopian radicals whom Lenin so bitterly opposed.
And in addition to this danger threatening the revolution from the left
there also existed what Lenin considered to be an even greater danger
coming from the right.

The World War made an end of the old official radicalism of the Second
International. A radicalism that did not bind its followers to
revolutionary action was no longer possible in parties which had voted
war credits and least of all in an International which could serve as a
platform for this type of 'reform'. Officials and leaders of the labour
movement as well as many European workmen were, nevertheless, desirous
not to abandon the old traditional, radical form of speech, the
irreconcilability and aversion to compromise, and the concentration in
thought and speech upon the goal lying ahead. At the same time they were
far from any thoughts of realising socialism through revolution. These
men sought in 1919-20 for a new faith and believed themselves to have
found it in Bolshevism. Here was revolutionary action on an heroic
scale. Here was the realisation of socialism, and here an unbridgeable
breach with capitalism. Entry into the Third International made a
workman free of all these achievements. The 'disgrace' of 1914 was wiped
out and the organising work of prewar radicalism could be resumed and
continued towards the ultimate goal. Italy became the scene of a typical
development of this kind.

The chance and superficial causes that led the entire Italian Socialist
Party to refuse to vote war credits have been described above. This
party had thus avoided committing the 'sin' of 1914 and could take part
as a whole in the Third International. Prewar traditions were thus
preserved unaltered in a postwar Italy, where the extraordinary
situation arose in which not only the entire prewar radicals (IIb) but
also the revisionists (IIa) became members of the Third International.

The European supporters of the Third International presented a
kaleidoscopic picture in their conflicting tendencies and beliefs.
Revisionists and radicals of the official prewar type stood side by side
with experienced revolutionaries determined to realise Bolshevism in
their own countries, with utopian radicals, with syndicalists and with
the supporters of Rosa Luxemburg. Only the exercise of democratic
self-criticism and actual experience on the part of the masses could
have gradually created a single unified party out of these diverse
elements represented in the new Communist parties in Europe. And there
was no time to spare for such an organic development. Instead it was
essential to create as quickly as possible Communist parties in all the
leading European states capable of revolutionary action in the near
future. According to Bolshevik opinion the foundation of an efficient
combative party was to be found in its possession of a strong party
committee animated by a resolute fighting spirit. In order to obtain
this desideratum the control of the party must be purged of all who
might be suspected of weakness and indecision in a time of revolution.
It was for this reason that Lenin demanded of the former Socialist, now
Communist, Party in Italy that it should exclude from its ranks the old
group of revisionists led by Turati. His demand resulted in the break-up
of the Italian Communist Party into three groups: a right wing led by
Turati; a left wing which supported Lenin's demand; and a broad centre
group, approximating to the prewar radicals, led by Serrati. Although
this latter group was strongly opposed to the attitude adopted by the
right wing, Serrati hesitated to provoke a cleavage in the Italian
labour movement by insisting upon the exclusion of Turati and his
followers. He preferred to resign from the party himself with all his
supporters.

On the subject of the situation in Italy Lenin wrote in a manner highly
characteristic of his own personality:

>Serrati failed to understand the peculiar conditions obtaining in a
>period of transition such as that through which Italy is now passing.
>As is generally recognised, Italy is now moving towards a decisive
>conflict between the proletariat and the middle class for the control
>of the state. The exclusion of the Mensheviks, reformists, and of
>Turati and his followers, from the party is in such a moment not only
>inevitable and necessary but it may even be necessary to remove sincere
>and able Communists from all important posts if they show signs of
>indecision and especially of inclining towards an 'agreement' with the
>reformists.

Lenin went on to say that he would cite an apt example of what he meant.
Immediately before and after the October Revolution in Russia a number
of outstanding Communists made a mistake 'which we now hesitate to
mention'. And Lenin went on to describe the hesitations displayed by the
Zinoviev-Kamenev group at the time of the October Revolution. He
depicted these men resigning from the party committee at the decisive
hour. Their resignation, however, was not a misfortune. For:

>... on the eve of the revolution and in the midst of a violent struggle
>for victory the slightest hesitation within the party itself might have
>cost us the victory, destroyed the revolution, and taken power from the
>hands of the proletariat -- a power that is not secure inasmuch as its
>possession is still hotly contested. If hesitant leaders disappear at
>such a moment, their departure strengthens rather than weakens the
>party, the labour movement and the revolution. Such a moment has now
>come in Italy.

In addition to ostracising Turati and his friends, the Communist Party
in Italy was also to allow Serrati and his followers to go their own way
peacefully. The party would only find itself the stronger for their
absence in the hour of revolution. After the victory of the revolution
the honourable men among those who had abandoned the party in the moment
of crisis would admit their mistake and return. On this subject Lenin
wrote:

>A part of the Italian Mensheviks and followers of Turati would most
>probably return after the crisis of the revolution was over and be
>received again into the party in the same manner (we have lived through
>three critical years since the revolution) in which a number of the
>Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries have returned to us after
>fighting on the other side of the barricades in 1917-18.

It is clear from these sentences that Lenin did not at that time
contemplate a state of things in which in every country in Europe a
'pure' Communist party and an 'impure' Social-Democrat party would be in
permanent opposition to one another. He was concerned solely with the
acute stage in the revolution. The masses were desirous of fighting and
were waiting for a resolute leader to give them the signal to engage the
battle. It was not of importance how many members a Communist party
possessed at the outbreak of a revolution. Two conditions alone were of
importance: the party must carry the masses with it; and the party
committee must not contain any faint-hearted member who would seek to
hinder the revolution. The party should dispense with the support of a
few thousand left-wing radicals if by doing so it retained control over
millions of workmen. With the same equanimity it should exclude doubters
from its leadership, or refuse to accept them, even if by so doing it
should lose members. Those who remained faithful to the party would all
the more certainly prove victorious in a time of revolution while the
workmen and party officials who had temporarily stood aside would then
return to the fold of the Communist party. This purge was not an end in
itself, but only a tactical means for rendering easier the conduct of a
revolution; and the aim remained the reunion of the working class and of
the leaders who were truly in sympathy with the proletariat.

Lenin's attempt in 1919-20 to organise a revolution in Europe was a
magnificent experiment. There were, however, gigantic difficulties to be
overcome before it could succeed. The tradition of the working class in
Europe was without exception democratic in the sense that labour policy
could only be decided upon in accordance with the free exercise of the
right to self-determination on the part of the masses. The conversion of
the proletariat from a policy of reform to one of revolution seemed only
possible if the masses altered their opinions first and subsequently
discovered a suitable means of giving expression to them. Now the
exactly contrary process was to be embarked upon with all possible
rapidity. A revolutionary party committee was to be set up in every
country and endowed with dictatorial powers over the members of the
party, and with an unquestioned authority over the masses, and this
party committee was to carry out a revolution. Although in the Promised
Land of professional revolutionaries -- Russia -- it was possible to
create such a central authority, there was nobody in Europe capable of
undertaking such a task. And if, indeed, a revolutionary of this type
was concealed somewhere in Europe in the editor of a labour newspaper,
or a trade-union official -- how was he quickly to be discovered? Even
in Russia and under Lenin's direction the Central Committee of the
Bolshevik Party had only gradually gained the confidence of the masses
after years of work. How was an improvised Central Committee of the KPD
or Communist Party in Italy to win over the majority of the nation to
its cause? The creation of a Central Committee of European Communists
could only be accomplished through the persistent use of dictatorial
methods. For the time being the only way of knowing whether any
particular person was a good revolutionary or not was by his voluntary
acceptance or rejection of resolutions emanating from Russia. Hence
twenty-one conditions were formulated for the acceptance of any party
desirous of joining the Third International. The seventh condition read
as follows:

>Parties desirous of belonging to the Communist International are
>pledged to recognise the complete cleavage with reformism and the
>policy of the centre and to propagate this cleavage as widely as
>possible among their members. Unless that is done there can be no
>consistent Communist policy. The Communist International
>unconditionally and absolutely demands the carrying out of this
>cleavage in the shortest possible space of time. The Communist
>International will never be prepared to agree that notorious
>opportunists such as Turati, Kautsky, Hilferding, Hillquit, Longuet,
>MacDonald, Modigliani, etc, shall have the right to pass as members of
>the Third International; for that would only lead to making the Third
>International closely resemble the Second International that came to a
>disastrous end.

By 'centre' is meant the middle or moderate tendency in socialism. The
twentieth and twenty-first conditions ran:

>Those parties anxious to join the Third International whose policy has
>not already undergone a radical change must before their entry into the
>Communist International take measures to see that not less than
>two-thirds of the members of their Central Committees and all other
>central executive organs are comrades who unmistakably and openly
>advocated entry into the Third International before the assemblage of
>the Second Congress of the Communist International. Exceptions may be
>made with the approval of the Executive of the Third International. The
>Executive of the Communist International possesses the right to make
>exceptions for the representatives of the centre named in paragraph
>VII.
>
>Members of parties who refuse in principle to accept the conditions and
>theses propounded by the Communist International shall be expelled from
>the party.
>
>The above has special application to delegates to extraordinary
>meetings of the party.

Thus confidence was automatically placed in European leaders who had
never performed any revolutionary action but who had announced their
adherence to the Third International before a given date. In the same
manner entry to the Third International was denied to certain persons
mentioned by name who had during the war belonged to Kautsky's group.
These were the men upon whom Lenin had already declared war at the time
of the Zimmerwald conference -- the 'centrals' -- who stood between him
and the so-called social patriots. Although the executive of the Third
International could make an exception in favour of individuals among
these men, the principle was not thereby altered in any way. Anyone
refusing to agree to the twenty-first condition was excluded from
membership. If, for example, the party congress of the USPD put the
question of membership of the Third International to the vote, and if
the majority were in favour of accepting the Twenty-One Conditions, then
the delegates composing the minority were automatically excluded from
the new Communist Party by the mere fact of their voting.

The employment of such methods in European labour parties must
inevitably result in creating an atmosphere of sectarianism and
heresy-hunting. Valuable members would be rejected merely because they
refused their support for certain theses and not because they had proved
themselves useless in revolutionary work. Moreover, the question
remained to be answered whether those who assented to these propositions
would in the event lead the revolution to victory. The truth is that
Lenin was then the prisoner of circumstances. In order to preserve
socialism in Russia revolution must be propagated in Europe as quickly
as possible. And if organised and developed revolutionary parties and
party committees did not already exist in Europe, then they had to be in
some way -- good or bad -- created.

The passing of the Twenty-One Conditions was the most important
achievement of the Second World Congress. These conditions reveal the
spirit animating the Communist International in the very brief period --
they ceased to exist by 1921 -- in which this organisation was the real
leader of the international socialist revolution. Although this spirit
was characterised by a stony one-sidedness, it also revealed a mighty
revolutionary will-power. The first of the Twenty-One Conditions
demanded that every party should conduct truly Communist propaganda and
agitation and, above all, hold up the ideal of a dictatorship of the
proletariat before the eyes of the masses. The second demanded the
removal of all reformists and supporters of the centre from responsible
posts at the disposal of the party. The third demanded that each party
should create an illegal, in addition to its legal, organisation because
in practically all American and European countries class warfare emerged
at some stage in a civil war. At such a moment the legal status of a
party was not sufficient to enable it to carry on its work. The fourth
condition demanded the pursuit of a systematic Communist propaganda in
the armies. The fifth condition was of importance as defining the
relationship between the working class and the peasantry. It ran:

>A regular and systematic agitation must be carried on in the country
>districts. The working class cannot achieve victory unless it is
>supported by the country proletariat and at least a part of the poorest
>peasantry, and unless it has assured itself by its policy of the
>neutrality of a proportion of the remaining inhabitants of the
>villages. At the present time Communist activity in the country
>districts is of the utmost importance. It must be pursued through the
>cooperation of revolutionary Communist workmen who have friends and
>relations among the peasantry. An abandonment of this activity or the
>entrusting of it to unreliable and not truly revolutionary workers
>would be tantamount to an abandonment of the proletarian revolution.

The sixth condition required the disavowal of the 'sham of social
pacifism'. The seventh condition has already been given above. The
eighth required that all Communist parties should work for the
liberation of all colonial peoples and for the independence of the
colonies belonging to their own countries. The ninth condition contained
a rejection of utopian radicalism and syndicalism in the trade-union
question. It ran:

>Every party desirous of joining the Communist International must
>develop Communist activities in a systematic and resolute manner in the
>trade unions, labour councils, factory committees, consumers'
>associations and other mass working-class organisations. Communist
>cells must be organised within these organisations for the purpose of
>winning the trade unions, etc, for Communism through determined and
>persistent propaganda. These cells are to expose the treason of the
>social patriots and the fickleness of the 'Centre' on all possible
>occasions. The Communist cells must be completely subordinated to the
>party.

The tenth condition is ambiguous. In every country the Communists are to
pursue their work zealously in the Social-Democrat trade unions. If,
however, the central committee of the trade unions in any country
becomes Communist, then these trade unions are to desert the old
Social-Democrat trade-union International -- the so-called Amsterdam
International -- and to join a new International of Red trade unions. As
the revolution passes rapidly from country to country, the capture by
the Communists of the central committees of the trade unions in the
individual countries must automatically follow, and the creation of the
new trade-union International progress parallel with the growth of the
Communist International. If, however, the revolution is delayed, then
violent controversies will arise within the individual trade unions --
for example, the German Metal-Workers' Association -- over the question
of union with Moscow or Amsterdam. This controversy might easily result
in the emergence of the danger of a cleavage notwithstanding the
activity of the Communist party within the trade unions. The trade-union
question has from 1920 to the present day remained one of the gravest
difficulties confronting the Communist International.

The eleventh condition dealt with parliamentary activity. In opposition
to the syndicalists it approved parliamentary activity before the advent
of the revolution. At the same time the Communist members of parliament
were to be completely subordinate to the Central Committee of the party
and to carry on truly revolutionary propaganda and agitation at all
times.

The twelfth to the nineteenth conditions are concerned with
organisation. All Communist parties are to be organised after the
Bolshevik model. The Central Committee of the party is to be entrusted
with the 'fullest power and authority, and with far-reaching rights'.
'Iron discipline' is required of the members. All these demands are
founded upon the necessity for an absolutely unanimous leadership of a
revolutionary party in time of civil war. This form of organisation is
given the name of 'democratic centralisation' in view of the fact that
the authority of the Central Committee of the party should rest upon the
confidence reposed in it by the members. Any opposition group within the
party would be at a disadvantage in comparison with such an autocratic
Central Committee. The Central Committee is empowered to appoint all the
party officials, control all party newspapers, and to expel from the
party undesirable members. Hence the Central Committee can make its
preparations beforehand for the party congress and assure itself of the
vote of confidence necessary to enable it to continue in office until
the next party congress. The Central Committee of a party is
subordinated to the Executive Committee of the Communist International
in an exactly similar manner to that in which the party members and
local groups are subordinated to it. The world congress elects the
Executive Committee. The majority of its members are non-Russians.
Nevertheless, the real policy of the Communist International is laid
down by the representatives of the Russian Communist Party. All
decisions of the Executive Committee are binding upon all Communist
parties. An opposition group within a Communist party can never in
normal circumstances overthrow the Central Committee. It is, however,
master of the situation at the moment when it succeeds in gaining the
ears of the Executive Committee, that is, the leaders of the Russian
Bolshevik Party. In that case the Central Committee succumbs to an
attack on two fronts and its opponents take its place in the control of
the party with the approval of the Executive Committee.

It is undeniable that such an organisation of an international labour
movement was only tolerable in an age of civil warfare. Even then it is
necessary to ask if a great popular revolution can be conducted on
military lines. In peaceful times the organisation of the Communist
International would inevitably lead to grave disputes among European
workmen. Zinoviev was chosen as Chairman of the Communist International,
and Lozovsky was entrusted with the management of the International of
Red Trade Unions. Both men sought to wipe out the memory of their
indecision in the autumn of 1917 by an increased display of
revolutionary energy.

The immediate problem was that of giving effect in Europe to the
decisions of the Second World Congress. The remarkable party congress of
the USPD which was to decide for or against acceptance of the Twenty-One
Conditions was held in Halle. Zinoviev appeared in person. He delivered
a speech that lasted for four hours in which he explained the Bolshevik
point of view with brilliant ingenuity. The majority of the delegates
accepted the Twenty-One Conditions; and the majority of the USPD
thereupon united with the old KPD (Spartacist Union) to form a great new
United German Communist Party. In France the majority at the Socialist
Party congress accepted the Twenty-One Conditions and founded the French
Communist Party. In Italy, however, the Twenty-One Conditions were
rejected both by Turati's supporters and by those of Serrati. It was
therefore only a minority of the old Italian Socialist Party that
founded the Italian Communist Party. The various tiny groups in England
who had declared themselves in favour of the decisions of the Second
World Congress united to form the English Communist Party.

The establishment of Communist parties in the sense desired by the
Second World Congress had thus been achieved in all important European
countries. It is true, however, that this was done at the cost of
serious cleavages and the alienation of large numbers of former
Socialist and syndicalist workmen. The author of the Twenty-One
Conditions had from the first reckoned with these losses. Moreover, it
was of no importance in 1920 whether the Communist party in a particular
country was supported by 20, 30, or 40 per cent of the electorate, nor
what percentage of workmen in a country were already organised. All that
was of decisive importance was whether the Communists would be
successful in securing the support of the majority of the people for
revolution. Whether the European Communist parties would be able to
organise a successful revolution so quickly that socialist Russia would
be freed from her cares, and whether Soviet Russia in her dangerous
condition of domestic crisis would be able to wait and hold out until
the revolution made itself perceptible in Europe -- these were the
all-important questions of the day.

## Chapter 08: The Great Change: NEP and the Third World Congress, 1921

The winter of 1920-21 was an especially hard and difficult one for
Soviet Russia. The Civil War had been terminated in 1920 by the defeat
of the White General Wrangel, and the expulsion from Russia of the last
counter-revolutionary troops. Peace had also been concluded with Poland
after a series of successes and defeats. The cessation of warfare did
not result in any improvement in the condition of the Russian nation.
The year 1920 had with all its other evils brought a bad harvest. Famine
reigned in the villages as well as in the towns. The passive opposition
and dislike of the peasants for communism increased, and in the towns
factories were for the most part idle. Civil war had not helped to
restore the disorganised system of transport. Freezing and starving
workmen became desperate. The Russian proletariat had been called upon
to defeat the White and Polish armies and to restore productivity to the
factories. In his hope of peace at home and in his belief in the
progress of the world revolution, the Russian workman had accomplished
heroic deeds. Peace had come. But the sacrifices required of him only
became heavier. Doubts began to be entertained as to the permanence of
the existing system. In any case the government was expected to take
action to overcome the misery of the masses of the nation.

The tense atmosphere surrounding the Bolshevik Party discharged itself
towards the close of the year in the form of a curious debate. Its
subject was the trade-union question. At this time the membership of the
Russian Communist Party was about 600,000. Nevertheless, it was
impossible to open the ranks of the ruling party in a state containing
130 million inhabitants to professional revolutionaries alone. Necessity
had turned Lenin's Bolshevik Party into a mass organisation. At the same
time care was taken to preserve the Bolshevik tradition by maintaining
the authority of the party leaders and insisting upon the strictest
discipline on the part of the members. New members were only admitted
with the greatest caution. The ruling party was only a minority of the
Russian proletariat as well as a tiny fraction of the Russian nation. An
entirely different picture was presented by the organisation of the
Russian trade unions. Membership of a trade union was obligatory upon
all workmen, employees and civil servants. The trade unions in 1920
comprised six million members. Of these six million, however, only one
million were actually factory workers. All Russians who could in the
widest possible interpretation of the term be called proletarian were
members of the trade unions. The management of the trade unions, like
the control of the soviets, lay in the hands of the Communists.
Nevertheless, the Communists employed in the management of the trade
unions held different views in many individual questions,
notwithstanding the strict party discipline, from those held by fellow
members who, for example, were employed in the Commissariat for Foreign
Affairs or in the Red Army. The Communist officials of the trade unions
were forced to listen daily to the complaints and demands of the members
and were thus involuntarily turned into mouthpieces for conveying the
grievances of the workmen to the party leaders.

The worse the condition of the Russian workmen the greater the
depression in the trade unions and the stronger the conviction among
many workmen that they would be given more food and fuel if the trade
unions had a greater voice in the government of the country. The most
fundamental of all the problems of Soviet Russia was thus brought into
prominence. The dictatorship of the proletariat -- it was said --
existed in Russia. The state was a working-class state. Was it not
therefore absurd that the workman as a member of a trade union should
make accusations and bring complaints against his own state? Absurd or
not -- the fact remains that the Russian workman felt himself to be
placed at a disadvantage in comparison with the soldier or peasant
through mistakes on the part of the governing bureaucracy. It thus came
about that towards the end of 1920 the complaints of the trade unions
raised the question of the nature of the Soviet state and its
relationship to the working man.

Discontent with existing conditions was rife. Change might be achieved
in two ways. The trade unions could defend the interests of their
members without regard for the general political life of the state and
the theories of the ruling bureaucracy. (If the trade unions adopted
this policy it would be tantamount at least to an indirect admission
that Soviet Russia was not a working-class state.) Or the exact contrary
would occur and the trade unions be incorporated in the machinery of
government. This would amount to a fresh proof that Russia could not and
must not be anything else than a working-class state. Trotsky
recommended the adoption of the latter policy. He hoped to overcome the
existing crisis by mobilising the whole strength of the proletariat. The
trade unions should be amalgamated with the civil administration.
Although Trotsky showed great caution in formulating his proposals in
detail, his purpose was clear: the restoration in Russia of
working-class democracy by means of the trade unions. If six million
trade unionists seized control of production and economic life in
general (the ideal of productive democracy here makes its appearance),
there would be an end to the dictatorship of the higher officials of the
Communist Party.

Lenin promptly saw through Trotsky's disguised attack on the Bolshevik
system of organisation and energetically took up the cudgels in its
defence. He openly told the opposition that Soviet Russia was a workers'
and peasants' state and not a workers' state alone. For this reason the
trade unions must be allowed to put forward complaints and demands
directed against state officials. Phrases like 'productive democracy'
could only result in undermining the dictatorship of the Bolshevik Party
and in endangering the revolution. His immense prestige with the party
enabled Lenin to secure the rejection of Trotsky's proposals. In this
discussion of the trade-union problem the leading men in Soviet Russia
refrained from calling things by their true names. They contented
themselves with vague allusions to avoid arousing a feeling of panic in
the nation. But Trotsky's aim was clear: no concessions to the peasants
and therefore the development of working-class democracy. On the other
hand Lenin was opposed to any weakening of the dictatorship, but in case
of necessity was ready to make concessions to the peasants, and it would
appear that as early as the winter of 1920-21 he had developed the
fundamental principles of his subsequent so-called 'New Economic
Policy'.

Despite his defeat Trotsky remained at the head of the Red Army and
continued to take a leading part in the work of the Central Committee of
the Bolshevik Party. Lenin entertained no thoughts of dispensing with
Trotsky's services merely on account of a difference of opinion with him
in the trade-union question. Trotsky indeed realised during the winter
of 1920-21 that he was not in a position to win over the Bolshevik Party
to his ideas. Although for years past it had seemed as if Bolshevism had
become coloured with 'Trotskyism', this impression now revealed itself
as false. Moreover, Trotsky was incapable of conceiving the notion of
mobilising against the party the non-Bolshevik masses with whom he had
helped to make the revolution. For the time being Trotsky submitted to
Lenin and the majority in the party and in 1921 he offered no opposition
to the fateful decision to embark on a new economic policy.

Trotsky's caution was not shared by other members of the Communist Party
in Russia. A radical opposition grew up in the party during the debate
over the trade-union question. This opposition was led by two former
metal-workers and highly-respected and long-standing members of the
party -- Shlyapnikov and Lutovinov. Among their demands was the
following: 'The organisation of the administration of the national
resources and production is placed under the control of the All-Russian
Conference of Producers united in trade associations. This conference
shall elect a central committee to administer the entire economic life
of the republic.' Framed in these dry words, this amounted to a demand
for the exclusion of the Bolshevik Party and its replacement by
self-government on the part of the producers among the population. Lenin
designated these proposals of the working-men's opposition as an
anarcho-syndicalist heresy. Nevertheless, Shlyapnikov and his supporters
in reality only desired a return to the soviet democracy of 1917 in the
form in which it had been put forward by Lenin in his pamphlet _State
and Revolution_. Shlyapnikov and his supporters contented themselves
with carrying on a legal propaganda within the Bolshevik Party and its
affiliations. Other workmen and the soldier sons of peasants were less
restrained, and, in March 1921, a rebellion broke out in Kronstadt. The
island-fortress of Kronstadt, lying at the gates of Petrograd, was and
is the main base of the Russian Baltic Fleet. The Russian Navy was a
hot-bed of revolution as early as 1905 and in 1917 the Kronstadt sailors
furnished the Bolsheviks with their staunchest troops. Of this 'Old
Guard' many had since fallen on the battlefields of the Civil War or
been sent to other posts by the Soviet government. The great traditions
of the revolution continued, nevertheless, to be associated with
Kronstadt. And it was in this very place of sacred revolutionary
memories that in March 1921 the soldiers and sailors revolted against
the Soviet government and took authority into their own hands. A
Provisional Revolutionary Committee of soldiers, sailors and workmen
took over the administration of Kronstadt. The programme of the
revolutionaries contained among other points the following:

>Out of regard for the fact that the present soviets no longer reflect
>the state of opinion among the workers and peasants, new soviets should
>at once be elected by a secret ballot and with free electioneering
>facilities for all workers and peasants. Liberty of the press and of
>speech for workers and peasants, for anarchists and the left-wing
>socialist parties! Liberty for the trade unions and peasants unions!
>Liberation of all imprisoned socialists and of all workers and peasants
>arrested for pursuing the aims of their several movements! The
>abolition of all Communist propaganda sections in the army in order
>that no single party shall have the advantage over others in propaganda
>and receive funds from the state for its prosecution! Equal rations for
>all engaged in work! Freedom for the peasants to dispose of the land
>which they cannot cultivate themselves!

This is virtually tantamount to the demand put forward by the Workers'
Opposition: overthrow of party dictatorship and return to soviet
democracy. It is unquestionable that the exiled enemies of the Soviet
government greeted the Kronstadt rebellion with enthusiasm, sought to
support the rebels, and even to some extent subscribed to their
battle-cry of 'Soviets without Communists'. The Soviet government made
use of this knowledge in its propaganda against the rebellion and laid
special emphasis upon the sympathy displayed by the White Guards for the
Kronstadt rebels. At the same time Lenin never regarded the Kronstadt
rebellion as an ordinary White Guard rising of the type led by Denikin
and Wrangel. He looked upon it as the symptom of the deep enmity between
the Bolsheviks and the masses of the Russian nation.

The Soviet government did all that lay in its power to prevent the
movement from spreading to other districts. Picked regiments of the Red
Army were sent across the frozen waters of the Baltic and stormed the
fortress after heavy losses. Its capture did not put an end to the grave
menace. What had happened today in Kronstadt might take place tomorrow
in twenty other districts in Russia. The revolution had given the masses
communism and in addition famine and servitude. If they must starve,
they were at least determined to starve in freedom. Although it was
Trotsky's Red Army which stormed Kronstadt, his views on the trade-union
question found their support in the Kronstadt rebellion and the demands
put forward by the Workers' Opposition.

Lenin recognised the need for swift action in these terrible weeks.
Although he was resolved not to give democracy to the masses, Lenin was
anxious to provide them with bread even at the cost of sacrificing
Communist ideals. All hopes of a speedy salvation for Soviet Russia
through revolution in Europe had been proved to be illusory. On the
subject of the emotions animating the leading men in Russia at the time
of the First and Second World Congresses of 1919 and 1920 Trotsky, in
1921, wrote as follows:

>The First Congress met at a time when Communism was in its infancy as a
>European movement and when there seemed to be some probability that the
>almost spontaneous rising of the working classes would destroy the
>middle class before it had had time to find its bearings and establish
>itself firmly after the war... And the rising was in truth spontaneous.
>The losses were enormous. Nevertheless, the middle class withstood this
>first assault and in consequence was strengthened in its
>self-confidence... The Second Congress met in 1920 at a decisive hour
>and at a time when it was already realised that the middle class could
>not be overthrown in the course of a few weeks or months, but that for
>this to be accomplished deliberate and careful political and other
>preparations were necessary. At that time the situation was critical.
>It will be remembered that the Red Army was marching on Warsaw. In view
>of the revolutionary condition of Germany, Italy and other countries,
>it was believed that in its function as a force additional to and
>strengthening the forces in operation in Europe, this military blow
>(which was of no importance by itself) might serve to dislodge the
>avalanche of revolution from the ledge on which it had come to rest.
>This did not happen. We were driven back.

In the summer of 1920 the Russian armies, after winning a series of
battles against the Poles, wildly pursued their retreating enemy up to
the gates of Warsaw. From a military standpoint this was a hazardous
action and one that exposed the numerically weak and ill-equipped Red
Army to the risk of meeting with a decisive defeat. This offensive was a
desperate political experiment on the part of Lenin, who wished to see
if the advance of the Red Army into the Polish Corridor would cause the
outbreak of a working-class revolution in Germany. Germany, however,
remained quiet and the Red Army was forced to retreat.

In September 1920 Italian workmen seized possession of the factories
without their action resulting in a political revolution. In March 1921
armed conflicts occurred at Mansfeld in central Germany between
Communist miners and the police. The Central Committee of the KPD wanted
to support the miners by proclaiming a general strike. Since, however,
only a small proportion of working men obeyed the Communist order to
strike, the 'general strike' was a complete fiasco. There seemed indeed
to be no likelihood of the outbreak of a working-class revolution in
Germany or Italy -- not to mention any other countries -- in the near
future. Since the Communists in Germany and Italy were unable to
accomplish what had been expected of them by the Second World Congress,
Soviet Russia was forced to rely upon itself. Lenin had embarked on the
October Revolution in 1917 with a very cautious socialist programme. He
had never promised the masses to introduce communism into Russia. The
Wartime Communism of the years 1918 to 1920 came into existence through
the force of circumstances and not by the desire of Lenin or as a result
of Bolshevik ideas. Even in these years Lenin remained sceptical of the
extent of what had been achieved in the way of socialism. He did not
believe it possible to abolish the millions of tiny peasant proprietors
by a stroke of the pen.

In the spring of 1921 Lenin embarked upon his retreat from Wartime
Communism to the 'New Economic Policy' (known as NEP). The confiscation
of grain from the peasants ceased and instead the peasant was required
to deliver a certain proportion of his harvest to the state as a tax in
kind. The rest was left to him to dispose of as he wished and he was
free to sell it when and how he chose. Thus the right of private
ownership that had been disguised by Wartime Communism with a network of
requisitions was restored at a single stroke. Simultaneously free trade
was restored and retail trade and small industries started again. As a
result there followed a return to the employment of currency after the
fashion of foreign countries. Wartime Communism had been at pains to do
away with currency, and therefore the restabilisation of the rouble was
now necessary. The state retained control over big industry, railways,
banks, and also reserved the monopoly of foreign trade. Private
ownership once more came into existence beside and beneath this state
control.

The NEP did away with the equality of mankind in the form in which it
had existed under Wartime Communism -- the equality imposed by a common
lack of food. Once more a minority of workers stood beside a majority of
peasants and other members of the middle class. Moreover, the economic
condition of the landowning peasant was far better than that of the
factory-worker in the towns. In addition there existed a Red Army with
professional officers and NCOs, an army of state and party officials of
all kinds, employees and technicians in all industries, teachers,
doctors, writers and artists. All these professions revived the moment
their followers received a living wage in hard cash. The grey monotony
of Wartime Communism changed under the NEP into a brilliant kaleidoscope
of classes and professions in which -- truth compels the admission --
the factory-worker occupied the lowest rank. It was left to the further
development of the NEP in the succeeding years to show how this social
condition would fit in with the so-called political dictatorship of the
proletariat.

The new economic system that came into being through the NEP was called
by Lenin 'state capitalism'. At the Third World Congress of the
Communist International in July 1921, Lenin delivered a speech on this
subject in which he said _inter alia_:

>Taxes in kind obviously imply freedom of trade. The peasant has the
>right after payment of his taxes in kind to exchange the remainder of
>his corn. This freedom of exchange implies freedom of capitalism. We
>make no secret of that and I repeat it. We make no secret of it
>whatsoever. We should indeed be degraded if we attempted to make a
>secret of it. Free trade means freedom for capitalism -- for a new form
>of capitalism; a capitalism that we shall build up anew in certain
>aspects. We are doing that openly. It is state capitalism. State
>capitalism in a land in which capital is the governing authority, and
>state capitalism in a proletarian state, are two very different things.
>State capitalism in a capitalistic state means capitalism recognised
>and controlled by the state for the benefit of the middle class as
>opposed to the proletariat. In a proletarian state this process
>benefits the working class and enables it to defend itself against a
>middle class that is still too powerful.

Thus socialism still possessed for Lenin the same narrow and moderate
interpretation that it had had in 1917. Lenin termed factories belonging
to a working-class state, or to a working-class and peasant state,
socialist undertakings; and he held that socialist factories of this
description could also exist within the limits of a system of state
capitalism. Even after the October Revolution Lenin considered a system
of state capitalism in Russia to denote an advance on the existing
backward condition of the country.

>The development of capitalism [he wrote] under the control and
>regulation of a proletarian state (that is to say, in the sense
>attached to the term 'state capitalism'), is good and absolutely
>necessary in an exceptionally poor and backward country of small
>peasants (only of course up to a certain degree, and in so far as its
>development is capable of hastening an immediate improvement in the
>agricultural system of the peasants). If the state retains control of
>the chief factors in economic life such as foreign trade, heavy
>industry, railways and banks, then it will be in a position to control
>and regulate the private capitalism that would develop in the country
>and in the middle class.

Of great assistance to the state in its regulation of retail trade, in
Lenin's opinion, was the cooperative association. In one of his last
articles, in May 1923, Lenin expressed the view that the cultural level
of the Russian peasant should be raised to the point at which he was
ready for membership of a cooperative society in a civilised state.
Russia would have attained socialism, in Lenin's view, when the
organisation of these societies had been perfected throughout the land.
Lenin wrote:

>A society consisting of the educated members of an association for
>common ownership of the means of production and based on the class
>victory of the proletariat over the middle class -- that is the
>socialist order of society... We now have the right to say that the
>simple growth of cooperative societies (under the above-mentioned
>'small' reservation) is in our eyes identical with the growth of
>socialism. We must, however, admit simultaneously that we have
>fundamentally altered our conception of socialism. This fundamental
>change consists in the fact that formerly we laid, and were forced to
>lay, the greatest emphasis upon political warfare, upon the revolution
>and upon the seizure of power. Now the chief emphasis must be laid upon
>peaceful, organising, 'cultural' work... Only this cultural revolution
>is wanting for Russia to become a completely socialist country. This
>cultural revolution, however, makes unheard-of demands both of a purely
>cultural (overcoming illiteracy) and of a material nature, since in
>order that we may turn into a civilised country it is necessary to have
>a certain material basis and to promote a certain development of the
>material means of production.

Something more will be said subsequently about the remarkable doctrinal
consequences that resulted from Lenin's theory of cooperative
associations. In the Russia of 1921-23 such an organisation of the
peasantry into cooperative societies could only be an ideal for the
future. The immediate problems were the isolated peasant industries and
state capitalism. It was because Lenin decided upon the transition from
Wartime Communism to state capitalism that he resolutely refused to make
any concession whatever to any form of democracy. The working-class
minority in Russia could only maintain itself as against the great
majority of small owners, especially in the new capitalist conditions,
by means of a relentless dictatorship. For the same reason the Communist
Party must be the undisputed leader of the proletariat and must itself
maintain the strictest discipline and unanimity.

Lenin's changeover to the NEP brought the desired results in the
succeeding years. The Bolshevik dictatorship maintained itself in power.
Discontent among the masses vanished with the disappearance of famine.
After seven years of depression and unemployment Russian industry
experienced an upward movement. A radical change came over the relations
between the Bolsheviks and foreign states and workers. A Russia
organised on a basis of state capitalism was no longer dependent upon
the irresistible advance of the world revolution. It could exist
peacefully within a capitalist world. From 1921 Lenin sought to obtain
foreign capital for the reconstruction of Russia. Foreign investors
might rent ground, mines, forests, etc. They were permitted to start
industries from whose profits a part went to the Soviet government as
rent or tax and the remainder was left at the free disposition of the
investors. Lenin saw nothing irreconcilable with his system of state
capitalism in the presence in Russia of these great foreign capitalist
undertakings. Despite the endeavours of the Soviet government since 1921
the number of concessions granted to foreign capitalists has been
relatively small.

After 1921 Soviet Russia was formally recognised by a large number of
foreign powers. Others entered into relations with her without giving
her government formal recognition. Soviet Russia made her appearance as
a buyer and seller on the capitalistic world market. Soviet ambassadors
and trade delegations took up their residence in foreign capitals. Both
parties -- Soviet Russia and the capitalist states -- grew accustomed to
each other and began to take each other into their calculations. Lloyd
George endeavoured to get the Soviet government to cooperate in his
plans for reconstructing Europe and was responsible for the invitation
sent to the Soviet government to take part in the Genoa Conference
in 1922. It was at this conference that Soviet Russia and the
middle-class German republic concluded the Treaty of Rapallo. A glaring
light was thrown upon the changed attitude towards the international
situation adopted in Moscow since the spring of 1921 at the Third World
Congress of the Communist International in July 1921. The resolutions
concerning the world situation passed by the Third Congress on the
proposal of the Russian Communist Party first defined a four-year period
of revolution dating from March 1917 (overthrow of the Tsar) to March
1921 (miners' strike in central Germany). It was then laid down that:
'This great wave failed to pass over and bear away with it capitalism
either in Europe or in the world at large.' The resolution goes on to
declare:

>The years elapsing between the Second and Third Congresses of the
>Communist International saw a number of insurrections and struggles on
>the part of the working class which in many cases ended in defeat. (The
>offensive undertaken by the Red Army against Warsaw in August 1920, the
>proletarian movement in Italy in September 1920, the insurrection of
>German workmen in March 1921.) The first period of revolution after the
>war appears virtually to have reached its conclusion. It was
>characterised by an elemental offensive force, a lack of system in
>methods and aims, and by the tremendous panic which it induced in the
>ruling classes. The self-confidence of the middle class as a class and
>the apparent strength of their state organisations unquestionably
>increased and fear of communism lessened if it did not wholly
>disappear. The leaders of the middle class armed themselves with the
>power of their state apparatus and have in all countries taken the
>offensive against the working-class masses both on the economic and on
>the political front.

A victorious world revolution was once more held up as the ideal and a
complete recovery of capitalism declared to be impossible. At present
the proletariat was forced to adopt the defensive. It could not wage war
for supreme power in the state and must therefore content itself with
lesser conflicts and more moderate demands of an economic nature. The
resolutions of the Third Congress on this subject run:

>All agitation and propaganda and the entire work of the Communist
>parties must be animated by the consciousness that no lasting
>improvement in the condition of the masses of the proletariat is
>possible within the capitalist order of society, and that only the
>overthrow of the middle class and the destruction of the capitalist
>states affords the possibility of commencing the work of improving the
>state of the working classes and of rebuilding the economic system
>destroyed by capitalism. This consciousness must not, however, find
>expression in an abandonment of the struggle for the daily necessities
>of life required by the proletariat before it is capable of securing
>them for itself by establishing its own dictatorship... All objections
>to making such partial demands, all complaints on the part of
>reformists against participation in this semi-warfare, are symptoms of
>the same incapacity to comprehend the essential nature of revolutionary
>action that manifested itself in the opposition of individual Communist
>groups to participation in the trade unions and in parliamentary life.
>It is not enough to proclaim to the proletariat the aim to be striven
>for without intensifying the everyday struggle that is alone capable of
>leading the proletariat towards the battle for the final objective.

The interest of the debates in the Third Congress centred round the
insurrection of the German workers in March -- the so-called 'March
Action'. It has already been mentioned above that local disputes in
central Germany resulted in conflicts between police and workmen, and
that the KPD then attempted to support their party colleagues in central
Germany by means of a general strike throughout the country. In this
connexion the so-called 'offensive theory' made its appearance in the
ranks of the KPD -- a theory according to which a revolutionary party
must resolutely and permanently continue the offensive for the purpose
of achieving power without regard for unfavourable circumstances. This
theory sounds fantastic and dangerous. In order to understand it
properly it is necessary to recall the resolutions passed by the Second
World Congress in the summer of 1920. These were:

>The proletariat of the world is confronted with its final struggle. The
>age in which we are now living is an age of actual civil warfare. The
>decisive hour approaches. In almost every land in which there is a
>labour movement of any importance the working class is confronted with
>a succession of fierce armed conflicts.

If the Second World Congress was in the right, then countries like Italy
and Germany were already in a state of open civil warfare. In civil
warfare, however, as Marx, Engels and Lenin repeatedly insisted, a
ruthless and clever offensive is the sole possible weapon for use by
insurrectionaries. The mistake made by the KPD in March 1921 is in
reality the mistake made by the Second World Congress in taking an
exaggerated view of the tenseness of the situation in Europe. In the
resolutions passed by the Third World Congress no mention is made of
this error on the part of the International -- also on the part of Lenin
and Zinoviev -- and the failure of the 'March Action' is laid wholly at
the door of the KPD. The resolutions of the Third Congress on this
subject ran:

>The March Action was forced upon the VKPD (United German Communist
>Party) by the government's attack upon the Central German
>proletariat... In this first great struggle since its foundation the
>VKPD made a number of mistakes, of which the most important is to be
>found in its failure to emphasise the defensive nature of the struggle
>and in its designating it an offensive action. The VKPD thereby laid
>itself open to the accusation on the part of the unscrupulous enemies
>of the proletariat -- the middle class, the SPD and the USPD -- of
>fomenting insurrections by the proletariat. The effect of its failure
>was only increased by a number of members of the party who declared an
>offensive to be the chief weapon in the armoury of the VKPD in present
>circumstances.

The criticism made by Lenin and other leading members of the congress in
the debates was sharper. The European working class must be convinced by
the members of the congress that the Communist International regarded
all idea of an armed revolution in the immediate future as wildly
adventurous and that a return must be made to the prewar policy of
unarmed economic struggle. The resolutions of the Third Congress are
open to the gravest objections in regard both to their appraisal of
facts and to their logic. The notion of an epoch of world revolution
developed by Lenin in his great speech to the Second Congress was still
valid. The revolt of subject peoples against imperialism was still in
progress in countries outside Europe. At the same time the inner
contradictions in the capitalist system revealed themselves with
increasing clearness in Europe and the United States -- indebtedness,
the results of the Peace Treaties of 1919, depreciation of currencies,
and unemployment. All these factors were as much in evidence in 1920 as
in 1921 and 1932. The fundamental characteristics of an epoch of world
revolution had undergone no change in the interval between the Second
and Third World Congresses. Moreover, no important change had taken
place between the summer of 1920 and that of 1921 in the leading
European states. Severe as was the suffering caused by the loss of life
in the March Action in 1921 for mourning working-class families, the
action itself was only an unimportant episode in the postwar history of
Germany and not to be compared with events such as the Kapp Putsch in
1920 and the economic crisis in 1923. Of all the problems crowding upon
Germany not a single one had been solved in 1921. Indeed, the
Franco-German tension, the reparations question, and the depreciation of
the mark and growing industrial distress were threatening to produce a
new crisis in the immediate future -- the crisis that actually came in
1923.

Lenin had truly prophesied the advent to power of a Labour government as
the first step in a revolutionary development in England. This opinion
was as sound in 1920 as in 1921. The situation had undergone no change.
Moreover, the political and social condition of France had remained
unaltered during the same year. The growth of fascism in Italy had
brought about a state of actual civil war in that country. Nevertheless
nothing of a decisive nature had occurred in Italy. Thus the situation
in Europe and that of the world at large had not altered in any way
between the Second and the Third World Congress. Soviet Russia alone had
changed. In the summer of 1920 Lenin hoped, by forcibly hastening on the
revolution in countries like Germany and Italy, to establish labour
governments in those states that would be friendly to Soviet Russia.
This is the explanation of the fervour displayed in the resolutions of
the Second World Congress. By the summer of 1921 Russia had withdrawn
into herself and come to rely upon her own resources. She adapted
herself to life without the world revolution. Lenin ceased to believe in
a speedy and successful working-class revolution in Europe. Hence the
symbolic importance of the March Action in Germany for the Third World
Congress. It was falsely taken to indicate the close of that period of
active revolutionary movement among the European working class that had
begun in the World War. In truth, its importance for the Communist
International lay simply in the fact that it practically coincided with
the changeover to the NEP. The Third World Congress seized the
opportunity to demonstrate in the March Action the mistakes of its
former policy.

It would indeed have been only right if the Third Congress had corrected
certain exaggerations on the part of the Second Congress in its
estimation of the universal extent of a state of civil war. Instead it
went to the other extreme. Since Lenin no longer believed in the
possibility of a revolution in Europe in the immediate future, he
overlooked the tense revolutionary condition of Italy and Germany. It
was still within the bounds of possibility that the Italian workmen
would defeat the fascists and achieve power, and that the disordered
social and economic condition of Germany might lead to the establishment
of a socialist labour government. It is true that the resolutions passed
by the Third Congress held forth the victory of the united Italian
proletariat over the fascists, and of communism in Germany as objectives
to be pursued. At the same time, however, these resolutions announced a
defensive policy on the part of the proletariat and directed the eyes of
workmen towards the pursuit of predominantly economic aims. It is indeed
in the highest degree questionable whether political parties
artificially organised from above, as were the Communist parties in
Central and Western Europe, were capable at all of revolutionary action.
And in so far as the capacity for revolution existed the decisions of
the Third Congress paralysed it.

The majority of European workmen supported the Third International
during the years 1919 and 1920. As a result of dissensions, and their
rejection of large sections of the working class, the Communists found
themselves once more in the minority. The SPD, strengthened by the
addition of a part of the USPD which had not gone over to the Third
International, had a far greater membership than the Communist Party in
Germany. The Social-Democrats in 1921 were once more supported by a
clear majority of the workmen in England and Italy, Sweden and Denmark,
Holland and Belgium, Austria and Switzerland. Only in France,
Czechoslovakia and Norway were the Communists in 1921 supported by the
majority of organised workmen. Communism was forcibly suppressed by the
governments in the Baltic and Balkan States, Poland and Hungary. The
syndicalists, who were supported by the majority of the Spanish workmen,
left the Third International; and their example was followed in Germany
by the small KAPD (German Communist Labour Party). Communism hardly
existed in non-European countries.

In the years following upon 1921 it would have been possible in these
circumstances to reconstruct the Socialist International to include the
majority of the working class. The Communists were in the minority from
an international standpoint. In the course of a great revolutionary
movement an active minority can become the majority of the nation. This
was shown by the change that came over Russia in 1917. The Third
International now demanded of the Communists that they should win over
the majority of the working class in all countries by means of a skilful
and successful leadership of the proletarian struggle for the daily
necessities of life. This task proved incapable of accomplishment. The
Social-Democrats possessed a long and successful tradition of leadership
in the proletarian economic struggle and especially in the trade unions.
The Communists might at the most excel the Social-Democrats in the
conduct of revolution; they could never do so in the matter of wages.
The Communists had gained for themselves the support of great numbers of
European workmen by summoning them from the peaceful daily struggle for
existence to engage in an armed struggle for political power. Now,
however, the Communists were to lead back the workmen to this daily
struggle, that is, to invade a sphere from which the trained and
experienced Social-Democrats could not be driven. Moreover, if there
were in Europe a permanent Social-Democrat majority opposed to a
Communist minority of workmen, if both pursued the same aims in the
daily struggle, if both worked together in the trade unions, then the
question in Europe at the close of the Third World Congress would become
one of deciding what reasons there were for the separate existence of
Communist parties. Up to the meeting of the Third World Congress there
had been a distinct and unmistakable difference between Social-Democrats
and Communists. The Communists proclaimed the necessity for an immediate
armed working-class revolution; the Social-Democrats denied the
possibility of such a revolution in existing circumstances. Now the
Communists declared that this aim could only be realised in some
far-distant future. They did, indeed, promise the workmen that they
should one day participate in a revolution and that on that occasion the
Social-Democrats would again be found wanting. A permanent cleavage in
the working class could not be justified by this promise of something
that was to happen in a conditional future.

The contradictory and ambiguous nature of the resolutions passed by the
Third World Congress are to be explained by the fact that Lenin and all
the leading Bolsheviks were perplexed as to the future of the Communist
International. If a great wave of revolution was one day to come again
the Communist parties would once more be able to take the lead. For the
moment the only alternative before them was an alliance with the
Social-Democrats. In October 1921 the Executive of the Communist
International proposed to the Social-Democrat parties and trade unions
the building of a 'United Front' for the purpose of carrying on the
struggle for the daily necessities of the proletariat.

The opinions entertained on the subject of the Third World Congress by
the most critical minds in the European labour movement found their
ablest expression in the writings of the brilliant Dutch Marxist Hermann
Gorter, who wrote immediately after the conclusion of the Third World
Congress as follows:

>The Third Congress of the Moscow, or Russian, International has decided
>the fate of the world revolution for the present. The trend of opinion
>that seriously desired world revolution -- that is to say German,
>English and Western European revolutions in the first place -- has been
>expelled from the Russian International. The Communist parties in
>Western Europe and throughout the world that retain their membership of
>the Russian International will become nothing more than a means to
>preserve the Russian Revolution and the Soviet Republic. The Western
>European revolution and the world revolution are pushed into the
>background in order to enable the Russian Revolution to live a little
>longer. Thus the world revolution is condemned to disappear for years
>to come.
>
>The Russian Revolution was only superficially a proletarian and
>communist revolution. In reality it was far too little proletarian and
>communist and far too greatly peasant and democratic... Out of this
>partially-concealed contradiction arose the domestic policy of the
>Soviet Republic and the Communist Party -- the dictatorship of the
>party leaders, the rigid discipline, over-centralisation, etc.
>
>At the head of the Third International stands a party which is
>compelled, and will be still more compelled, to pay more regard to
>peasant and middle-class democracy than to the proletariat, and that
>forces, and in the future will still further force, the International
>to follow its example. It is a party that with the one hand supports
>English and German capitalism by foreign trade and concessions, and
>with the other hand supports the German and English proletariat. The
>tactics pursued by this Third -- Russian -- International are of the
>same ambiguous nature in the case of all countries and all parties. In
>other words, a Third International forced by world capitalism and
>Russian democracy to adopt a policy of compromise and opportunism and
>in which revolution will become more and more a matter of phrases
>possibly alternated with insurrections.

These sentences of Gorter's contain exaggerations and are coloured by
the personal sympathy entertained by the writer for the German
'Communist Labour Party'. But he has correctly defined the fundamental
problem: whether after 1921 the government of a Soviet Russia organised
in accordance with the principles of state capitalism would be capable
of directing the proletariat of the world in its struggle with
capitalism.

## Chapter 09: Lenin's Testament, 1922-1924

An apoplectic stroke in 1922 brought to a close Lenin's active life.
Although his condition improved towards the close of 1922 and again
early in 1923 sufficiently to enable him to deliver a few speeches and
write some articles, it soon became worse again and he died in
January 1924. After carrying out the Russian Revolution Lenin had
assured peace for his fellow countrymen by making an end of both the
Civil War and the war with Russia's external enemies. Through the
adoption of the NEP he overcame famine and restored a quiet daily life
to towns and villages. As ruler of Russia Lenin kept up the same modest
and simple habits of life which he had pursued in his furnished room in
Zürich. His life-work was characterised throughout by an unvarying
regard for reality and he never once permitted himself to be swayed by
personal feelings. In the eyes of the nation Lenin was a simple son of
Russia who shared the anxieties of his compatriots and was accessible to
everyone. He abhorred all theatricality because it was unnecessary for
his purpose. Hegel said: 'Robespierre declared virtue to be the greatest
of all moral qualities and it can with truth be said that he practised
what he preached.' The same may be said of Lenin. In the last years of
his life Lenin enjoyed unbounded respect among the Russian nation. His
body was embalmed and placed in a public mausoleum in the Red Square in
Moscow. People come there daily to gaze upon the features of the 'Saint
of the Russian Revolution'. No one would have been more astonished than
Lenin himself if this posthumous reverence had been prophesied to him.
His realism and modesty, nevertheless, did not avail to prevent his
becoming the embodiment of all that was mystic in the Russian
Revolution.

The great motivating force in Lenin's life was his passionate desire to
liberate Russia from the thraldom of the Tsars. Marxism provided him
with a weapon ready to his hand. Although his life-work was accomplished
on Russian soil, Lenin saw the Russian Revolution against the background
of the greater world revolution. Throughout the thirty years of his
political activity Lenin remained faithful to himself and despite
tactical changes in matters of detail he never changed his opinions on
matters of principle. Thus it would be a mistake to see in the NEP an
admission on Lenin's part that his socialist ideal was shattered. On the
contrary, the NEP belonged organically to the body of opinion formed by
Lenin before 1917 on the subject of the Russian Revolution and the
economic future of Russia. The Wartime Communism of 1918-20 was not
Lenin's work, but was a temporary change of plan which circumstances
forced him to make. Lenin never denied, at least in theory, during the
years 1918-20 his fundamental principle of state capitalism.

Lenin bequeathed to the Bolshevik Party the task of holding together the
Russian peasants and workmen. An economic link necessary for this
purpose was to be forged between the state administration of heavy
industry, transport, banks and foreign trade on the one hand and private
interests in the form of peasant ownership of land and retail trade on
the other. Conditions in Russia had been stabilised by the NEP to such
an extent that no great disturbance occurred during Lenin's illness and
the Bolshevik Party could continue to rule Russia unopposed after his
death. The most important economic consequence of the NEP was the return
of Soviet Russia to a stabilised currency. After lengthy preparations
inflation was successfully overcome and a new and stabilised rouble
placed in circulation by 1924. At the same time the state monopoly of
foreign trade enabled the government to maintain a careful control over
Russia's international trade balance. Soviet Russia only bought from
abroad goods payment for which could be covered by the proceeds of its
own export trade. The Soviet government punctually discharged its
obligations to foreign suppliers and never contracted debts beyond its
capacity to pay. It was thus able to prevent foreign speculators from
tampering with the Russian rouble. The circulation of money within
Russia itself was in 1924 brought into relation with the volume of
trade, and arbitrary printing of new notes ceased. Naturally Russia
suffered after 1924 from the distresses attendant upon this process of
deflation. Strictest economy was enforced upon government offices and
all undertakings. State industry was to be made to pay its way. The
various state trusts were enjoined to take the greatest care in making
their calculations; the working capacity of the workmen was to be
increased as far as possible; and wages were to be brought into relation
with profits.

The reconstruction of Russian industry went on apace after the adoption
of the NEP. In 1920 the output of Russian industry was only 15 per cent
of its prewar output. This figure had increased by 1924 to 45 per cent.
It must not, however, be forgotten that even in 1924 Russian industry
was still in a backward condition from a technical standpoint. Money and
material were wanting to modernise the older factories. In consequence
the rate of production was slow and the cost of production unduly great.
The number of workers employed in factories rose from 1,200,000 in 1922
to 1,600,000 in 1924. After enormous difficulties had been overcome the
railway system was reorganised during these years and a reliable service
of trains put into operation.

A bad harvest in 1921 retarded improvement in Russian agriculture. After
that year, however, its progress was rapid. The light taxes imposed upon
the Russian peasant were at first payable in produce and only after 1924
in money. Since 1920 ownership of land had been put on an ordered
footing and no further state interference took place. It is true that
new social distinctions gradually grew up in the country districts. The
restoration of free trade and money payments brought into existence a
new and well-to-do class of big peasant proprietors who carried on the
traditions of the kulaks. The poor peasants had no land to spare for
their younger sons, who therefore emigrated to the towns, flooded the
labour market and contributed to the unemployment so typical of Russia
under the NEP. In 1924 there were already one million unemployed in
Russia. With the assistance of a small dole from the state they
endeavoured to make a living by doing casual labour. A new class of
agricultural labourers also came into existence.

The social equality characteristic of the period of Wartime Communism
disappeared completely in the early years of the NEP. Money had again
become an influential factor. People began once more to distinguish
themselves from their neighbours by the amount and manner of their
earnings. At the head of the social scale came the small governing
clique of Bolshevik Party leaders. Next came the millions of public
servants and officials employed by the soviets, the Bolshevik Party,
trade unions and cooperative societies, office-workers of all
descriptions, engineers and technicians in state industries, teachers in
higher and lower schools, officers and NCOs of the Red Army. Rykov, a
leading member of the Soviet government and Chairman of the Council of
People's Commissars in succession to Lenin, said in 1924 on the subject
of the state administration:

>The Soviet administration is of the greatest importance for our work.
>It employs many hundreds of thousands of officials of whom the
>overwhelming majority were educated in and imbibed the traditions of
>the former government. These characteristics are brought by them into
>their new work of construction. These Soviet officials, who are for the
>greater part indifferent to the vital concerns of the party and the
>working class, have neither the planning capacity nor the unwearying
>resolution in its execution that are required for a swift discharge of
>the tasks which the party has set before them. Bureaucratic and lower
>middle-class strikes and bureaucratic divergences are inevitable in the
>Soviet administration in these circumstances.

Lenin himself wrote in May 1923 on the subject of 'the great and
epoch-making task of reorganising our practically worthless
administrative apparatus that has been taken over in its entirety from a
previous age. We have not, and could not, achieve anything worthy of
mention during the five years of warfare.' The state machinery of Soviet
Russia is nevertheless far better than the Tsarist bureaucracy and if
circumstances be taken into account can be compared not unfavourably
with administrations in other countries. The violent criticism of the
Soviet administration voiced by leading Bolsheviks like Lenin, Rykov and
others is to be explained by the fact that these men found in it a
foreign element, that is, the middle-class ideal as opposed to the
proletarian ideal of the state. The Soviet administration cannot be
other than it is as long as the government uses it as an instrument for
maintaining its dictatorship over the nation. The choice is either true
democracy in the form of effective government by the soviets or
bureaucracy in the form of government by the state apparatus. A third
alternative was and is impossible in Russia. Moreover, it is no less
inevitable that in the course of years these government officials will
take on the appearance of a new middle-class society through being the
more educated and materially secure upper class of brain-workers
controlling the administration of the state and of the means of
production.

Beside this great army of state officials in the widest sense of the
term there stood in Russia in 1924 the richer and poorer peasants,
merchants and manual workers, the professional classes (doctors,
artists, writers, etc), and -- finally -- the factory-workers. Nor was
the proletariat in 1924 any longer an entity. Instead there existed a
long scale of wages graded according to occupation and qualification. A
million unemployed formed the base of this social pyramid.

The dreams of communist equality that had haunted the minds of Russian
workmen for years past were thus dissolved, and it was no easy matter to
effect an intellectual change in the Russian proletariat without running
the risk of endangering the existence of the Soviet state. This change
was rendered possible by the fact that, even after 1921, Lenin continued
to reiterate that he regarded the Soviet system of government as a
dictatorship of the proletariat. It bears that name to the present day.
The government and the Bolshevik Party continually assure the Russian
workers that the existing state is their state -- not, indeed, a state
organised in accordance with the chance interests of individual workmen
but the state of the working class as a whole. Further, they sought to
maintain that all that happened in Russia was done in the interests of
proletarian government. Compromises, apparent injustices in individual
instances, the sacrifices that were continually being demanded of the
workers -- all these were necessitated by the demands of the proletarian
state. Nevertheless, it was difficult for the ordinary factory worker to
persuade himself that he exercised a class dictatorship over his
technical manager, for the tram-conductor to feel that he was master of
the well-paid official whose fare he collected, and for an unemployed
man to imagine himself the ruler of the owner of the provision store
before whose window he stood and gazed hungrily. Ever since 1921 Lenin's
Russia was in truth a compound of state capitalism with a proletarian
myth. The most extraordinary aspect of the situation was that no special
attempt was made to conceal the real state of affairs. Lenin and his
successors have always sincerely and openly discussed the true facts.
If, however, the complicated existing governmental system is depicted as
a dictatorship of the proletariat, the picture will belong to the realm
of fantasy and not of truth.

The beginnings of the proletarian myth stretch back to 1918, to the time
when soviet democracy was replaced in Russia by a party dictatorship,
although no attempt was made to change the name of the state from that
of a Soviet state, and the fiction was maintained that everything that
was done in Russia was done in the name of and by the self-governing
soviets. The real roots of the Bolshevik myth of the proletariat are,
nevertheless, to be found in the works of Marx and Engels. According to
Marx it was for communism to point the right path to the proletariat,
and the actions of the communists are those of the proletariat as a
class in the historical sense of the term, even though any number of
'backward' workmen protest against them. It is not for the proletariat
to seek to improve the condition of the individual workman. Its great
mission is the liberation of mankind. And in executing this mission it
will be called upon to make greater sacrifices than the other classes.
This was the interpretation placed by Marx and Engels upon their policy
-- for example, in the _Neue Rheinische Zeitung_ -- in styling it a
proletarian policy; and in a similar manner Lenin and the Bolshevik
Party leaders could claim that their state was a proletarian state and
all their actions were acts done in the name of the proletariat.

The completion of the middle-class revolution, the liberation of the
peasants, and the restoration of liberty to oppressed peoples, etc, are
in Marx's and Engels' view tasks to be fulfilled by the working class.
These, however, are simple and obvious matters of fact. The fable first
appeared in the moment in which the proletariat falsely identified the
completed phase of middle-class evolution with the coming proletarian
and socialist phase. The dictatorship of the proletariat is
simultaneously the realisation of socialism. Nevertheless, Lenin had
always admitted that Soviet Russia was not a purely socialist state but
a form of state capitalism in which both middle-class and socialist
elements were present. The fable here conflicts glaringly with the
truth. In his famous essay in 1923 on the organisation of cooperative
societies, however, Lenin had pointed out a way by which this conflict
might one day be resolved: socialism would be realised when once the
cultural level of the Russian peasants had been raised and they had been
united in cooperative societies. At the same time no effort must be
spared to enlarge the state-controlled industries, to place them on a
higher technical level, and to increase the number of workmen employed
by them. A state-controlled industry of greater productivity and
efficiency -- Lenin was specially interested in plans for the
electrification of Russia -- should form the foundation for the peasant
cooperative societies and engage with them in an exchange of
commodities. The result would be socialism.

Such was the testament in an economic sense left by Lenin to his party
and the Russian nation. If Lenin was right, Russia certainly was not a
socialist state in the years 1921-24, but it could become one if the
difficulties arising out of deflation and currency stabilisation had
once been overcome; and become one in a few years without any specially
dramatic events and, above all, by an organised evolutionary process in
Russia itself that paid no regard to the progress of world revolution.

'Socialism' is capable of many interpretations. The term is defenceless
against those who misuse it. Lenin laid a strict interpretation upon it
in the sense of Marxism and his whole attitude to socialism can only be
criticised by bearing in mind Marx's definition. The meaning attached by
Marx to socialism in an economic sense can be discerned quite clearly in
his _Capital_ and other works. Marx distinguished between three phases:
a primitive phase in which the producers -- manual workers and peasants
-- are also owners of the means of production; a second phase --
capitalism -- in which the working man finds himself severed from the
means of production that are now the property of a minority in whose
interest the dispossessed working man must labour; and a third phase --
socialism -- in which the working man recovers his control over the
means of production. The spoiler is now himself despoiled. Nevertheless,
there is no return to the primitive phase, and no fresh division of the
means of production among small proprietors, but instead centralised
production is maintained -- this time in the interests of all. In a
socialist organisation of society barter in the barest necessities of
life would replace trading in goods with its exploitation of markets,
striving after profits and accumulations of unwanted goods.

The Russian Revolution in 1917 destroyed agriculture on a large scale.
It also resulted in the return to a system of small ownership and small
farms. This was a development that had nothing in common with socialism
and that did not take on a more socialist character merely through the
incorporation of ten or a hundred peasant proprietors in a cooperative
society. For such a society produced goods, made and accumulated
profits, and would be a middle-class organisation in a middle-class
monetary system. Indeed Lenin's theory of the peasant cooperative
societies as a form of socialism is irreconcilable with Marxian
economics. Nevertheless, Lenin had received absolution in anticipation
of his 'sin against Marxism' from the hands of no less a person than
Marx himself.

During the last years of his life Marx had followed with intense
interest the revolutionary movement in Russia that led to the
assassination of Alexander II. It has already been stated that the
_Narodniki_ were in those days the leaders of revolution --
intellectuals inspired with the ideal of liberating the Russian
peasants. The industrial proletariat at that time played no political
part in Russia. The _Narodniki_ persuaded themselves that certain
remains of communal property still to be found in Russian villages were
capable of further development and that a peasant socialism based on
village councils would one day replace the Tsars. In this manner Russia
would avoid passing through the phase in the evolution of Western Europe
characterised by fully developed industrial capitalism and proletarian
socialism, and would pass direct from Tsarist feudalism to a nationalist
Russian peasant socialism. During these last years Marx was often asked
by Russian revolutionaries for his opinion on this question. If Marx had
been nothing more than a socialist _doctrinaire_, he would have been
forced to reply to the _Narodniki_ that their ideas had nothing in
common with his. Marx, however, was a revolutionary first and foremost,
and a theoretical economist only in the second place. Hence it was that
he hailed the _Narodniki_ movement with enthusiasm and made possible a
reconciliation between their ideals and his own theories. A Russian
translation of the _Communist Manifesto_ appeared in 1882 with a preface
by Marx and Engels, in which they say:

>The purpose of the _Communist Manifesto_ was to proclaim the
>inescapable and approaching disappearance of the present system of
>middle-class ownership. In Russia, however, in addition to a feverish
>development of capitalism and the beginnings of middle-class property
>ownership, the greater part of the land is to be found in the communal
>possession of the peasants. The problem is: can the Russian village
>community -- an already much dilapidated relic of the primitive
>communal ownership of land -- develop directly into a higher communist
>type of landownership, or must it undergo the same dissolution that
>took place in the historical evolution of the West? The only possible
>answer today to this question is: if the Russian revolution is the
>signal for a workers' revolution in the West, and if these complement
>one another, then the present-day system of communal ownership in
>Russia can serve as the starting-point for a communist development.

The _Narodniki_ grossly exaggerated the extent of communal ownership in
Russia. It had completely vanished by the outbreak of the Russian
Revolution. It is of importance, however, to find that in 1882 Marx
assented to the existence of peasant socialism in Russia at the side of
proletarian socialism in Western Europe. Moreover, if the victory of the
revolution over the Tsar could be accomplished in no other way, then
Marx was also prepared to concede to Russia a separate national
development on a peasant basis. It is true that Marx only considered
peasant communism possible in Russia if the true socialist workers'
revolution had simultaneously proved victorious in Western Europe -- if,
in other words, an agrarian socialist Russia could find its support in a
proletarian socialist Western Europe. Thus, when Lenin found a new way
to socialism for Russia in 1923 through peasant cooperative societies,
he was able to link up his ideas with those of Marx. At the same time
his ideas implied a return to _Narodniki_ theories. There is indeed an
element of tragedy in the fact that after fighting a ruthless political
battle with the Social Revolutionaries for thirty years Lenin was forced
at the close of his life to bring his system into some sort of agreement
with their ideals. The force of social evolution is indeed stronger than
the will of any party organisation. When the Russian Revolution
destroyed feudalism together with the bigger private capitalists, and
when it could not be carried on by the industrial proletariat alone,
then it was forced of necessity to seek a middle path that led it by way
of state capitalism and peasant cooperative societies to a nationalist
Russian 'socialism' wearing _Narodniki_ colours. In his old age Lenin
was prepared to tread this path. Stalin has followed it.

Marx, as a Western European, could only conceive of a _Narodniki_
revolution in Russia as parallel to and in alliance with the workers'
revolution in the West. On the other hand Lenin was forced after 1921 to
content himself with a Russian Revolution in the midst of a world that
had remained capitalist. If the last speeches and writings of Lenin are
read with care, it will be seen how he came to concentrate his thoughts
wholly upon Russia and how he was determined to achieve what he called
socialism in Russia alone. International connexions are only of
importance for Russia in so far as they are able to protect her from
foreign invasion. There is no longer any mention of Russia's receiving
definite support from a world revolution. All justification for the
existence of the Third International was therewith destroyed and it only
remains to ask why Lenin and his successors maintained it. Enemies of
Bolshevism frequently declare that Soviet Russia makes use of the Third
International in the interests of its foreign policy or that it is used
as a magnet to attract the attention of foreign workers to Russia. An
impartial study reveals both views to be false. It would indeed be
serviceable from the standpoint of Russian foreign policy if a Communist
party dependent upon Russia were to become the government of a foreign
country. Since 1921, however, Communists have not achieved power in any
non-Russian country; they never had any hope of doing so; and they have
nowhere exercised any real influence upon the existing government. If it
is to be successful, Russian foreign policy must be prepared to treat
with existing governments and parties. The existence of Communist
parties in the countries themselves, far from lightening only helped to
render more difficult Russia's relations with Mussolini, Kemal Pasha,
Germany, England, etc. Russian diplomacy would work better and be more
fruitful of results if it was not compromised by the existence of the
Third International. Russian diplomacy and foreign trade are wholly
independent of the Third International, even though they both have a
common base in the Central Committee of the Communist Party in Moscow.
Nevertheless, the rulers of Russia are well aware that if they wish
their foreign policy to be successful they must not identify it with the
Communist International.

Moreover, Soviet Russia is deeply concerned to gain the friendship of
the working class throughout the world. Now the majority of the
international proletariat since 1921 has once more belonged to the
Social-Democrat party and the continual attacks made by Communists on
Social-Democrat party officials have not been calculated to promote
feelings of friendship for Russia. It is in spite of and not because of
the local Communist party that a Social-Democrat remains friendly to
Soviet Russia. The path leading to the friendship of the majority of
European and American workmen is closed and not opened to Soviet Russia
by the activities of the Communist International. It will be shown below
that the existence of the Third International has exercised a
prejudicial effect even upon the relations between Soviet Russia and the
Asiatic peoples engaged in a struggle against imperialism. Moreover, the
Communist parties in foreign lands can be of little real assistance to
Soviet Russia in its upward path and only do harm to its international
position. For all these reasons it appears all the more extraordinary
that the Soviet government should not have long ago cast off the Third
International. As a matter of fact two attempts have been made by the
Bolshevik rulers of Russia in the past decade to dissolve the Communist
International: the policy of a united front on the part of the
international proletariat that was pursued from 1921 to 1923, and the
attempt to achieve the unification of the trade unions in an
international sense that was made from 1925 to 1927. Both these attempts
ended in failure because they were pursued by Moscow in a hesitant and
contradictory manner.

What is the mysterious force that has time and again bound together
Soviet Russia and the Communist International during the past decade? It
is the proletarian and socialist fable which even Russian Bolshevism
cannot dispense with and whose importance for Russian domestic policy
has grown even greater since 1928. If a dictatorship of the proletariat
really existed in Russia, the fact would be recognised by the
international proletariat or at least by its revolutionary element. If
all the international labour organisations were to certify that Soviet
Russia is a middle-class state, their testimony would not overthrow the
Soviet government but would certainly prejudice its relations with the
Russian proletariat. The recognition and moral support of international
opinion has always been of great importance to Russian revolutionaries.
The fact of least importance was that Russian exiles received money or
other assistance from citizens of the countries in which they found an
asylum. What was of extreme importance was that the revolutionaries
became convinced that they formed a part of the great international
movement for the liberation of mankind. This was the reason that led the
_Narodniki_ in the 1870s and 1880s to seek the blessing of Marx and
Engels for their work. This was the reason why the Russian
Social-Democrats in prewar days were enthusiastic members of the Second
International. This was the reason why Lenin at the time of the World
War sought to find in the Zimmerwald movement a moral support for the
coming revolution in Russia. In the years 1918-20 the Bolsheviks
expected their material salvation to come to them directly from the
hands of the Third International. It was of decisive importance during
the Kronstadt rebellion in 1921 not only that all White Guards and
Monarchists in foreign countries supported the rebels but that the
entire revolutionary working class in Europe stood behind the Soviet
government.

The Third World Congress in the summer of 1921 and the Fourth World
Congress towards the close of 1922 expressly approved the NEP in Russia
and declared its adoption to be necessary in the interests of the
international proletariat and socialism. Lenin and his successors were
sincerely convinced that the Russian Revolution in 1917 was a great
historical achievement of the world proletariat and that workers in
every country were under an obligation to recognise and support Soviet
Russia. The Social-Democrats in Europe very naturally sought to defend
themselves against the continuous Bolshevik attacks by criticising
Soviet Russia and by adopting the views of exiled Menshevik leaders. The
rulers of Soviet Russia were therefore anxious to find some thoroughly
reliable means of combating Menshevism and anti-Bolshevism in
Social-Democracy throughout the world. The first demand made by the
Bolsheviks of every Communist party abroad was its recognition of the
proletarian and socialist character of the Soviet state. The Communist
International was therefore not to lay stress in its propaganda on the
state capitalist character of the Soviet state with its system of
compromises but rather on the revolutionary and proletarian legend. A
classic witness to the existence of this Soviet Russian legend is to be
found in the resolution passed by the Third World Congress in July 1921
on the subject of the tactics to be pursued by the Russian Communist
Party. The resolution ran:

>The Third World Congress of the Communist International looks back in
>admiration upon almost four years of struggle by the Russian
>proletariat for the capture and retention of political power. The
>congress unanimously approves the policy pursued by the Russian
>Communist Party, which from the outset has accurately judged the
>dangers implicit in each situation as it occurred and, true to the
>principles of revolutionary Marxism, has always found ways and means to
>overcome them; and which -- after the temporary conclusion of the Civil
>War -- by its policy towards the peasants, and in the questions of
>concessions and industrial reconstruction, has concentrated under its
>leadership all the energy of the proletariat upon maintaining its
>dictatorship in Russia until the proletariat in Western Europe shall be
>able to come to the assistance of their brothers.
>
>In thus giving expression to its conviction that it is only thanks to
>this resolute and purposeful policy on the part of the Russian
>Communist Party that Soviet Russia will continue to be regarded as the
>first and most important fortress of the world revolution, the World
>Congress brands as treachery the conduct of the Mensheviks in all
>countries who by their attacks upon Soviet Russia and the policy of the
>Russian Communist Party have strengthened the hands of the capitalist
>reactionaries in their war against Russia, and have attempted to delay
>the coming of the socialist revolution throughout the world. The World
>Congress calls upon the proletariat in all countries to place itself
>unanimously at the side of Russian workmen and peasants and to make the
>October Revolution a reality throughout the whole world. Long live the
>war for the dictatorship of the proletariat! Long live the socialist
>revolution!

A marked contradiction thus came into existence in the years 1921-23
between the Russian revolutionary manner of speech of the Communist
International and its revisionist actions. Communist policy in these
years was inspired by the idea of the united front. The argument ran
somewhat as follows: Communists and Social-Democrats are not agreed in
their aims. But the international proletariat is confronted with urgent
problems of the day. The workmen must defend their political freedom,
hours of work, social gains and wages, against the attack of their
employers. The Communist workman is as much interested in these matters
as is the Social-Democrat, Christian socialist, or non-party workman.
And this great struggle for daily needs cannot be led by the Communist
minority among the workers alone but must be waged by the proletariat as
a whole. For this reason Communists should go to the Social-Democrats
and the trade unions and say to them that, even if agreement did not
exist in the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat, it existed
in that of the daily bread of the working class, and that they should
therefore join together in the struggle for 'the price of bread'.

Even in the days when it was pursuing this policy of a united front the
Communist International sought to find a revolutionary alibi by
demonstrating that the Social-Democrat leaders were incapable of
fighting for the smallest social reforms. Common action would result in
bringing the entire proletariat under the control of the Communists, and
out of the lesser struggle for economic objects there would slowly
evolve again the revolutionary struggle for power. These arguments,
nevertheless, failed to alter the fact that a systematic pursuit of the
policy of a united front must result in the disappearance of the
Communist parties. It is indeed possible for a party to ally itself with
another for a definite time without losing its individuality. It is not
possible for a party to change its principles to suit those of another
for a long period of time; nor can it declare that the other party
merely exists to formulate a policy which it will itself carry out. What
has been the effect of the pursuit of a policy of a united front with
the Conservatives upon the English Liberal Party since the World War?
What doom awaits the German National and German Peoples' Parties in
consequence of their pursuance of a similar policy with the National
Socialists in the years 1930-32? It was obvious that the Communists must
be the sufferers as a result of the pursuit of a common platform with
the Social-Democrats in Europe; for they were the weaker party in the
alliance and the policy to be followed by the 'united front' would be a
Social-Democrat and not a Communist policy. The leaders of the Communist
International also found a political excuse for the economic aspect of
their policy of a united front in the existence of a labour government.
In association with Social-Democrats, Communists were to try to capture
a majority in parliament and then form a coalition government with them.

The following definition of a labour government was formulated at
Leipzig in 1923 at the congress of the German Communist Party: 'It [a
labour government] is neither the dictatorship of the proletariat nor a
constitutional approach to it. It denotes an attempt on the part of the
working class within the framework and employing the methods of
middle-class democracy to pursue a labour policy with the support of
proletarian institutions and a proletarian mass movement.' This was in
effect the translation to the Continent of the policy which Lenin had
recommended in 1920 for adoption in England. A labour government that
attains to power by peaceful and legal means can only govern within the
framework of the middle-class social and political order. The economic
policy of a government of this type cannot be socialist. It must consist
in a middle-class radical financial policy combined with participation
by the state in great industrial undertakings -- the so-called theory of
real values. The existence of a labour government even within the limits
of a middle-class democratic state is an important victory for the
working class. The history of Labour government in England witnesses to
the truth of this statement. When, however, the Communists came forward
with proposals of this nature, they immediately abandoned their claim to
be looked upon as a separate party; for a parliamentary labour
government is in its essentials entirely a Social-Democrat institution.
Even the distinction between Communists and Social-Democrats -- that the
Social-Democrats were prepared to enter a coalition with the
middle-class parties whereas the Communists were only prepared to
coalesce within the boundaries of socialism -- did not continue to
operate. For the policy of a united front in Germany was extended to
cover the Christian Socialist workmen and thus a completely
representative German labour government would have included leaders of
the Christian trade unions under the influence of the Centre Party. And
when the Executive of the Communist International extended the term
'labour' government to cover the workers' and peasants' government that
was the ideal to be pursued in every land -- then, indeed, the
theoretical possibilities of coalitions became indefinite. What could
not be comprised under the term 'peasant party' in Central and Western
Europe?

At this distance of time it is a cause for astonishment that the same
members of the Communist International who in 1919-20 were animated by
the ideal of insurrection and world revolution accepted Communist
revisionism in 1921-23. It must not, however, be forgotten that after
the World War the Communist International became the meeting-place of
all workmen and officials who were desirous of carrying on the formal
prewar radicalism. The reconstructed postwar Social-Democrat
International pursued a revisionist policy. The result was that the
Social-Democrat parties did not always display sufficient energy in
keeping their policy free from middle-class capitalist ideas. An
important advance had been made, nevertheless, by the abandonment of the
superficially radical phraseology of prewar days. On the other hand the
Communist International after 1921 returned to the official prewar
radicalism characterised by political passivity, camouflaged reformist
practices, and intoxication with the ultimate aim. The ideal state
pictured by radical workmen before 1914 had now been realised in Soviet
Russia. The vision of Soviet Russia as it revealed itself to the eyes of
these workmen afforded them consolation in their daily cares and
embodied their hopes of a better future. And they consoled themselves
for the compromise and tactical manoeuvres of Soviet Russia and the
Communist International by saying: the Bolsheviks are the leaders of the
world revolution. What they do cannot be inspired by motives of
expediency. One must trust them, even if one cannot always understand
their policy, and one must time and again seek inspiration in the
Russian Revolution.

After 1921 the Communist International was thus permeated simultaneously
from above and below by a belief in the revolutionary proletarian
legend. This is the secret of its existence. It is a singular and yet
comprehensible paradox that the Communist International at one and the
same time sharply criticises the Second International in its prewar form
and continues its work. For the Communist criticism of the Second
International washes away the 'sin' of 1914, and thus makes ready the
path for the continued use of the old phraseology, whilst the postwar
Socialist International must in some form or other accept the
responsibility for the 'sin' of 1914 and cannot therefore continue to
use the old pseudo-radical catchwords. It was precisely its combination
of non-revolutionary, revisionist action with a pseudo-radical habit of
speech that had for its subject Soviet Russia that enabled the Communist
International, even after 1921, to retain a large proportion of its
supporters. This combination was successful in satisfying not only the
workers desirous of carrying on prewar radicalism but also up to a
certain degree the utopian radical proletarian who found in it a means
of ventilating his vague hopes of revolution and his hatred of state and
society and Social-Democrats. Nevertheless, it is impossible for a great
labour movement to subsist, in the present stirring and truly
revolutionary condition of the world, upon a legend alone. The crisis
would come in the same moment that the hard hailstones of actual facts
fell upon the glass-house of the Communist International and compelled
at least a part of its members and officials to think for themselves.

The Communist International subsisted upon a mixture of Russian
revolutionary theories and reformist practice. And the International
would collapse the moment either of these elements was taken seriously.
If a Communist was sincerely convinced that the working class could
strive for reform and not revolution in the existing state of the world,
then the phrases emanating from the Russian Revolution must be unwelcome
in his ears and he must become aware of the existence of reformist
practice in Soviet Russia itself. He would be forced to ask himself the
question whether there was any justification for a separate existence of
a Communist Party beside the Social-Democrat Party. If, however, a
Communist believed seriously in the revolutionary phrases, and wished to
bring about a revolution in his own country, then he must speedily be
brought to the recognition of the fact that the Executive of the
Communist International with its policy of a united front was an
obstacle in the way of revolution. Thus he would be led to see through
the contradictions inherent in the Communist International and to
discover their cause in the system of state capitalism in Russia that
concealed itself beneath the cloak of a dictatorship of the proletariat.
These two trends of Communist opinion resulted in the development after
1921 of a 'Left' and a 'Right'-wing group within the Communist
International in distinction to the loyal 'Centre'. Each trend had its
own starting-point and they only came together in their common
matter-of-fact Marxian criticism of conditions in Soviet Russia. The
leaders of the Communist International saw in these two trends of
opinion nothing more nor less than the invasion of their domains by
anti-Bolshevism and they sought to strangle this opposition by all the
means available to them.

The iron discipline imposed upon the Communists for the purpose of the
Civil War was now used to crush subversive opinion in their own ranks.
The rulers of Russia feared in even the slightest divergence from the
official tenets the beginning of the end -- namely, the growth of a
doubt as to the proletarian-socialist character of the Soviet state. For
this reason they have branded every form of opposition both in the
Communist International as well as in Russia itself since 1921 as
counter-revolutionary and anti-Bolshevik, and as something to be
destroyed by all the means that lay in their power. Ever since 1921 all
independent critical thought has been stifled by official persecution
both in Soviet Russia and in the Communist International. The Bolshevik
empire resembles the empire ruled over by the emperor in Andersen's
immortal fairy-tale. The emperor can walk about naked because everyone
who fails to see his supposititious clothes is a moral outcast.
Similarly the emperor walks through the Bolshevik empire and to his
right and left go party officials driving away everyone who dares to cry
aloud: 'The emperor is naked!' Thus in 1921 Paul Levi and his friends
were expelled from the German Communist Party. Levi was one of the very
few German Socialists who had given Lenin his unconditional support
before the Bolshevik Party came into power. He began as early as the
winter of 1920-21 to entertain doubts about the imminence of a
proletarian revolution in Germany and in doing so anticipated the
decisions taken by the Third World Congress. In the days of the March
Action in 1921 Levi was no longer Chairman of the party but he was one
of its outstanding leaders and a member of the Reichstag. He strongly
disapproved of the March Action and wrote a pamphlet in which is to be
found everything that was subsequently said in criticism of the March
Action by Lenin and other important Bolsheviks at the Third World
Congress.

It might have been expected that as a result the Executive of the
Communist International would have ceremoniously invested Paul Levi
after the World Congress with the leadership of the German Communist
Party as being the outstanding Bolshevik in Germany. Instead Levi was
expelled from both the party and the International. The explanation was
that, in addition to pointing out the mistakes of the German Communist
Party, Levi had gone on to depict the mistakes of the Executive and to
tell the truth about the condition of Soviet Russia. Moreover, he
refused to be a party to the traditional veneration for anything and
everything that happened in Russia. His presence could therefore no
longer be tolerated in the Communist International. Paul Levi
subsequently returned to the Social-Democrat Party. The greater number
of members of the KPD had also strongly opposed Levi's action owing to a
fundamental political difference of opinion. In opposition to Levi these
members still believed in the imminence of a German working-class
revolution and wished to promote it by every means available to them.
The trend of opinion in the Communist International which rejected the
revisionist policy of the Executive since 1921, and which was opposed to
a united front and labour governments, constituted the so-called Left.
This Left comprised practically the whole Italian Communist Party led by
Bordiga, who was noted for his high character and his keen ideological
mind. The circles in Italy upon whose support the Executive might have
counted in its pursuit of the new policy had already fallen away under
the leadership of Serrati. It is noteworthy that Serrati rejoined the
International in its changed condition. The Executive devoted all its
energies to driving Bordiga out of the Italian Communist Party and to
establishing a Central Committee that would be subservient to it.
Meanwhile the Fascists marched from victory to victory. In 1922
Mussolini became dictator of Italy.

In Germany the Central Committee of the KPD, under the chairmanship of
Brandler, sought to carry out punctiliously the policy laid down by the
Executive and the World Congresses. Although, in 1923, under the
influence of the occupation of the Ruhr and inflation, the
disintegration political and economic of middle-class Germany proceeded
apace, the Central Committee of the KPD forbade propaganda in favour of
a dictatorship of the proletariat and the socialist revolution. It
remained faithful to the policy of a united front and labour government.
And this policy led to practical results in Saxony and Thuringia, where
Social-Democrat governments came into power and maintained themselves
with the help of the Communist votes in the Landtag. In October the
Communists themselves accepted several portfolios. For the first time a
labour government in the sense preached by the Communists had come into
existence. The Central Committee hoped to see this system of government
extended from Saxony and Thuringia to cover all Germany. The Left wing
in the KPD, supported by the party organisation in Hamburg and Berlin,
refused to support this policy, in the belief that it would destroy all
possibility of a revolution in Germany. Although the Left complained to
Moscow, the rulers of Soviet Russia remained true to their revisionist
policy; and it was not until August 1923 that a change in opinion made
itself apparent in Russia. Meanwhile, the Soviet government watched the
steadily increasing discontent in Germany, especially after a general
strike had resulted in the fall of Cuno's middle-class and conservative
government. Stresemann succeeded Cuno at the head of a coalition
government of Social-Democrats and the Centre. The French were firmly
established in the Ruhr and the Rhineland. The Kahr-Hitler putsch was in
preparation in Bavaria. The mark became valueless. Germany was
threatened with a dissolution of the Reich and civil war.

The Bolsheviks now began to believe once more in the possibility of a
German proletarian revolution and demanded that the KPD should lead it.
Nevertheless, Soviet Russia in 1923 was no longer vitally interested in
the victory of a proletarian revolution in Germany, since the conclusion
of the Treaty of Rapallo rendered possible friendly relations with a
middle-class German government. At the same time if revolution should
break out in Germany the Third International did not wish to lose an
opportunity for refurbishing its revolutionary laurels. But it was soon
shown that the Communist International was no longer capable of leading
a revolution. The Central Committee of the KPD continued even after
August 1923 its revisionist, non-revolutionary agitation for the
establishment of a labour government, etc; and simultaneously made
secret preparations for revolution in the form of a conspiracy without
the cooperation of the great masses of the proletariat. This led to the
presence in the Communist secret organisations of all possible types of
adventurers and spies. When, however, in October 1923, open warfare was
to begin, the Central Committee realised its unfitness for the struggle
and the whole preparations exploded like a toy balloon. In Saxony and
Thuringia the government of the Reich dissolved the labour governments
with the help of the Reichswehr and without meeting with any opposition.
In consequence of a misunderstanding several hundred of Communist
workmen in Hamburg took up arms. They were defeated after a sanguinary
battle with the police. Nothing of a political or military nature
occurred anywhere else in Germany. After the cessation of the Ruhr
conflict and the stabilisation of the mark the German middle class was
able in the winter of 1923-24 to strengthen its hold on the government
of Germany.

The collapse of the revolutionary movement in Germany in October 1923
was the second -- this time decisive -- defeat sustained by the
Communist International. The first was Mussolini's accession to power in
Italy. Nor was the fact that a proletarian revolution had proved
unsuccessful in Germany the most depressing aspect of this second
defeat. It is possible to hold very various opinions on the subject of
whether a revolution of this type would have been possible in Germany in
1923 and in what manner it should have been carried out. The most
discouraging aspect was the inefficiency and weakness displayed by the
Communists in their tactics and strategy. For two long years no
opportunity for revolution in Germany had presented itself to the rulers
of Russia. Then suddenly they discovered the imminence of a German
revolution, and instead of a great popular movement they produced a
conspiracy. The bureaucratic officials of the German Communist Party
kept their eyes obediently turned on Russia. They never permitted
themselves an independent idea and their sole desire was to follow
precisely the policy laid down for them by the Executive. That such a
mechanical body of subservient party officials could not lead a
revolution is obvious. Ever since the parties composing the Communist
International have served solely as disseminators of Soviet Russian
legends they have ceased to be capable of real political activity. After
October 1923 the Communist International refrained from any further
attempts to promote revolution in Europe.

The members of the KPD were embittered as a result of the failure of
their party's policy. They supported the Left-wing opposition that had
sharply criticised the conduct of the Central Committee from 1921
onwards. The Executive of the Communist International also attempted to
beat a retreat by admitting some mistakes on their own part at the same
time as they placed the principal share in the responsibility for the
defeat in October upon the shoulders of Brandler. Yet Brandler had never
for an instant deviated from the instructions given by the Executive,
and his policy was approved by the leading men in Russia up to the very
last. These men now hoped by unjustly blaming Brandler and by effecting
a compromise with the Left to retain the working-class members of the
KPD within the Third International. For the complete break-up of the KPD
was possible at the close of 1923 and the beginning of 1924, and would
have been followed by that of the Third International.

Owing to his illness Lenin had no share in the detailed work of the
leaders of the Third International in 1923-24. Nevertheless, the course
followed by the Third International that led to defeat and paralysis was
laid down by Lenin himself at the Third World Congress. The downfall and
break-up of the Third International is no less the work of Lenin than
was the resuscitation of Soviet Russia as a result of the NEP.

## Chapter 10: Stalin Versus Trotsky, 1924-1927

The question of the succession to Lenin became actual in 1922 in
consequence of his long illness. It was obvious that his work could not
be carried on by any particular individual or individuals, but that his
heir must be the Bolshevik Party as a whole. In practice this would mean
the government of the 'Old Guard', who in the years succeeding to 1903
had built up the party in common with Lenin. Lenin's cloak thus fell
upon the shoulders of Zinoviev and Kamenev. Since, however, they were
both politicians and ideologues, they needed the assistance of a
practical organiser. Such a one was found in Stalin. Stalin had for
years been a member of the party and was a Georgian, or Grusian (as they
called themselves), from the Caucasus. The Georgians have contributed a
whole series of brilliant men to the Russian revolutionary and socialist
movement. There were many Georgians among the influential Mensheviks
in 1917. In the revolutionary movement in the days of the Tsars
nationality played no part and Great Russians, Ukrainians, Jews, Poles,
Letts and Georgians worked together with no thought save of the common
cause.

Stalin is an educated Russian revolutionary of the prewar type. The fact
that he belonged by blood to the small nation of Georgians was at the
most responsible for his special interest in the problem of socialism
and nationalism. It is an exaggeration to connect Stalin in any way with
Circassian romances. In February 1913, in a letter written from Galicia
to Maxim Gorki, Lenin said that he agreed with his opinion that it was
essential to take nationalism seriously. Lenin continued: 'We have here
a fine type of Grusian' working on a great study of the question of
nationalities for which he has collected the entire Austrian material.
The 'Grusian' was Stalin, who had just succeeded in escaping from
Siberia and who lived for a time in Cracow and Vienna. After 1917 Stalin
gradually became more and more prominent as an organiser. In the spring
of 1917 he still belonged to the moderate group led by Kamenev and it
was only by slow degrees that he became a supporter of Lenin's policy.
As Secretary-General of the Bolshevik Party in 1922 Stalin exercised
supreme control over the party machinery. A Committee of Three --
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Stalin -- ruled Russia from 1922 to 1925. No
constitutional existence was given to this 'committee' and the Central
Committee of the Communist Party continued as before to take all
important decisions. In every important matter, however, these three men
made common cause after previously consulting with each other. Any
proposal they made was at once accepted by the Central Committee, or its
smaller sub-committee, the Political Bureau.

This government by old-time Bolsheviks meant the exclusion of Trotsky
from the conduct of affairs. True, he remained a member of the Central
Committee and People's Commissar for War, but his advice was not asked
by the three ruling personalities before they decided upon any important
action. Although Trotsky enjoyed great authority among the masses of the
nation, the clique of old-time Bolsheviks always looked upon him as an
interloper. It was known that Trotsky was not in agreement with these
old-time Bolsheviks in important matters of policy and organisation. As
long as Lenin was well, and controlled the party himself, he had
contrived to bridge the gulf separating these old-time Bolsheviks from
Trotsky, but the moment Lenin fell ill the chasm was reopened. Towards
the close of 1923 Trotsky openly came forward in opposition to the three
rulers of Russia. He showed that a small bureaucratic clique had seized
power; that the members of the party no longer possessed their right of
self-determination; and that the new leaders of the International were
involving it in defeat after defeat. It was hardly astonishing that the
German revolution should have collapsed so pitifully in 1923 if the
Bolshevik Party and the International were led by the very men who had
in 1917 threatened to ruin the revolution in Russia. In conjunction with
Lenin, Trotsky had in 1917 led the revolution to victory, despite the
opposition of the 'opportunists' Zinoviev and Kamenev. What moral right
then had this so-called Old Guard autocratically to lead the party and
the international proletarian movement? Although an old group of leaders
may have rendered services that will live on in history, there is always
the danger that they will grow stiff and bloodless in the same manner as
the Social-Democrat leaders before the World War. Democratic control on
the part of the members and the recruitment of new members from the
coming generations could alone save the Russian Communist Party from
destruction.

It is obvious that these arguments of Trotsky's attacked the very
essence of Bolshevism, namely, the hierarchic construction of the party
from below upwards, and the traditional authority of the old Bolshevik
Central Committee. If, however, the dictatorship within the party were
destroyed, then the dictatorship of the party itself over the Russian
peoples could no longer be maintained in its present form. Of necessity
the one involved the other. At the end of 1923 and the beginning of 1924
an animated discussion took place within the party on the subject of
Trotsky's opposition. His views were enthusiastically supported by the
younger members and especially by the educated proletarian students in
the working-class universities. The entire party machine was, however,
opposed to him -- and the machine ruled the members. Hence the party
congress in 1924 declared itself unanimously against Trotsky and for the
three rulers of Russia. Trotsky was dismissed from the Commissariat of
War and withdrew, temporarily, from all active participation in
politics. The party dictatorship and the NEP continued without further
opposition.

The membership of the Russian Communist Party rose by the beginning of
1927 to a total of 1,200,000. Of these, about 600,000 were employees and
officials of all kinds. Among these employees were a quarter of a
million former workmen and 150,000 ex-peasants. The membership of the
party also included 150,000 peasants still engaged in agriculture and
450,000 workers in factories. Thus the employees (agents of the
governmental machine) and peasants together composed almost two-thirds
of the total membership of the party and the actual factory workers only
just over one-third.

The governmental apparatus in Russia continually renewed itself from the
ranks of clever ex-workers and ex-peasants. In itself this is a sound
principle of utilising the best forces in the nation. A genuine
dictatorship of the proletariat could not dispense with able officials.
These officials, however, would in such a case be subject to a
continuous democratic control exercised by the masses and would thus
maintain connexion with the masses. In the Russian dictatorship, on the
contrary, the official ruled the masses with the aid of party and state
discipline. Hence the ex-proletarian under this system, on entering the
service of the governmental machine, ceased psychologically and actually
to be a member of the working class.

The numerical proportion of workers to non-workers among the members of
the Russian Communist Party is typical and significant. But it is less
the proportion among the ordinary members than among the members of the
party administrative apparatus that is of decisive importance. It was
estimated in 1927 that in the party committees charged with the taking
of decisions -- not only in the Central Committee itself, but also in
the local administrative bodies throughout the country -- only a tenth
of the membership consisted of actual factory workers. The state
capitalistic governmental machine had thus come to be independent of the
productive classes in the nation.

The reconstruction of Russian industry made great strides from 1924
onwards. In 1927 the prewar rate of production had almost been restored
and the total of actual factory hands at work amounted in that year to
2,300,000. The industrialisation of Russia has indeed been in progress
ever since 1921 and not only in recent years. The achievement of the six
years 1921-27, in which there was little or nothing in the way of
material from which to build, is even more deserving of praise than the
results obtained in more recent years, when a firm foundation had
already been laid. Moreover, the careful advance calculations and
planning of economic development for many years to come is as old as
Soviet Russia itself, and not a sensational new discovery of the past
five years.

The real wages of the Russian workman rose considerably up to 1925, sank
in 1926, and rose again in 1927. It is true that the workmen complain of
the power wielded by the factory management in whose hands lie in
reality the engagement and dismissal of workmen. In the event of
disputes between the workmen and the management the State Economic
Council decides the issue in a dictatorial fashion by means of
compulsory arbitration.

Production also increased in the country districts between 1924 and 1927
-- years in which Russia was free from famine. Those were years in which
everyone could purchase food-supplies of the best quality in the shops
to the limit of his purchasing capacity. Industrial products were scarce
and much dearer than in Europe. Increased prosperity brought social
distinctions back to life among the peasants. It is incontestable that
the typical Russian form of agrarian middle class, the kulaks, the
village money-lenders and wealthier peasants, increased in number and
influence. There are no figures available to show what percentage of the
Russian peasants then belonged to the kulak class; for the
characteristic of the kulak is less his possession of a large farm than
of money for speculative purposes, and hence the difficulty of arriving
at any precise statistical estimation of the number of kulaks. In
addition to this difficulty the Russian government and the Opposition
were then engaged in a controversy as to the nature and number of
kulaks. The one side continually reproached the other with under- or
over-estimating the danger from the kulaks, with the result that
agrarian statistics were made to serve the purpose of this dispute
within the Communist Party itself. Nevertheless, the number of
agricultural labourers affords a means of ascertaining the social
differences existing in the Russian villages. These agricultural
labourers were said, in 1927, to have numbered 1,600,000. Their state
was deplorable. Only 20 per cent of their number were members of trade
unions. Their real wages were less than before the war, and their daily
hours of work were seldom less than ten. Indeed, no limitations were set
to their hours of work in the majority of cases, and their wages were
paid irregularly and often after months of waiting.

The kulaks were the sole employers of agricultural labour. The small
peasants and even those with moderate-sized farms employed no labourers.
It may reasonably be supposed that in 1927, in Russia, the number of
agricultural labourers far exceeded the number of kulaks. There can, of
course, be no doubt that there existed many hundreds of thousands of
farmers of the kulak type. When, in 1928, the government resolved to
place a super-tax upon the kulaks, it determined to tax two to three per
cent of all peasant holdings. The total number of peasant farms in
Russia was estimated to be 20 million, and thus the number of kulaks
about half a million. The increase in the number of kulaks during the
years 1925-27 produced an extraordinary state of affairs in regard to
land tenure. Many poor peasants were unable to cultivate their land
properly for lack of farm implements and oxen for ploughing. Hence they
were forced to let their land to the kulak, who then cultivated it with
the aid of his horses and ploughs. The rent received by the peasant
consisted of a moderate share in the harvest. This singular procedure
was adopted because the direct purchase of land by the well-to-do was
attended by difficulties under the Soviet legal system. In contrast to
the customary type of land tenure there thus arose in Russia an
extraordinary type in which the rich and not the poor were the tenants.
Impartial observers have described the relationship of the poor peasant
and the agricultural labourer to the kulaks in many parts of Russia as a
form of serfdom. Although the percentage of agricultural labourers as of
kulaks was small in proportion to the total agricultural population of
100 million in Russia, the emergence of these two classes beside the
poor peasants and small farmers was symptomatic of the trend in economic
development. It was nothing less than a tragedy that ten years after the
victorious October Revolution the spoliation of millions of agricultural
labourers and small peasants should be possible.

The unemployed sons of the small peasants migrated to the towns and thus
helped to increase the total of unemployment in Russia, until in 1927 it
reached a figure of two million. Class enmity increased during the years
1924-27 beneath the cover of the so-called proletarian dictatorship. If
the number of industrial workmen engaged in work increased, the number
of unemployed also grew larger. Although the real wages of the workmen
improved, the profits made by kulaks and traders simultaneously rose;
and in the so-called NEP class of traders there were not a few
millionaires. For example, there were persons who worked under the cover
of a so-called cooperative society. A buying society was established for
purchasing textiles from poor homeworkers at miserable prices. This
'society' concealed a successful millionaire speculator. The ruling
party bureaucracy in Russia was therefore confronted with the task of
restoring the balance between all these contending forces in the social
life of Russia. The time had come for the rulers of Russia to decide
whither their policy was leading them.

After 1924 Stalin developed certain original ideas on the subject of the
future of Russia that speedily involved him in a fierce conflict with
his two colleagues. The most important of Stalin's theories, and the one
that has become the fundamental doctrine of Bolshevism since 1924, is
the theory of the possibility of realising socialism in a single
country. It has already been pointed out above that this theory is to be
found as early as 1923, in Lenin's last writings and speeches. It is
true that Lenin did not precisely formulate the theory and place its
execution in the forefront of the party's activities. He contented
himself with giving it indirect expression in his works. It was Stalin
who for the first time clearly formulated the theory and made it the
basis of Bolshevism. As late as April 1924, Stalin propounded this old
and truly Marxian doctrine in a pamphlet in which he wrote:

>An effort on the part of a single country is sufficient to overthrow
>the middle class. This is shown by the history of our own revolution.
>An effort on the part of a single country, especially a peasant country
>like Russia, is not sufficient to achieve the final victory of
>socialism and the socialist organisation of production. The efforts of
>the proletariat in several highly-developed countries will be necessary
>for that purpose.

In December 1924, Stalin repudiated his theories and declared that they
must be improved upon. He now divided up the problem into two parts.
First, can it be said that there is a complete guarantee against the
restoration of a middle-class order of society in Russia? Such a
guarantee would imply that for the future all military intervention of
no matter what kind on the part of foreign powers in Russia would be
impossible. In order that this guarantee may become a real one -- Stalin
now admits -- the victory of a proletarian revolution will be necessary
in at least several highly-developed countries. Second, can it be said
that the creation of a completely socialist order of society is possible
in a single country? Stalin now unhesitatingly answers this question in
the affirmative. The path leading to socialism is the one already
pointed out by Lenin in 1923: the increased industrialisation of Russia
and the simultaneous organisation of the peasants into cooperative
societies. The pursuit of the right policy on the part of the party
could result in winning over a decisive majority of the peasants for
socialism.

The Russian peasants are not, in Stalin's opinion, the same as European
peasants. The peasants in Europe received their land at the hands of a
liberal middle class in the course of its struggle with feudalism. Thus
the European peasants have become a source of strength for the middle
class. In contrast to the European the Russian peasants received land
and peace at the hands of the proletariat, and have thus become a source
of strength for the proletariat. Moreover, agriculture in Europe
continues to develop within the limits of capitalism and to the
accompaniment of all the crises attendant upon capitalism, and the
steadily increasing impoverishment of larger and larger classes among
the agricultural population. In Russia, on the contrary, the Soviet
government closes the path to the growth of capitalism and consequently
the peasants are progressing towards socialism. If, indeed, as Stalin
believes, the economic organisation of Russia is leading to the complete
realisation of socialism, then it can no longer be termed 'state
capitalism'. Stalin admits that in 1921, at the time of the introduction
of the NEP, Lenin rightly described the conditions obtaining in Russia
as a system of state capitalism. The growth of socialism in Russia,
however, had as early as 1923 rendered the description 'state
capitalism' inapplicable, and it was now meaningless. Stalin's theory
resulted in an extraordinary and illusory fashion in resolving the
contradiction between legend and reality in Soviet Russia. A proletarian
dictatorship existed in Russia, which was only reconcilable with
complete socialism. Therefore this complete socialism would now be
established in Russia by abolishing entirely all traces of capitalism.
The temporary abandonment of socialism which Lenin was compelled to make
in 1921 had come to an end. The dream of a socialist order of society
that had inspired the Russian workman for so long would at last become a
reality. This great aim can obviously only be achieved by Stalin after
the manner of Lenin in 1923 by giving Marxist economic doctrines a
_Narodnik_ interpretation. Stalin's theory of a Russian peasant that is
no ordinary peasant, but a socialist in embryo, is a purely _Narodnik_
notion. The peasant member of a cooperative society remains a peasant
and a producer of food supplies. The Russian workman is still the slave
of a dictatorship of semi-middle-class government officials, even in a
state organised in accordance with the socialist doctrines of Stalin.
Thus Stalin failed to resolve the fundamental contradiction inherent in
Soviet Russia. All he had done was to place it on another footing. Since
1925 the Soviet myth consists in the fact that the official Bolshevik
doctrines declare nationalist Russian socialism to be the only true
Marxian socialism.

Nevertheless, the theory put forward by Stalin marks, from a
middle-class nationalist standpoint, a great step forward in the
development of the Russian nation. Up to the year 1925 there existed a
continual danger that utopian-communist aspirations on the part of the
Russian proletariat might paralyse all practical constructive work and
drive the state into making the wildest experiments. Unless a revolution
in Europe brought relief, and there was little likelihood of its
occurrence, the opposition between the idealistic demands of the working
class and the actual state of the country must destroy the Russian
Revolution. At this juncture Stalin held up before the workers an ideal
difficult of attainment and demanding sacrifices -- but still an ideal
capable of being attained. Although only after great opposition has been
overcome the peasantry can, by Stalin's method, be made an organic part
of the Soviet economy. It would not be necessary for Russia either to
sink into a chaos produced by utopianism or to return to the Western
European system of private capitalism. It can at once retain the fruits
of the revolution and resolutely modernise itself. All these advantages
are certainly only to be achieved if two preliminary conditions are
fulfilled. First, the establishment of dogmatic absolutism in Russia,
which will forbid all independent critical thought on the subject of
Marxism and socialism. For from the moment the Russian people no longer
believe that Stalin's socialism is the true socialism all the old
difficulties will revive. Hence Stalin and his party refuse to tolerate
any theoretical deviation from the official beliefs that are declared to
be the sole true doctrines of Lenin. Second, the theory of national
Russian socialism meant the final separation of Soviet Russia from the
world revolution, notwithstanding the fact that Stalin has preserved the
façade of the Third International.

At first, Stalin's new theory effected no practical change in industrial
conditions in Soviet Russia. During 1925-27 the work of reconstruction
went on with whatever materials were at hand, and accompanied by a
rigorous regard for economy and the stability of the Soviet currency. Of
greater importance were the changes that occurred in the agricultural
districts of Russia. Stalin, like all other Bolsheviks, knew that the
kulaks -- the village money-lenders -- were enemies of the Soviet state,
and that the very poor peasants for the most part sympathised with the
town proletariat. The decisive influence among the Russian peasantry
was, nevertheless, neither the kulak nor the very poor peasant, but the
class of so-called 'middle' peasants who could live comfortably on the
produce of their farms without, however, having any surplus. In 1925
Stalin urged upon the Communist Party the extreme importance of making
firm friends of the 'middle' peasants. These 'middle' peasants, or small
farmers, were not merely to be obedient to the government officials but
also to become convinced and enthusiastic supporters of the Soviet
state. Once that had taken place it would be easy to induce them
voluntarily to form cooperative societies. Stalin demanded that the last
vestiges of Wartime Communism should be made to disappear from the
villages. Party and government officials were not to make these farmers
conscious of their authority. Free elections should be held for country
soviets. In those districts where elections had already been held under
pressure from the government officials the results were to be declared
null and void and new elections held.

Stalin's object was to strengthen soviet democracy at any rate within
the realm of local government. The Bolshevik Party in any case continued
to enjoy the monopoly of being the only political party in Russia, and
the foundation or promotion of any new party continued to be forbidden.
The peasants were now to be free to elect non-party men from their own
ranks to serve on the village councils, and these village soviets were
to have freedom of action within the limits of Soviet law. This
unquestionably denoted a relaxation of the party dictatorship. All
harshness was to be avoided in the collection of land taxes, and the
greater part of the receipts from these taxes were allocated to the
local administration in order that the peasants in the village soviet
might decide for themselves what use was to be made of their own money.
Stalin's object in making these concessions was to isolate the
anti-Soviet kulaks from the main body of the peasants and to oppose to
them a front of small farmers and poor peasants who were loyal
government supporters. The success of this policy pursued by the Soviet
government between 1925 and 1927 is highly questionable. It became
evident again and again in the free elections for the village soviets
that the kulak was the ruler of the village, was followed by the other
peasants, and was master of the local soviet. In districts where the
kulak controlled the local administration the poor peasant was treated
more harshly than the rich in the assessment of taxes, and the state
subsidies for the promotion of agriculture went to swell the pockets of
the kulak. Even as early as 1925 the kulaks in a great part of Russia
were not afraid to buy up the produce of the poor peasants and small
farmers. The corn thus purchased was then stored away in their barns and
retained until a shortage of bread caused the price of wheat to rise to
fantastic heights.

Nevertheless, in the years 1925-27 Stalin hesitated to take forcible
measures against the kulaks. He was afraid that the small farmers would
fail to understand the purpose of police action against the kulaks, and
that they would think that Wartime Communism with its use of force had
once more returned to their midst. Once this belief took root and
spread, the masses of the peasants would be seized with panic and would
adopt an inimical attitude towards the Soviet government that would
render impossible the peaceful winning over of the small farmers for
socialism. Whilst the kulaks were organising first economic and then
political counter-revolution in the villages, Stalin continued his
methods of educating the peasants by gentle means. In districts where
speculation in corn on the part of the kulaks was specially notorious
the government threw on the market, at low prices, large quantities of
grain from its own grain stores. Prices were thus forced down and the
kulaks were at least in part compelled to disgorge their stocks. This
warfare between the omnipotent Soviet government and the kulaks had a
tragi-comic aspect. If it continued for some years, what would be left
of the dictatorship of the proletariat?

Winning the goodwill of the peasants was in Stalin's eyes not an end in
itself. His desire was to make the peasants anxious to accept socialist
improvements. At the same time his policy was capable of another
interpretation. A group specially friendly to the peasants grew up
within the Russian Communist Party and was referred to in its
discussions as the Right. At the head of this right wing was Rykov, the
Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, and Bukharin, the most
highly respected Marxist thinker in the party, and the author of
important scientific books. These men were of the opinion that Russia
was and would remain an agricultural country, notwithstanding all the
progress that had been made towards its industrialisation. The
prosperity of Russia therefore depended wholly upon agriculture, and
everything possible must be done to improve the productivity and
standard of life of the peasants. The development of a rich peasantry
would from this standpoint be anything but a misfortune for the Soviet
government, since if the Soviet state held in its hand the control of
heavy industry, foreign trade and the entire banking system, a wealthy
peasantry could not injure it. Where was the peasant to take his
savings? All he could do was to purchase government stocks bearing a
good rate of interest or put his money into the nearest state savings
bank. No matter what happened, the accumulated profits of the kulak or
the successful trader must eventually return to benefit the Soviet
state.

Bukharin, Rykov and their intimate friends accepted without reservations
Lenin's and Stalin's theory of the possibility of realising socialism in
a single land. This justified them in designating the economy of Soviet
Russia, despite its many inner contradictions, as 'socialist'. In 1925,
in the course of a speech addressed to the wealthy peasants Bukharin
gave them as a motto 'Enrich yourselves!'. This phrase coming as it did
from the lips of the government theorist made an enormous impression.
For the first time the purpose of the new policy became clear. Many
Russian workmen and old-time Bolsheviks said to themselves that the
kulak's lust for profits should now be proclaimed to be true socialism.
A cynical use was being made of the word 'socialism' and the way was
being prepared for Russia's return to capitalism. In order to calm the
excitement in the party and among the working class Stalin declared
officially that he disapproved of the phrase 'Enrich yourselves!'. And
in truth Stalin was wholly opposed to the group led by Bukharin and
Rykov which wished to perpetuate the conditions created by the NEP of
1921 and the concessions made to the wealthy peasants. This group looked
upon the perpetuation of the existent state of affairs in Russia as the
sole means to the pursuit of a socialist policy. Stalin, on the
contrary, wished the existent conditions merely to serve as a basis upon
which it should and would be possible to erect something new in the
future. Moreover, Stalin and the aged Lenin were not free from
responsibility for this misunderstanding, since if Marxian socialism is
replaced by the arbitrary theory of 'socialism in a single land' there
is small cause for wonder when people of all sorts and conditions read
into this 'socialism' whatever they wish it to mean.

A singular chance willed that the most prominent leader of Russian trade
unionism, Tomsky, was also to be found among the followers of Bukharin
and Rykov. Tomsky was a sceptic and a realist politician who reconciled
himself to the agricultural character of Russian economy as an
unalterable fact. The Russian worker, in Tomsky's opinion, should not
run after wild visions and should devote himself to obtaining as good a
livelihood as possible in the existent circumstances. If the country
were ruined by utopian socialist experiments, the workman would suffer
more than anybody in that he would again experience the pangs of hunger.
Tomsky represented the views of a minority of skilled and better-paid
Russian workmen who had grown weary of revolution and refused to listen
any longer to socialist fables. Their desire was to defend and to
improve their living conditions with the assistance of the trade unions.
If the Soviet state were to take on a semi-middle-class character that
would not cause them any anxiety, since the skilled workmen as a
professional class would not be likely to suffer from the change. Tomsky
regarded the Soviet state after the fashion in which a Western European
socialist trade-union leader looks upon his middle-class capitalist
state. For this reason it is easy to understand why in the years 1925-27
Tomsky was the most enthusiastic worker for an alliance between the
Russian workers and the socialist trade unions in Europe.

It is obvious that the Right group in the Bolshevik Party -- the group
led by Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky -- made use of the theory of
'socialism in a single land' in order to free themselves from the
Socialist-Communist myth. On the other hand, Stalin wanted to use this
theory to lend an appearance of reality to the myth itself. Moreover,
the seemingly insuperable inability of the Soviet government to deal
with the kulaks and traders aroused new hopes in the middle-class
Russian intellectuals. These men were in part to be found in the service
of the Soviet state and in part in exile. It seemed to them that Russia
was now increasing the pace of her return journey to a middle-class
order of society that had begun in 1921 and that Stalin and Bukharin,
notwithstanding their socialist formulas, would either themselves
restore the middle-class nationalist state in Russia or that the
evolution would proceed irresistibly by way of the right-wing Communists
until the old conditions had been restored. There thus came into
existence within and without Russia a group of Russian intellectuals who
supported Stalin and the Soviet government. These men openly wrote their
articles in support of Stalin from the standpoint of Russian
middle-class patriots, and did not deem it necessary to make any
profession of faith in socialism and communism. A minor Soviet official
named Ustryalov became famous in these years as the mouthpiece of
Stalin's middle-class followers. The support of these men gravely
compromised the Soviet government in the eyes of the party and the
workmen. A single article in praise of the government from Ustryalov's
pen did more harm to Stalin than a hundred spiteful attacks in the
newspapers published by the exiled White Guards. For it seemed as if the
middle-class counter-revolution could claim the leading men in Soviet
Russia as its supporters. Hence Stalin was forced in his great speeches
before the party congresses -- the most ceremonial occasions in the life
of the Soviet state -- to point out time and again at great length the
divergences of opinion separating him from the minor official Ustryalov.

After Trotsky had been defeated in the party debates and excluded from
power towards the close of 1924 Stalin propounded his theory in the form
of a violent attack upon Trotsky's conception of the permanent
international revolution. At first Trotsky kept silence and waited to
see how the party would react to Stalin's ideas. He had not long to
wait. In 1925 the crisis came in a disruption of the Committee of Three.
The Bolshevik Old Guard, led by Zinoviev and Kamenev, rejected Stalin's
theory of socialism in a single state and his agrarian policy as an
opportunist deviation from Marxism and Leninism. Thanks to the support
of the right wing, led by Bukharin and Rykov, Stalin obtained a majority
in the Central Committee, and thus became sole head of the party and the
government. Dissension, nevertheless, increased within the party.
Hundreds of old-time Bolsheviks, among them Lenin's widow, Madame
Krupskaya, joined the opposition to Stalin and Bukharin in the belief
that the revolution had not been undertaken merely to enable the kulaks
to grow rich. The Leningrad Bolshevik Party revolted against the Central
Committee. Violent debates took place at the celebrated Fourteenth
Congress of the Russian Communist Party in December 1925. Since he had
the party machine firmly under his control, Stalin was successful in
securing the election of the majority of his supporters as delegates to
the party congress, although their election was no true indication of
the state of feeling among the members of the party and the working
class. Trotsky continued to maintain silence. It was not until 1926 that
Russia was suddenly electrified by the news that Trotsky had allied
himself with Zinoviev in waging war on the Soviet government and the
party leaders.

The fact that it was the Bolshevik Old Guard who now turned to him for
help afforded Trotsky great personal satisfaction. These men had for
twenty years been his greatest opponents in doctrinal matters. In the
discussions in 1923 and 1924 Zinoviev and Kamenev had directed a fierce
bombardment upon Trotsky and his doctrines that had been answered no
less fiercely. Stalin had in those days refrained from appearing in the
forefront of the attack upon Trotsky and had prevented his expulsion
from the Russian Communist Party on the motion of Zinoviev and Kamenev.
Now two years later Trotsky and his former opponents were walking
arm-in-arm. It was, moreover, obvious that Trotsky alone was the
intellectual inspiration of the Opposition, since he alone had a theory
fundamentally opposed to that of Stalin. The old-time Bolsheviks could
not reproach Stalin in matters of principle, but only accuse him of
mistakes and backslidings in matters of detail. In spite of internal
differences of opinion this left wing solidly opposed Stalin in 1926-27
with an ever-increasing sharpness. Stalin was accused of preparing the
Thermidor of the Russian Revolution. On 9 November 1794, Robespierre had
been overthrown by the French capitalists, and it now seemed that a
similar occurrence was imminent in the history of the Russian
Revolution.

Stalin still retained control of the party machine and the state
administration and was supported by the secretaries of the party, by
Ustryalov, the kulaks and NEP men (successful traders and profiteers),
and the young 'Red Professors' who had been taught by Bukharin to
reconcile Leninist doctrines with the slogan 'Enrich yourselves!'.
Stalin was opposed by Trotsky and Krupskaya, Zinoviev and Kamenev, the
senior members of the party, and all who had been prisoners in Siberia
or fought in the battles of the Civil War. In 1927 Stalin saw himself in
danger of being compelled to fight on an untenable front, that is, in
alliance with all the partly and wholly middle-class elements in the
country against the proletariat and the ideals of the Russian
Revolution. From such a struggle Stalin could only emerge defeated, or
in the event of victory would be compelled to open the gates to the
counter-revolution. The sharpest criticism of the Opposition was
directed less against Stalin's domestic than against his foreign policy.
The history of the Third International has been narrated above up to the
winter of 1923-24, in which the KPD found itself in danger of
dissolution as a result of its decisive defeat in the March Action. The
dissatisfaction felt by the members of the party with Brandler's policy
had resulted in giving the Left Opposition the majority in the party. If
this Left Opposition had publicly and resolutely proclaimed that the
International was to blame for the disaster in Germany, the party would
have been split in twain, a cleavage that would have been accompanied by
serious consequences for the Executive and the Bolshevik leaders. The
Left Opposition was, nevertheless, not as powerful as it seemed.
Although its leaders were under no illusions regarding the Russian myth,
they had not imparted their knowledge to their followers. The members of
the KPD still believed in Soviet Russia. They blamed the Central
Committee of the KPD for the mistakes of 1921-23, and believed that the
Executive and the Bolshevik leaders had been kept in ignorance of the
facts. Since the Left Opposition leaders had up to 1923 not ventured to
denounce this Russian legend, they now found themselves its prisoners.

The logical members of the Left -- called in reproach ultra-left by
their opponents -- were unable to gain acceptance for their views. The
friends of a compromise with Russia were in a majority and the Left came
to an understanding in 1924 with the Executive. The Executive and the
Left then joined in placing the entire responsibility for the mistakes
made in Germany upon Brandler's shoulders. The revolutionary glory of
the Executive and the Bolshevik leaders was unimpaired in the eyes of
German Communists and the Executive in return permitted the Left to take
over the leadership of the KPD. The Pyrrhic victory of the German Left
at the party congress in Frankfurt in 1924 bore in it the seeds of the
coming disaster in that the Left was deprived of all independent beliefs
and contributed to strengthen in Germany the authority of the Third
International.

The Fifth World Congress of the Communist International met in 1924 in
Moscow, and was the scene of an orgy of rhetorical radicalism that was
wholly unmeaning. Zinoviev now retrospectively damned the 'opportunist'
policy of Brandler and designated the Saxon policy of 1923 'a banal
parliamentary comedy'. As a reply to this denunciation the left-wing
Central Committee of the KPD declared itself in opposition to Trotsky
and passed a vote of confidence in the Russian Committee of Three. In
truth the policy of the united front that had been pursued in 1922-23
could no longer be maintained in the same fashion. Zinoviev laid
emphasis upon the fact that a labour government could only be looked
upon as another expression for a dictatorship of the proletariat. From a
practical standpoint the notion of a labour government ceased to have
any importance, and the policy of the united front between Communists
and Social-Democrats broke down as a result of the internal dissensions
in the Third International. When Stalin developed his theory of
socialism in a single land, it was obvious that this must have a
decisive influence upon the future of the International. Stalin's theory
was that Russia could achieve socialism alone if the working class
abroad could prevent an armed capitalist foreign intervention in Soviet
Russia. Since, however, the Communists as a minority in the world
proletariat are not able themselves to guard Russia against such a
danger, it is necessary to achieve direct connexion between Soviet
Russia and the Social-Democrat majority of the international
proletariat. Scarcely had the policy of a united front been buried in
its old dress than it was resurrected and clad in a new garb. This new
garb was the international solidarity of trade unions. If necessary the
International of the Red Trade Unions would be sacrificed for this
purpose. This International comprised the Russian trade unions together
with larger and smaller individual trade unions in France,
Czechoslovakia, Germany, Asia, etc. The great majority of the
trade-unionist workmen in Europe belonged to the so-called
Social-Democrat Amsterdam Trade-Union International. The Red
International now proposed to the Amsterdam International the holding of
a World Congress of Trade Unions for the purpose of achieving their
unification.

If the congress had ever assembled it would have marked a decisive stage
in the breakdown of international Communism. It is true that the
Bolshevik leaders hotly denied, in 1925-27, that they had in view the
dissolution of the Third International. Suppose, nevertheless, that this
world congress of trade unions had held a meeting and decided upon
achieving the international unification of the trade unions. The central
committee of the new world International would comprise English and
German Social-Democrats as well as Russian Communists. The new world
International would be responsible for all international working-class
action and, in the several countries comprised in the International,
Socialists and Communists would jointly conduct the daily economic
struggle. The separate existence of the Communist International and the
individual Communist parties would be rendered so unnecessary that the
workers themselves would put forward an irresistible demand for
political unification.

Stalin and his supporters cannot have been ignorant of the inevitable
results of their proposal for bringing about the international
unification of the trade-union movement. Their aim was to make the bonds
uniting Soviet Russia to the international proletariat as tight as
possible. If the organised workmen in all European countries sympathised
with Soviet Russia, there would no longer be any cause to fear a foreign
invasion. The payment made by Soviet Russia for this incomparable
service was very slight and consisted in fact in the renunciation of an
outworn revolutionary romanticism that was no longer regarded seriously
by leading circles in Russia. It is also comprehensible that it should
have been especially the Right wing in the Russian Communist Party, led
by Bukharin and Tomsky, that worked in the interests of international
proletarian solidarity. The Right hoped in this manner to free
themselves of the remains of the proletarian revolutionary myth that
hindered them in their domestic policy. Obviously the Communist
International must continue to reflect faithfully the hesitations and
tactical manoeuvres of Moscow for as long as it remained in existence.
Disturbances were, however, to be expected from the side of the KPD
under its left-wing leadership. Hence the Left wing was deprived of its
leadership by the Executive as a result of a manoeuvre carried out by
Bukharin in 1925 with brilliant diplomatic skill. A part of the Left
wing -- the Thälmann group -- unconditionally submitted to orders from
Moscow and established a new Central Committee prepared loyally to carry
out the wishes of the Bolshevik leaders. The other leaders of the former
German Left were driven out into the political wilderness and expelled
from the party in succeeding years. The majority of the members of the
KPD had lost all revolutionary spirit after the defeat of 1923, and
consequently believed all the more firmly in the Russian fable. The
left-wing leaders were followed into political exile by only a few small
sections in the party and these Left Communist groups that formed
outside the official parties in Germany and other countries endeavoured
to establish relations with Trotsky and his followers. Thus the Russian
line of battle grew longer. Pamphlets in which Trotsky and Zinoviev
criticised Stalin's policy were zealously distributed by Left Communists
in 1926 and 1927 in Germany and France.

The Social-Democrat leaders in Europe looked with grave mistrust upon
Russian endeavours to promote international unity among the trade
unions. A greater degree of success attended their efforts in England.
English trade-union officials made a tour of Russia, published glowing
reports of their Russian impressions, and pronounced themselves in
favour of an alliance with the Russian workmen. A separate agreement was
concluded between Russian and English trade unions by which both parties
pledged themselves to work in common in the interests of the
international proletariat and in the campaign for international
unification of trade unions. Tomsky was the moving spirit in this
Anglo-Russian united front. Trade-union leaders from both countries met
on several occasions during the years 1925-27 to exchange views on the
international situation. The English trade unions are for all practical
purposes identical with the English Labour Party. Hence the tiny English
Communist Party was, in truth, excluded from this united front of
Russian Bolsheviks and English socialists. The friendship of the English
workmen was at this time of great value to the Soviet government because
events in Asia had strained Anglo-Russian relations to breaking-point
and the English Conservatives threatened to make war on Russia.

A general strike occurred in England in 1926 which ended in defeat for
the English trade unions. The consequences of this defeat were overcome
with extraordinary rapidity by the English workmen. The Russian
government and Tomsky refrained from criticising the policy of the
English trade-union officials for fear lest they should offend them and
lose the friendship which they needed so badly. In truth the labour
movement in England from the World War to the present day has made
amazing progress and has no need of Russian teachers. Nevertheless, in
the customary phrases employed by the Communist International, the
English trade-union leaders who called off the general strike were
styled 'strike-breakers, agents of the middle class, and betrayers of
the workmen'. The leaders of the Opposition in Russia, Trotsky and
Zinoviev, now made use of these polite epithets when speaking of the
leaders of the English labour movement. The Opposition accused Stalin of
concealing the 'betrayal of the workers' on the part of the English
'reformists' out of consideration for less important interests of state.
The criticism of English Social-Democracy by the English Communists was
rendered valueless, and the entire work of the Communist Party in
England rendered hopeless, because the Social-Democrat leaders of the
English labour movement could always secure the approval of Soviet
Russia and the Bolsheviks for their actions. The double-dealing of
official Bolshevik policy was indeed mercilessly revealed by the events
in England in 1926-27. Either the Bolsheviks must admit the English
Social-Democrats to be in the right and therefore dissolve the Communist
International, or they must continue to prove themselves Communists by
pursuing an independent Communist policy and by breaking with the
English Social-Democrats. Stalin thus found himself at a crossroads in
1927, both in foreign and domestic policy.

All the paradoxes characterising the English policy of the Bolsheviks
appeared still more sharply and with tragic results in the Chinese
revolution. In the years following upon the World War the rise of Soviet
Russia had been greeted with enthusiasm in all Asiatic lands. The
patriots in the various districts in Asia where a struggle was being
waged with foreign rulers and European-American imperialism, saw their
natural allies in the Bolsheviks. Soviet Russia had renounced all the
unfair treaties which had been forced upon Asiatic countries in Tsarist
days. Soviet Russia had retained her rights only in the North Manchurian
Railway -- and by doing so created a fruitful source of trouble. In no
other Asiatic country was there such a feeling of sympathy with the
Russian Revolution as in China. The nationalist movement for liberation
in China found its embodiment in the Kuomintang Party founded by Dr Sun
Yat-Sen. The party was animated by the ideas of the young intellectuals
and especially of students who had been educated in Europe. In their
struggle against foreign imperialism the Kuomintang had the support of
the masses of Chinese workmen and peasants as well as of patriotic
businessmen and estate-owners. The attitude of the Kuomintang in social
questions was as ambiguous as that of European democracy before 1848.
Sun Yat-Sen had himself declared that China was still in a
pre-capitalist stage of development. A clever policy on the part of the
Kuomintang could prevent the development of private capitalism of the
European type in China. The development of China's productive forces
could proceed under state capitalism and thus the Chinese nation would
be spared the danger of being poisoned by the struggle between capital
and labour. Unhappily in the years following on the World War an
industrial proletariat numbering millions came into existence whose
cares and demands could not be overlooked. Sun Yat-Sen's ideas were of
as little avail in talking away the existence of capitalism in China as
those of the _Narodniki_ in destroying its existence in Russia.

The principal enemies of the Kuomintang in China were the foreign powers
with their settlements and men-of-war. There were in addition the native
Chinese millionaires, who were involved in the ramifications of
international capital, and, finally, adventurers, styling themselves
Generals and Marshals, with their armies. The Kuomintang had indeed
overthrown the monarchy in China before the World War. But authority in
the majority of the provinces had fallen into the hands of the generals
who joined with the foreigners in brutally repressing the national
movement for liberation. At the time of Sun Yat-Sen's death his party
only ruled over Canton and the surrounding provinces in southern China.
In the rest of China the generals and their armies were the rulers.
During the years 1924-25 the Bolsheviks were the stronger party in the
relations between Soviet Russia and the Kuomintang. The Bolsheviks were
the rulers of a great and powerful empire with all its possibilities of
help for China. The Kuomintang barely maintained itself in a single
Chinese province. Nevertheless, the Soviet government recognised that
the future belonged to the Kuomintang. Although belief in the
possibility of spreading the world revolution from land to land by the
sword had been abandoned, it was obvious that once a Russophile national
government came into power in China that vast country with its 400
million inhabitants would become the political and economic ally of
Soviet Russia. That would mean an enormous support for the international
position of Soviet Russia and this would be an object that would repay
much sacrifice. For this reason the Soviet government supported the
Kuomintang generously with advice and assistance.

The Kuomintang was willing in 1924 to enter the Third International.
Soviet Russia politely refused its request. Although Lenin had laid upon
the Bolsheviks the duty of stirring up nationalist revolutions among the
oppressed Asiatic peoples, it was impossible for the Bolsheviks to bring
themselves to admitting a middle-class party like the Kuomintang into
the proletarian International. Their refusal led to the foundation of an
independent Communist Party in China. Its membership remained small up
to 1927, although it exercised a profound ideological influence upon
millions of workmen and peasants, for in the years prior to 1927 Soviet
Russia and Bolshevism meant to the masses of the people in China
approximately what it had meant to European workmen in the years
1919-20. The Bolsheviks were given an opportunity throughout the years
1924-27 to pursue one of two policies in regard to the Chinese
revolution. The first policy was based firmly on the belief that only a
middle-class nationalist revolution was possible in China -- and nothing
else. In that case the leaders of the Kuomintang must be unconditionally
and unreservedly supported even if the middle-class element should
completely dominate the Kuomintang. A distinguished soldier, General
Chiang Kai-Shek, had become Chairman of the Kuomintang in succession to
Dr Sun Yat-Sen, and he felt himself to be politically a representative
of the middle-class right wing of the party. If the Soviet government
believed this policy to be right, it should have unquestioningly
supported Chiang Kai-Shek and instructed the Communist Party in China to
follow its example. The second policy was based on the belief that the
Chinese revolution could be carried on beyond the limits of the
middle-class stage within a reasonable time. In that case the Kuomintang
should only be supported in so far as it really fought against military
despotism and foreign imperialism. At the same time the Communist Party
in China must ruthlessly pursue its own policy. It must place itself at
the head of the workmen and peasants, organise soviets of armed workers
of all classes throughout China, overthrow the Kuomintang in the course
of the revolution, and establish a democratic dictatorship of the
peasants and workers.

Fate decreed that Stalin and the Chinese Communists should not make any
serious attempt to adopt either of these alternative policies, but that
they should endeavour to effect a weak compromise that involved them in
complete disaster. It is unquestionable that the Soviet government was
from 1924 to 1927 inspired with the sincere desire to make common cause
with Chiang Kai-Shek and the leaders of the Kuomintang. The Communists
in China were organised in two ways: they became members of the
Kuomintang and undertook to support it loyally in addition to being
members of the Communist Party. A vast wave of discontent swept over the
masses in China during the years 1924-27. The workmen refused any longer
to accept the miserable existence of coolies that was forced upon them
by their employers. The peasants rebelled against the intolerable burden
of rents and taxes. Nevertheless, the Communist Party in China never
contemplated placing itself at the head of these discontented masses.
Instead it hindered, in so far as it lay in its power, insurrections on
the part of peasants and workmen, prevented the proletariat from arming,
opposed strikes and allowed officials of the Kuomintang to deal cruelly
with peasant extremists. All this was done in the name of the political
truce between the Communists and the Kuomintang. The united front of all
patriotic classes in China in the struggle against imperialism must not
be broken up. The Chinese Communist Party anxiously avoided suggesting
the establishment of soviets to the masses of the population.

At the same time the Chinese Communist Party had certain duties as a
Communist party and belonged to the proletarian International. The
Kuomintang was itself not a united party. There was a left wing composed
of sympathisers with the workmen and peasants which was in opposition to
Chiang Kai-Shek's right wing. The Communist Party began to intrigue
against Chiang Kai-Shek in alliance with the Kuomintang left wing. In
1926 the Kuomintang won a number of astonishing military successes.
Chiang Kai-Shek set out on his famous march northwards that led him from
one province to another as far as the Yangtse-Kiang valley and Shanghai.
The Chinese Communist Party endeavoured to impede his progress by all
sorts of intrigues. Chiang Kai-Shek was, nevertheless, successful in
reaching Shanghai. He now became convinced that Soviet Russia and the
Communists were his enemies and in the spring of 1927 he took action
against them. The Chinese Communist Party and its subsidiary and
associated organisations were dissolved and the opposition of the
workmen broken by force. For a brief moment it appeared as if the left
wing in the Kuomintang would fight against Chiang Kai-Shek in alliance
with the Communists. In the result all groups in the Kuomintang united
against Russia. The ban on the Chinese Communist Party remained in
force, all Russian helpers and advisers were expelled from China, and
the Kuomintang government broke off relations with Soviet Russia.

Thus Stalin's Chinese policy ended in disaster. Everything that had been
gained in Asia in the way of authority and prestige had been lost. The
sympathies of the Chinese National Party for Soviet Russia had been
changed into bitter enmity. The Communist International had not wished
to wage class warfare in China. Instead it had manoeuvred and intrigued.
The result was that the masses were defeated and the middle-class
element in the Kuomintang won the day. The Opposition in Russia bitterly
attacked Stalin's foreign policy. In May 1927 Trotsky and Zinoviev drew
up an indictment of Stalin and the Central Committee of the Russian
Communist Party that criticised with unparalleled sharpness the foreign
and domestic policy of the rulers of Russia. The indictment was signed
within a short space of time by five hundred of the oldest members of
the Bolshevik Party. In this indictment the writers say _inter alia_:

>The question at issue is not whether we have sustained a terrible
>defeat in China but why, how and for what reason we have sustained
>it... No Marxist will deny that the false policy in China and in the
>matter of the Anglo-Russian Committee [the joint committee of Russian
>and English trade unions] was not a matter of chance. It is a
>continuation and enlargement of the mistaken domestic policy... The
>economy of the Soviet Republic has in the main come to the end of its
>period of reconstruction. Real results have been achieved in the course
>of this period of economic reconstruction.
>
>Grave difficulties arose simultaneously with these achievements as a
>result of this period of economic reconstruction. These difficulties,
>which arose out of an insufficient development of productive forces and
>out of our economic backwardness, were increased by being concealed
>from the broad masses of the party. Instead of being given a Marxian
>analysis of the true situation of the proletarian dictatorship in
>Soviet Russia the party was put off with the petty middle-class 'theory
>of socialism in a single land' which has nothing in common with Marxism
>and Leninism. This gross desertion of Marxism resulted in rendering it
>harder for the party to discern the nature of the economic process in
>progress from a class standpoint. It is, nevertheless, in the
>rearrangement of classes to the disadvantage of the proletariat, and in
>the misery in which broad masses of the people are living, that there
>exist the negative phenomena of the period of revolution that we have
>experienced.

The Declaration of the Five Hundred continues:

>This mistaken policy accelerates the growth of elements inimical to the
>proletarian dictatorship -- the kulaks, NEP men, the bureaucrats. Our
>entire party policy suffers from taking a swing to the right... The
>self-satisfied officials who toady to their superiors; the petty
>middle-class men who have wormed their way up to posts of authority and
>look down arrogantly on the masses -- these find the ground growing
>steadily firmer beneath their feet and raise their heads higher and
>higher... Under the NEP the new _bourgeoisie_ has become a powerful
>element in the towns and in the country.

The declaration warned the Central Committee of the party against
attempting to discredit or destroy the left, proletarian, 'Leninist'
wing. Their destruction would inevitably result in a speedy increase of
strength to the right wing and in opening up the prospect of a no less
inevitable 'subjection of the interests of the proletariat to those of
other classes'.

In these words Trotsky and the old Bolsheviks uttered their warning
against the approaching Thermidor of the Russian Revolution. Towards the
close of 1927 Stalin recognised that his entire policy had led Russia up
a blind alley. He sought and found the way out in December 1927 at the
Fifteenth Congress of the Russian Communist Party.

## Chapter 11: 'Socialism in a Single Land', 1927-1932

Among the Russian proletariat in the years 1926 and 1927 confidence in
the Soviet government was severely shaken. This want of confidence was
caused by the belief that the Soviet government was the friend of the
kulaks and lacked the desire to promote socialism. In order to regain
the confidence of the Russian workmen Stalin was compelled to prove to
them that he was in earnest in seeking to realise socialism in the form
laid down by his theory of 'socialism in a single country'.

At the Fifteenth Congress of the party Stalin adopted a resolute and
confident manner of speech. He demonstrated to his listeners that Russia
was an industrial country, and set before the party the task of
furthering its industrialisation by all possible means. He then
proceeded to draw the conclusion:

>Our country advances unerringly and swiftly towards socialism inasmuch
>as it forces the capitalist elements into the background and gradually
>excludes them from the national economy.

Stalin continued:

>This fact confronts us with the fundamental problem: who shall be
>attacked and by whom? This question was asked by Lenin in 1921 after
>the introduction of the New Economic Policy. Should we be capable of
>allying our socialist economy to peasant economy, of driving out the
>private trader and private capitalist, and of learning to trade
>ourselves, or would private capital be too strong for us and create a
>chasm between the proletariat and the peasants? Such was the question
>in those days. Now we are able to say that we have already achieved a
>decisive victory in this direction. The truth of that statement can
>only be denied by madmen and the blind. Now, however, the problem of
>'Who' and 'By whom' takes on quite a different character. Now the
>problem is transferred from the sphere of trading to that of
>production, manual production and agricultural production, in which
>private capital has a certain definite importance and from which it
>must be systematically uprooted.

Stalin admitted in this speech that the situation in the country
districts was unsatisfactory, and that hitherto too little effort had
been made to destroy the influence of the kulaks. He went on to describe
severe measures that were about to be put into operation against the
village moneylenders. Police measures -- he added -- would not alone
suffice; it would be necessary to find a satisfactory solution to the
problem presented by Russian agriculture. Stalin continued:

>This solution is to be found in the transformation of the tiny
>scattered peasant farms into a vast and centralised industry on the
>basis of cooperative farming and in the adoption of collective farming
>based on a new and higher technical knowledge. The solution consists in
>the incorporation through example and as the result of conviction, but
>not of force, of the smaller and smallest farms in a great industrial
>organisation for communal, collective and cooperative farming,
>employing agricultural machinery and tractors, and making use of
>scientific methods to intensify agricultural production. There is no
>other solution. Our agriculture will in no other way be able to catch
>up with and surpass the agricultural methods of the most
>highly-developed capitalist countries (Canada, etc).

The Soviet government, in conformity with the resolutions passed by the
Fifteenth Party Congress, greatly increased the pace of industrial
construction. A Five-Year Plan to cover the period 1 October 1928 to 1
October 1933 was put into operation. Industrial and agricultural
production was to attain a certain level within this period. The
progress achieved in the first year caused the government to announce
its intention of completing the Five-Year Plan in four years. This meant
that this stage in the industrialisation of Russia was to terminate at
the close of 1932. It has already been stated above that Soviet Russian
industry had in 1927 already achieved the level of prewar production. By
the end of 1930 industrial production had been doubled, and in 1931
production had been increased by 20 per cent in comparison with the
previous year. A further increase was to be expected in 1932, and by the
close of that year the output of Soviet Russian industry should have
trebled that of Russian industry in prewar years. Although this is
doubtless an immense achievement, Russian industry has, nevertheless,
not attained to the level of the leading industrial countries in Europe
or to that of the United States. A few significant statistics may not be
out of place here. In 1913 the coke production of Russia totalled 27
million tons, in 1926, 20 million tons, and in 1931, 58 million tons.
For the purposes of comparison with the coke production of Western
Europe it is necessary to select a year previous to the present great
economic crisis. In 1927 Germany produced 154 million tons of coke and
151 million tons of brown coal. The petroleum output of Russia in 1913
was nine million tons, in 1925, seven million tons, and in 1931, 22
million tons. The United States in 1926 produced 106 million tons. The
Russian production in pig-iron in 1913 was 4.6 million tons, in 1926,
2.4 million tons, and in 1931, 4.9 million tons. In 1927 Germany
produced 13 million tons. In 1913 Russia produced 4.2 million tons of
raw steel, in 1926, 3.0 million tons, and in 1931, 5.3 million tons.
Germany in 1927 produced 16 million tons of steel. Great praise must be
given to Russia for the steady increase that has taken place in her
industrial production in recent years. Soviet Russia will, nevertheless,
have to carry out many Five-Year Plans before it attains even to the
industrial level of Germany.

Interesting comparisons can be made between the number of factory
workers, and indeed of all paid workers and employees, in Russia, and in
the modern industrial states of Western Europe. The percentage of paid
workers and employees to the total population, or to all engaged in work
of any kind, affords an approximate index figure for the rate of
proletarisation or for the disappearance of the self-supporting small
industries and occupations. In 1927 there were 2,300,000 factory workers
actually employed in the great industries. The total number of persons
in receipt of wages or salaries amounted to 10,300,000. Among these were
no less than 3,300,000 brain workers -- employees, officials, civil
servants of all descriptions. The balance was made up of railwaymen,
transport workers, agricultural labourers, and those employed in small
industries or businesses. In consequence of the growth of Russian
industry the total number of industrial workers in Russia had risen, in
1931, to 5,400,000 and the total of wage-earners in the widest sense to
18,500,000. The increase in the latter class is to be accounted for by
the increase in the number of employees and officials as a result of the
concomitant growth of industry and also of the over-organisation that
was a consequence of the attempt to complete the Five-Year Plan in four
years. Out of a wage-earning population of 32 million in Germany in 1925
there were no less than 21 million workmen. If the population of Germany
of 65 million be compared with that of Russia of 160 million, the
following result is obtained. In Germany every third person is in
receipt of wages, or a salary, and in Russia every eighth person. The
total number of wage-earners, inclusive of working members of families,
can today be reckoned in general at half the total population. According
to this rule two-thirds of the industrial population of Germany are
wage-earners, or employees, and in Russia only a fourth. These figures
prove that even today the self-supporting lower middle class are in the
majority in Russia even though they are concealed behind the veil of
so-called peasant 'collectives'. Here, again, many and successful
Five-Year Plans will be necessary in order to transfer the centre of
gravity of Russian economic life from the country to the town, and from
the peasantry to the proletariat.

The vast growth of Russian industry since 1927 has necessitated the
expenditure of immense sums of money. The circulation of money has in
consequence steadily increased. This form of inflation can,
nevertheless, be justified from an economic standpoint, since the goods
produced in Russia increased in proportion to the increase in the amount
of currency in circulation. The sound principles on which Russian
foreign trade has been conducted have not been departed from in recent
years. It is true that Russian imports have notably increased in
consequence of the necessity to import from abroad the machinery
necessary for the expansion of industry. Foreign currency was also
necessary to pay the foreign experts employed in Russian factories. This
increased demand for foreign currency was in great part balanced with
the help of the proceeds of Russia's export trade.

Soviet Russia has made use of all possible means to increase its export
trade in recent years. Russia not only sold her natural products like
naphtha, timber, furs and corn, but also products of which her own
population had an insufficient supply, such as butter, fish, poultry,
etc. These heavy sacrifices were required of the Russian population,
especially of the proletarian population of the towns, in order to
acquire foreign currency. The economic crisis throughout the world and
the diminishing purchasing power of the international market at present
places difficulties in the way of Russian export, and therefore of the
acquisition of the foreign currency necessary for the further
industrialisation of Russia. Nevertheless, the Soviet government
obstinately continues to carry on its work of industrialisation and the
entire state and party machinery works unceasingly to increase
industrial production. The working capacity of the factory workers is
strained to the uttermost -- the trade unions cooperate in this
endeavour -- for, according to the official party belief, the
industrialisation of Russia means the realisation of socialism. The
demands made of the factories by the party and the government are so
great that they cannot possibly be fulfilled. It is in this connexion
significant that the production of the year 1931 has failed to reach the
projected figures: 83,500,000 tons of coal were to have been produced
and only 58 million tons were actually obtained; 8,800,000 tons of steel
were stipulated for, and only 5,300,000 were produced. Even the naphtha
industry, which had undergone an especially rapid and successful
increase in productivity, only produced 22,300,000 tons instead of the
projected 25,500,000 tons. For 1932, extraordinarily high demands have
been made of the individual industries and in general the figures
exceeded those stipulated for in 1931. It is unnecessary to add that the
quality of the manufactured article suffers from hasty production.

The plan for the industrialisation of Russia lays the greatest stress
upon heavy industry and upon increased production of raw materials and
machinery. Judged from the standpoint of national economy this is right,
since it is only by this path that Russia can arrive at having a modern
self-supporting industry, but it involves at least temporarily neglect
of production of the necessaries of life and of readymade goods. For
this reason the vast growth in the industrial production in Russia in
recent years has not diminished the lack of commodities from which the
population is suffering.

Unemployment has indeed been overcome by the great increase in
employment necessitated by the rapid growth of Russian industry,
transport, etc; and this achievement of the Soviet government is all the
more noteworthy in view of the unemployment prevalent throughout the
world. The Soviet government may justifiably pride itself upon the fact
that unemployment no longer exists in Russia. This is an important
achievement for the Russian workman from a psychological standpoint,
since as long as there were a million unemployed in Russia the contrast
between the official socialist legend and the reality was glaring in the
extreme.

Ever since 1928 Stalin's policy has been directed towards a steady
repression of the kulaks and the development of peasant cooperative
societies. Stalin was anxious to avoid anything in the nature of a
startling interference on the part of the Soviet government in the
peasant life of Russia, because he feared that it would have
catastrophic effects upon Russia's food-supplies. His object was to
increase the number of peasant cooperative societies and he hoped that
within the five years 1928-33 approximately a fourth of the Russian
peasantry would be organised in societies for cooperative production.
The object of the state was to favour these societies in such matters as
the payment of taxes and the granting of credits. The cooperative
societies were to be given tractors and all other necessary modern
farming implements and machinery. The peasants who still remained in
their archaic isolation would thus be induced to abandon it gradually by
the sight of the work accomplished by the cooperative societies for
production (the 'collective' farms).

Class distinctions in the Russian village proved too strong in the years
1928-29 for even a slow rate of development to be maintained. The kulaks
observed that the government wished to take still sharper measures
against them in taxation, local administrative questions, etc, and they
intensified their obstructive tactics. They systematically held back
grain supplies with the result that in 1928 Russia was forced to
purchase foreign wheat in order to relieve the worst sufferings of the
population. In many districts in Russia the kulaks organised a regular
terror. Village correspondents for Communist newspapers who reported the
true state of affairs were in danger of their lives. Many of them were
murdered. Stalin found himself compelled to make use of the entire
resources of the Soviet state in his struggle with the kulaks and the
order went forth that they were to be exterminated as a separate class
in society. Their properties were confiscated in many cases and
presented to the peasant cooperative societies. Kulaks who had been
specially active in a counter-revolutionary sense were exiled from their
native districts. It is unquestionable that many injustices were done to
them and that there was much suffering. Although it is possible to argue
that the kulaks were only punished because they wanted to make money,
and that the Soviet government itself had for years stimulated their
cupidity, the truth is that the struggle with the kulaks in the years
1929-30 was a struggle for the preservation of the Russian Revolution.

All concessions on the part of the Soviet government had proved
unavailing in satisfying the wealthy peasants and the village usurers.
In the first place they asked that in return for their grain they should
be given manufactured goods at prices that were not higher than those
obtained for the same goods in foreign countries. A domestic policy that
would have satisfied the kulaks would have finally resulted in the
destruction of the government's monopoly of foreign trade. The abolition
of this monopoly would have had for its consequences the flooding of the
Russian market with cheap foreign manufactured goods and the ruin of
Russian industry. All progress in civilisation that had resulted from
the Russian Revolution would have been destroyed as a result of the
decay of the great industrial towns. If the kulak had in reality been
stronger than the Soviet government, he would have become the autocrat
of the village, have allied himself with the reactionary elements in the
state administration and the Red Army, and thus have brought about a
real Russian Thermidor and a White Guard military dictatorship. The
struggle with the kulaks of necessity involved the country in unpleasant
economic consequences. Since the small farmer and peasant as a general
rule only produced sufficient supplies for his own needs, the country as
a whole was forced to rely upon the bigger farmers -- the kulaks -- for
its supplies. The expropriation and dividing up of the kulak farms at
first resulted in producing a state of confusion in the villages and a
complete disorganisation of the food market. In a large number of
instances the kulaks slaughtered their cattle wholesale before their
lands were confiscated and the panic thus created seized upon large
numbers of the small farmers.

In the course of the single year 1929 Russia's stock of cattle sank by a
quarter and her stock of pigs by more than a third. The consequences of
this catastrophic shock to Russian agriculture in 1929 have not yet been
overcome. The Soviet government was once more forced to introduce food
rationing, and in conjunction with it came state control and high
prices, to the exclusion of free trade. The results were similar to
those experienced by Germany during the World War -- shortage of food
supplies, profiteering, lowering of agricultural production. The Soviet
government was forced to restore liberty to trade by the May Decrees of
1932.

The action taken by the GPU against the kulaks aroused the fear in many
small farmers that a persecution of the Russian peasantry was about to
begin. Stalin and the Soviet government never entertained the slightest
intention of taking action against the Russian peasants as a whole.
Local mishandlings on the part of over-hasty officials occurred that
were hardly to be avoided in a process of this kind. The small farmers
sought and found protection in the 'collective' system of farming.
Anyone quick to join a collective society was not only assured of his
personal safety but was changed from being an object of suspicion to the
Soviet government into a co-worker with it in the cause of socialism. As
a member of a collective society the peasant no longer had cause to fear
the police and could even approach the state with all manner of
requests. Thus the years 1929 and 1930 beheld the Russian peasants
flocking in crowds to join the collective societies. As early as 1930,
37 per cent of the agricultural land of Russia was in the possession of
the collectives, three per cent in that of the great state farms, and 60
per cent remained in the hands of individual and uncollectivised
peasants. At the close of 1931 the collectives were in possession of 62
per cent of all peasant farms and 79 per cent of the arable land, and
the process of collectivisation was proceeding uninterruptedly.

Although the Soviet government proudly pointed in its official
publications to this triumph of the cooperative ideal among the Russian
peasants, the rulers of Russia must in truth have watched the mass
movement of the peasants into the cooperative societies with mixed
feelings; for the Soviet government did not possess sufficient tractors
and other agricultural implements to supply the colossal needs of the
collectives. In 1930 only 17 per cent of the arable land in the
possession of the collective farms was cultivated by means of tractors.
In 1931 it was hoped to raise this figure to 19 per cent and in 1932 to
44 per cent. At present the majority of Soviet collective farms are
still using the old primitive methods of agriculture of the peasants. In
other words, these collective farms exist only on paper. In the normal
type of Russian collective farm the arable land and the means of
production are the property of the cooperative society. The farmhouse,
domestic animals and garden remain the property of the peasant. The
produce belongs to the society and is annually divided up among the
members. The taxes paid by a collective farm are very small. The
collective farms have to hand over a settled proportion of their produce
to the state authorities at state-controlled prices. It was decided in
1930 that the collective farms in the good grain districts after an
average harvest must surrender to the state a quarter to a third of
their gross production. In districts where the land is poorer the
proportion is less. In practice this does not place a too heavy burden
upon the collectives. The May Decrees of 1932 lowered the amount of
produce to be surrendered to the state and the taxes to be paid by both
the collectives and the non-collectivised peasants. At the same time
smuggling was in a sense legalised in that the peasants after they had
given the required quota to the state were free to sell their surplus
stocks of grain, cattle, etc, in the open market at whatever prices they
could obtain. It is indeed not intended to permit private trading to
develop, and instead the collectives are to open their own shops for the
sale of their surplus produce.

The vast extent of the Russian state and the enormous number of its
peasant inhabitants renders impossible any effective state control of
agriculture. The collectives can easily prove themselves an excellent
cloak for the development of a new class of kulaks. If the members of
the Soviet Russian collectives were not inspired by agrarian selfishness
but by a socialist communal feeling, Russia would not today be
experiencing any shortage of food supplies. Once successful collectives
have turned into shopkeepers the business instinct will soon seize upon
them. Moreover, there is also the serious problem of what is to happen
to those poor peasant families that have failed to gain a footing either
in a prosperous collective or in industry. Signs are not wanting to show
that a new poverty-stricken class is coming into existence in the
Russian countryside.

The change in Soviet policy brought about by Stalin in December 1927
altered his relations with the various groups inside the Russian
Communist Party. Stalin's so-called 'left course' split the Opposition.
The old-time Bolsheviks led by Zinoviev and Kamenev made their peace
with the Soviet government. At the same time they were no longer given
responsible posts. Trotsky and his intimate friends were once more alone
in their opposition. Nevertheless, Trotsky did not allow himself to be
discouraged by Zinoviev's defection and instead only attacked Stalin and
his policy with greater bitterness. In 1929 Trotsky was forcibly
expelled from Russia by the police and handed over to the Russophile
Turkish government, who gave him asylum on an island near
Constantinople. Here Trotsky has devoted himself untiringly to literary
activities and waged war to the death on the theory of socialism in a
single country. He has criticised the mistakes of the ruling bureaucracy
in Soviet Russia and demanded that it should accord the Russian workman
the right to decide his own fate. He has also demanded the pursuit of a
resolute, internationalist, proletarian policy.

Since 1928 the great majority of Russian workmen and members of the
Communist Party have remained faithful supporters of Stalin and the
Central Committee. But the radical agrarian policy of the Soviet
government led to a breach with the 'Right' group of peasant
sympathisers in the Communist Party. Stalin overcame their opposition
with little difficulty. Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky were removed from
their responsible posts. Indeed it is remarkable that the Right
Opposition put up so poor a fight against Stalin. For this nationalist
conservative group could not only have mobilised the masses of the
peasantry but also a large number of civil servants and a part of the
army; and Tomsky himself represented important sections of the working
class. It must, however, not be forgotten that Rykov's group was in
reality only a buffer between Stalin and the group whose opinions can
best be symbolised by the name of Ustryalov. In their first assault upon
Stalin's position the Right would have found themselves the prisoners of
the middle-class-peasant-military counter-revolution. The leaders of the
Right recognised this danger and preferred to submit to the majority in
the party. Police measures such as were employed against Trotsky and his
followers have never been used against the Right.

In order to make clear to the Russian proletariat his conversion to
unqualified socialism, Stalin at the close of 1927 abandoned the foreign
policy that had caused him to become the object of so much criticism.
Soviet Russia broke off relations with the English trade unions and also
relinquished its propaganda for international trade-union solidarity. It
declared war to the death upon the Kuomintang in China and made no
further attempt to restrain the masses of the population from
revolutionary action. Ever since Chiang Kai-Shek's victory in the spring
of 1927 the fighting strength of the revolutionary masses in China had
been broken and armed insurrections could now only be in the nature of
wild adventures. Nevertheless, in December 1927, Communist workmen
revolted in Canton and proclaimed a soviet republic. The insurrection
was put down after bloody fighting. This insurrection in Canton was the
tragic conclusion to the Communist International's Chinese policy.
Events in China between 1924 and 1927 display a remarkable similarity
with those in Germany between 1921 and 1923. In both cases Soviet Russia
judged conditions in a foreign country from the standpoint of her own
state interests. In Germany her policy was based on the Treaty of
Rapallo and friendship with a middle-class republican government; her
policy in China was founded on the agreement with the Kuomintang
government and with Chiang Kai-Shek. The Soviet government refused in
both instances to believe in the possibility of an independent
proletarian revolution in the near future, and by so doing paralysed the
KPD in Germany and the Communist Party in China. The Bolsheviks could,
nevertheless, not bring themselves to give up their pseudo-radical
manner of speech and their intrigues. Hence they failed in Germany to
work in sincere collaboration with the Social-Democrats and their
friendship with the Kuomintang in China was not of a permanent nature.
It was only when it was already too late that it was discovered that in
both countries the situation was favourable for revolution. Hamburg and
Canton were the achievements of this policy.

Ever since the foundation of the Third International the Bolsheviks
attempted to exercise an influence over the course of the world
revolution. They did this in the years 1919-21 by directly stirring up
an international Communist revolution, and from 1921 to 1927 by their
pursuit of a policy of a united front with the Social-Democrat workmen
in the West and the movement for national independence in the East. Both
policies successively proved mistaken and their failure caused the
Soviet government to draw the natural conclusions. After 1928 it
abandoned all attempts to influence the international labour movement
and to assist colonial and oppressed countries in their struggles for
national freedom. And it sought at the same time to maintain its hold
over the minority of the international proletariat that still believed
in Soviet Russia and to fill their minds with a meaningless
pseudo-radicalism.

The new policy of the Communist International was laid down at the Sixth
World Congress in the summer of 1928, and at the Fifth Congress of the
Red Trade-Union International in 1930. The Sixth World Congress made the
discovery that a 'third period' had begun in the international labour
movement. The first period, from 1917 to 1923, was that of direct
revolutionary struggle; the second covered the years 1923-28. In the
summer of 1928 the United States was still enjoying great prosperity,
and even Germany was experiencing economically an Indian summer, brought
about by the foreign credits she had received since 1924. The
resolutions of the Sixth World Congress made no attempt to deny the
relatively prosperous economic condition of the capitalist world.
Although it was always possible from a Communist standpoint to entertain
doubts of the permanence of capitalist prosperity, and to prophesy new
crises and upheavals on a vast scale, it is very difficult to understand
why the 'third period' should have been said to have begun in the summer
of 1928. It was stated that the typical characteristic of this 'third
period' was the appearance of Social-Democracy as an ally of world
capitalism and its assumption in certain respects of fascist ideas. Any
form of united front with Social-Democrat parties and leaders was
therefore out of the question during this 'third period'. This judgement
upon international Social-Democracy will be accepted or otherwise by the
individual critic according to his own personal political beliefs. The
Social-Democrats can be praised or condemned according to the political
standpoint from which they are judged. It is, nevertheless, impossible
to prove that in matters of principle Social-Democracy had undergone any
change between the summer of 1927 and that of 1928.

Hence it is only possible to explain the resolutions passed by the Sixth
World Congress by the same methods that were employed above to explain
those of the Third World Congress in 1921. Soviet Russia and not the
world at large had changed. A new attitude towards the international
situation is always the consequence of a change in Russian domestic
policy. The policy of compromise pursued in Russia itself at the time of
the NEP and the concessions to the kulaks, found its international
expression in the policy of a united front. Since, however, Stalin had
embarked on his so-called 'left course' in domestic policy, it became
necessary to reveal this new radicalisation of Bolshevism in the
International's policy by abandoning the policy of a united front with
the Social-Democrats and by burdening the Sixth World Congress with the
notorious 'third period' theory in order to advance a pseudo-practical
reason, based upon conditions within the International, for the
disruption of the united front. The task of the Communist International
since 1928 has been to attract to itself a minority of the workmen by
means of radical formulas unaccompanied by purposeful actions. The
utopian radicals among the international proletariat are the most
receptive of this propaganda. Hence the policy of the Communist
International was framed in such a way as to appeal to them. The theory
of a working-class aristocracy put forward, before 1917, by Lenin in his
isolation in the midst of the World War, was revived -- a theory that
had been abandoned in favour of an attempt to win the support of the
trade-union workmen at the time in 1920 when the Communist International
was making a serious effort to obtain the leadership of the proletariat.

The Communists are for the present content to remain a minority of the
proletariat. They have no longer any real hopes of achieving power and
have therefore abandoned their struggle for the control of the trade
unions. The resolutions of the World Congresses in 1928 and 1930 did
indeed declare that Communists were to continue their activities in the
trade unions. At the same time, however, the task was given to them of
organising the non-unionist workmen for the purpose of leading them in
economic conflicts without regard for the wishes of the unions. In
practice this implied the creation of new organisations in competition
with the old Social-Democrat trade unions and the promotion of a split
within the trade-union movement. Important successes have, nevertheless,
been denied to the Communists since 1928 in their work of organising a
red trade-union opposition in Germany and other countries. Although it
is true that they have secured the support of at least a part of the
unemployed by means of their utopian radical propaganda, it is also true
that the utopian radical workmen are the most unreliable element in the
whole proletariat. This section of the proletariat, composed chiefly of
unemployed, and actuated mainly by purely emotional considerations, is
capable of changing its convictions with great rapidity, and could
within twenty-four hours abandon the Communists and join the fascists,
National Socialists, etc. Recent elections in Germany have testified to
the truth of this statement. The Communist International could not
indeed achieve any real success with such a policy. The result of a
parliamentary election is in this connexion relatively unimportant. But
what is of decisive importance is that in all those places where the
world revolution is in progress the Communists are without any
influence. The Spanish revolution was carried out without the help of
the Spanish Communist Party. The English Communists exercise no
influence upon the great struggles of the English working class. The
Communist Parties in India and China are completely insignificant,
notwithstanding the fact that on occasions the European press describes
the insurrectionary Chinese peasants as 'Communists'.

At the time of the Third World Congress the Communist International was
still supported by the majority of the workmen in France, Czechoslovakia
and Norway. The Communists have long ago lost the support of the
majority of the workmen in all three countries. They have sunk to the
level of an unimportant minority in France. There are today six million
unemployed in Germany, and if their families be added to the
calculation, the total is at least nine million voters. The largest
Communist vote in the elections in 1932 totalled five million. The KPD
probably comprises at present barely 50 per cent of the German
unemployed, and only a very small percentage of the employed workmen.
That is a catastrophic condition for a party that seriously aims at the
leadership of the majority of the proletariat. At the same time the KPD
is relatively the strongest party in the Communist International.

During 1925-27 the Communist bureaucrats in control of the party forced
the so-called Left to leave its ranks. After 1928 the Right met with the
same fate. Thus the Communist parties are for the present freed from all
unwelcome independent criticism and are in the undisputed control of the
bureaucracy. These bureaucratic officials endeavour to conceal the
failure of the policy of the Communist International by narrating to
their supporters the victories won by socialism in Russia.

This is not the place in which to discuss whether socialism is better
than capitalism. It can, nevertheless, be discovered whether a country
is organised in an economic sense in accordance with the doctrines of
Marx. In order that Soviet Russia should be truly socialist there are at
least three preliminary conditions that must be fulfilled. Industry must
be organised into great industrial associations under the free control
of the producers; agriculture must be organised in a similar fashion;
and production must be regulated solely by demand and not in accordance
with market and trade interests. Soviet Russia today does not fulfil any
one of these three preliminary conditions. Although industry is
organised into the modern big industry system, the producers have no
part in the management and no voice in the determination of industrial
policy. Socialism is inconceivable unless accompanied by the exercise of
self-determination on the part of the people. For socialism is the rule
of freedom under which the state disappears. An over-bureaucratised
administration based on the employment of force, and which the masses
must obey, is irreconcilable with the socialist organisation of society
and can only be regarded as a middle-class institution.

In the agricultural organisation of Soviet Russia only a small part of
the production is organised on a large scale. The predominant agrarian
type is the collective farm. At present the state cannot supply the
majority of these farms with agricultural machinery. The peasant
therefore continues to make use of his old-fashioned plough and aged
horse to till the piece of ground that has been in the possession of his
family for generations. The communal division of produce in the
collectives serves only to veil the traditional petty middle-class
system. On the collective farms where state tractors are working the
peasant has less work and a far better result from his labours. The
collective farm system as a whole serves no other purpose than to work
well in the interests of its members, to sell as little produce as
possible at state-controlled prices, and to dispose of as much as
possible in private trading at far higher prices. That is a typical
petty-middle-class method of production.

There is as little trace in the state industries as in the collectives
of a system of working solely for the production of necessaries. Here
trade interests are also predominant; and this without taking into
account the influence daily exercised upon Soviet Russia by the
movements of the capitalist world market. The same conditions prevail in
the domestic economy of Soviet Russia. The individual state trusts and
heavy industries are legally independent. A Russian machine factory must
find a market for its goods and pay for its raw materials exactly as is
done by a similar factory in Europe. It has its overdraft at the state
bank; the management must fulfil all obligations; and, in the event of
its becoming bankrupt, its credit ceases with the state bank and its
supplies of steel are discontinued. The latest decrees of the Soviet
government, published in the second half of 1931 and the beginning of
1932, lay upon the state industries an obligation to organise themselves
on a purely business model, acquire capital, and to make profits. At
present it is theoretically impossible, however, for a badly managed
Soviet undertaking to go bankrupt. All this is trading on a modern
financial and capitalist basis.

There is a great difference from an economic standpoint in whether
Russia produces 20 or 60 million tons of coal annually, or whether her
vast and fertile cornlands are ploughed up with a wooden plough or a
tractor. Nevertheless, increased production, and the abandonment of
outworn methods of production, have not helped to bring Russia an inch
farther along the path leading to true socialism. Soviet Russia still
belongs to the same social and state category to which she belonged
in 1921. Russia is a peasants' and workers' state, organised in
accordance with a system of state capitalism by means of which the
governing bureaucracy contrives to maintain its hold over both the basic
classes in society. The proletarian influence shows itself in the fact
that private trading for profits is inadmissible. The governing
bureaucracy, which owes its existence to the support of the peasants,
issues its commands, nevertheless, to the workmen, and organises
industry on a trading and financial and capitalist basis. The
proletarian influence prevents the emergence in the country districts of
a class of private landowners. The power of the peasants, however, is
shown in all the concessions which the state has made to the
collectives; and their existence indirectly justifies the dictatorship
exercised by the party and state machinery over Soviet Russia.

It is only possible to avoid delivering false judgements on the subject
of Soviet Russia by according full recognition to the mixed character of
its social order. It is as mistaken to ignore the part of the
proletariat in present-day Russia as it is to underestimate the
importance of the middle-class and peasant element. Official Soviet
statistics published in 1930 show that deposits amounting to 722 million
roubles were credited in the books of the Russian savings bank. Of this
total only 91 million belonged to workmen, 205 million to employees and
government officials, 134 million to 'special' workers, that is, members
of professions, manual workers, etc, and only 46 million to peasants as
individuals. To these figures must be added, however, 246 million
belonging to 'legal persons', behind which designation were concealed
chiefly collectives and other cooperative societies. This statistical
panorama serves admirably to reveal the multiplicity of classes in
modern Russia no less than the fact that, in standard of living and
opportunity for saving, the working class are by no means favoured above
the rest.

State capitalism is for Russia an excessively modern form of social and
economic organisation. Such an organisation of society demands a
modernist civilisation. Soviet Russia can therefore dispense with
religion in public life, use the latest pedagogic methods, and make an
inestimable contribution towards knowledge of maternity and child
welfare. The complete intellectual freedom that is characteristic of a
true socialist society is certainly not to be found in Soviet Russia,
where the ruling party dictatorship could not continue to exist without
a rigidly dogmatic doctrinal system known as Leninism, which all
citizens are compelled to believe in.

The wages of the Russian workman have risen in recent years. At the same
time his real standard of living has been lowered in comparison with the
years before 1927, since the supply of manufactured goods available for
the town population has not improved and the supplies of food have
diminished. Nevertheless, there is no actual famine, unemployment is
virtually unknown, and the Soviet government should find it possible in
the near future by the employment of all the means at its disposal, and
after its latest concessions to the peasants, to bring the national food
supplies once more into order. Moreover, the Soviet government in taking
action against the kulaks has for the time being suppressed all open
enmity among the country population. The situation of the small farmers
and peasants organised in the collectives has improved wherever modern
machinery could be placed at their disposal. There has never been any
question of a persecution of the peasantry by the Soviet government.

The socialist theory put forward by Stalin has given the Soviet
government freedom of action in the immediate future. A new Five-Year
Plan is now being drawn up. The collectivisation of Russian agriculture
and the simultaneous raising of the level of industrial production to a
respectable height is possible within the next few years. The Soviet
government will then be able to declare that the 'realisation of
socialism' has been achieved and the 'class-free society' brought into
existence. It would then be possible to lessen the present too intense
pace of industrialisation. The party dictatorship might even be relaxed
and more freedom accorded to self-government; for in a 'class-free
society' the dictatorship of the proletariat is clearly superfluous.
Substantial concessions to the peasants could also be justified by the
argument that 'peasants' in a private capitalist sense no longer existed
but only agricultural producers within the framework of the perfected
socialist order of society.

Class distinctions in Russia cannot be concealed permanently. If the
present and the succeeding Five-Year Plans prove an economic success,
improved living conditions will strengthen the class-consciousness both
of the workers and the peasants. In a distant future Russia will not be
spared decisive class-warfare, and _Narodnik_ 'socialism' will not avail
to postpone the conflict indefinitely.

In their endeavours to overcome Russia's backwardness the Bolsheviks
feel themselves the executors of the testament of Peter the Great. On 19
November 1928, in a speech before the Central Committee of the Russian
Communist Party, Stalin said:

>We are not responsible for the technical and economic backwardness of
>our country. It has existed for centuries and has come down to us as an
>inheritance from our entire history. This backwardness was also felt to
>be an evil in pre-revolutionary days and it continued to be so after
>the revolution. Peter the Great's attempt, after his experience of
>developed Western states, feverishly to build factories and other works
>to supply the army and to increase the defensive strength of the
>country, was a unique attempt to burst the bonds of this backwardness.
>It is only natural that neither of the old classes -- feudal
>aristocracy or middle class -- was able to solve the problem provided
>by the backwardness of our country. Indeed these classes were not only
>incapable of solving this problem but even of visualising it properly.
>The centuries-old backwardness of our country can only be overcome by
>successful socialisation and only the proletariat, which had
>established its dictatorship and directs the destinies of the country,
>is able to accomplish it.

The historic mission thus placed before Bolshevism has in the main been
fulfilled by it. Bolshevism in Russia overthrew the Tsar with the help
of the proletariat and completed the middle-class revolution. It
overcame the shameful backwardness of the country and brought it up to
the level of a modern middle-class European state. Indeed, thanks to the
power of the working class, Bolshevism could in Russia replace private
capitalism and its accompaniments in social and economic life by a
modern system of state capitalism.

The successes achieved by the Bolsheviks from a Russian nationalist
standpoint were precisely the cause of their international failures. It
is not an accident that Soviet Russia has advanced steadily and
uninterruptedly since 1921, whilst the Communist International has in
the same years gone steadily downhill. Bolshevik doctrines and methods
were modern and progressive in comparison with the ideas and methods of
Tsarist Russia. But they were reactionary when applied to the industrial
lands of the West, where the middle-class revolution has virtually
reached its completion, where the peasants are no longer the most
influential element in the population, and where the proletariat has
already learnt to create and control its own organisations. The heroic
deeds of the Russian workmen from 1917 to 1920 temporarily threw a veil
over Bolshevik backwardness and awoke the feeling that Bolshevism was
the predestined form of the universal proletarian revolution. Important
sections of the European proletariat were at that time anxious to ally
themselves with the Bolsheviks in an attempt to seize the reins of
government. In the course of time, however, the impossibility of
entrusting the leadership of the world proletariat to the government of
the agrarian Russian state became more and more evident. The Russian
state and the international working class once more parted company, and
Stalin's theory of 'socialism in a single land' is only the verbal
expression of an accomplished fact. An isolated, nationalist, Russian
Bolshevism was not even capable of leading the Asiatic peoples in their
struggle for freedom.

The historic deeds of the great Russian Revolution still fascinate some
small sections of the international working class. But the Communist
International has no longer any influence upon the course of the world
proletarian movement. The achievements of Bolshevism in the Russian
Revolution will live forever in history. If today the international
middle class still fears Bolshevism, it does so because it
misunderstands the present nature of Bolshevism. It may have cause to
fear the international Marxian proletariat and the world revolution: but
these are not 'Bolshevism'.

## Bibliography

_Translator's Note_: In his bibliography Professor Rosenberg refers to
German translations of Russian works and to works by German writers upon
his subject. The translator has therefore deemed it better to preserve
the German titles. A list of Russian works used by Professor Rosenberg
that are available in English has been appended for the reader's
convenience.

### Chapter 01

* For the correspondence between Marx and Ruge, cf _Marx-Engels,
  Gesamtausgabe, herausgegeben vom Marx-Engels-Lenin Institut in
  Moscow_, Erste Abteilung, Band I, Erster Halbband (Frankfurt a M,
  1927), pp 557ff.
* Marx, _Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie_; cf ibid, pp
  607ff. Engels's letter of 13 November 1851; cf _Gesamtausgabe_, Dritte
  Abteilung, Band I (Berlin, 1929), pp 148ff.
* Marx and the Commune; cf Karl Korsch, _Revolutionäre Kommune_, in the
  review _Die Aktion_, nos 5-8, 1929, and nos 3-4, 1931.
* Marxism in general; cf Karl Korsch, _Marxismus und Philosophie_ (II
  Auflage, Leipzig, 1930), and his _Die materialistische
  Geschictisauffassung_ (Leipzig, 1929).

### Chapter 02

* All references made here and throughout this work to Lenin's writings
  and speeches are taken from the publication in which they are most
  readily accessible to German readers, that is, the great collection of
  his writings and speeches entitled _Ausgewählte Werke_ (Verlag für
  Literatur und Politik, Vienna, 1925). Reference is also made to
  various writings published individually in German translations. The
  standard collection of Lenin's writings in the original Russian has
  now appeared in a second edition. A part has already been translated
  into German under the title WJ Lenin, _Sämtliche Werke_ (Verlag für
  Literatur und Politik, Vienna and Berlin). The Russian and German
  versions are arranged in chronological order. Hence it is easy for the
  reader to discover in either edition the passages to which reference
  is made here.
* For Lenin's early life cf NK Krupskaya, _Erinnerungen an Lenin_
  (Verlag für Literatur und Politik, Vienna and Berlin, 1929), p 5,
  where Lenin's widow writes: 'Vladimir Ilyitsh came to Petersburg in
  the autumn of 1893. Although I did not make his acquaintance in those
  days, I was told by friends that a very well-informed Marxist had
  arrived from the Volga [etc].'
* Lenin was born in 1870.
* The quotations from Lenin's writings in 1902 are taken from the
  pamphlet entitled _Was tun?_, cf _Sammelband_, pp 45, 49, 52, 78.
* For Lenin's speech at the party congress in 1903, cf _Sammelband_, pp
  80ff.
* For Lenin's _Rede über die Revolution von 1905_ (delivered in January
  1917) cf the publication bearing that title published by Verlag für
  Literatur und Politik in Vienna in 1925.
* L Trotsky, _Die russische Revolution 1905_ (II Auflage, Berlin, 1923;
  the first edition was published in Dresden in 1909), pp 87ff and
  168ff.
* For Lenin's article on the Soviets cf _Sammelband_, pp 170ff.
* Lenin _versus_ Martynov in 1905, cf _Sammelband_, pp 132ff, 135,
  147ff, 150ff.
* Zinoviev, _Vom Werdegang unserer Partei_ (Berlin, 1920), p 26:
  'Historians cannot suppress the fact that the councils of workers'
  delegates in Petersburg were the creation of a group of Mensheviks who
  sought the support of the non-party masses of the population against
  the "narrow circle" of professional revolutionaries.'

### Chapter 03

* Lenin and Zinoviev, _Gegen den Strom_ (containing articles written in
  the years 1914-16, and published by the Verlag der Kommunistischen
  Internationale, 1921), pp 30ff, 272ff, 291ff.
* Trotsky's articles for the years 1909 and 1915 are to be found in an
  appendix to his book _Die russische Revolution 1905_, pp 228ff, 230ff,
  232ff.

### Chapter 04

* Lenin and Zinoviev, _Gegen den Strom_, pp 6, 277ff, 281ff, 341ff,
  521ff.
* P Frölich, _10 jahre Krieg und Bürgerkrieg_ (Berlin, 1924), pp 150ff.
* _Spartakusbriefe_ I (Vereinigte Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands,
  Berlin, 1921), pp 57ff, 132ff.

### Chapter 05

* Lenin, _Sammelband_, pp 345ff, 369ff, 423.
* Lenin, _Staat und Revolution_ (III Auflage, Berlin, 1919).
* Lenin, _Die drohende Katastrophe und wie soll man sie bekämpfen?_
  (Vienna, 1920), pp 9, 10, 12, 17, 25, 40.
* Trotsky, _Von der October-Revolution bis zum Brester Friedensvertrag_
  (written in 1918 and published in 1919 in Berlin).
* Bukharin, _Der Klassenkampf und die Revolution in Russland_ (Kleine
  Bibliothek der russischen Korrespondenz, Berlin, Nr 19-21, 1920,
  written in 1917).

### Chapter 06

* Trotsky, _Von der October-Revolution bis zum Brester Friedensvertrag_;
  cf especially pp 43, 52ff, 61ff, 89ff.
* Trotsky, _Die Geburt der Roten Armee_ (Verlag für Literatur und
  Politik, Vienna, 1924, written in 1922), pp 10ff, 133ff.
* Trotsky, _1917_. _Die Lehren der Revolution_ (Berlin, 1925, written in
  1924), pp 45ff, 54ff. Trotsky reveals in these pages the part played
  by Zinoviev and Kamenev in 1917.
* Lenin, _Sammelband_, pp 425ff.
* Lenin, _Die Kinderkrankheit des Radikalismus in Kommunismus_ (Berlin,
  1925, written in 1920). For the elections to the National Assembly cf
  pp 64ff, 104ff; and for the situation in regard to the peasants cf p
  55.
* Larin and Kritzmann, _Wirtschaftsleben und wirtschaftlicher Aufbau in
  Sowjet-Russland 1917 bis 1920_ (Berlin, 1921), pp 132, 136.
* Milyutin, _Zwei Jahre ökonomischer Diktatur des Proletariats in
  Russland_ (Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1920), p 4.
* _Die Verfassung der Russischen Sozialistischen Föderativen
  Sowjet-Republik, Beschluss des 5 Allrussischen Sowjetkongresses vom 10
  Juli 1918_ (Kleine Bibliothek der russischen Korrespondenz, Berlin, Nr
  22, 1920). This also contains the 'Deklaration der Rechte des
  werktätigen und ausgebeuteten Volkes' dated January 1918.

### Chapter 07

* Rosa Luxemburg, _Die russische Revolution. Eine kritische Würdigung.
  Aus dem Nachlass herausgegeben von Paul Levi_ (Berlin, 1922, written
  in 1918), p 113.
* Lenin, _Sammelband_, pp 512, 542, 570ff (on Italy).
* Lenin, _Die Kinderkrankheit des Radikalismus in Kommunismus_, pp 61ff,
  69ff, 91ff, 97.
* Lenin, _Die Weltlage und die Aufgaben der Kommunistischen
  Internationale_ (speech delivered in the first session of the Second
  World Congress, Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1920).
* _Leitsätze und Statuten der Kommunistischen Internationale_ (passed by
  the Second World Congress, Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale,
  1920). For the twenty-one conditions, cf ibid, pp 26ff.
* Zinoviev, _Die Weltrevolution und die III Kommunistische
  Internationale_ (speech delivered at the USPD Congress in Halle on 14
  October 1920, Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1920).

### Chapter 08

* Lenin, _Sammelband_, pp 588ff (trade-union debate), 638ff (NEP), 712ff
  (cooperative societies).
* Steinberg (a former Social Revolutionary People's Commissar) _Gewalt
  und Terror in der Revolution_ (Verlag Rowohlt, Berlin, 1931), pp 189ff
  (Kronstadt revolt).
* Trotsky, _Die neue Etappe. Die Weltlage und unsere Aufgaben_ (Verlag
  der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1921), p 59.
* _Taktik und Organisation der revolutionären Offensive_. _Die Lehren
  der März-Aktion_, Herausgegeben von der Zentrale der Vereinigten
  Kommunistischen Partei Deutschlands (Leipzig and Berlin, 1921).
* _Thesen und Resolutionen des III Weltkongresses der Kommunistischen
  Internationale_ (Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1921), cf
  especially pp 8ff, 45, 48, 52ff.
* Gorter, _Die Moskauer Internationale_ (Verlag der KAPD, Berlin, 1921).

### Chapter 09

* Karl Korsch, 'Zur Geschichte der marxistischen Ideologie in Russland',
  _Der Gegner_, 5 February 1932.
* The preface to the Russian edition of the _Communist Manifesto_, cf
  _Kommunistisches Manifest_, herausgegeben von Kautsky (Berlin, 1918),
  pp 20ff.
* Ryazanov, 'Briefwechsel zwischen Vera Sassulitsch und Marx',
  _Marx-Engels Archiv_, I, pp 309ff.
* Rykov, _Die Wirtschaftslage der Sowjet-Union_ (Berlin, 1924).
* Rykov, _Bericht über die Wirtschaftslage der Sowjet-Union und die
  Ergebnisse der Parteidiskussion in der KPR_ (Herausgegeben vom
  Pressbüro des Kongresses, Referat auf dem V Weltkongress, Moskau,
  1924).
* For the views of the Third World Congress on the situation in Russia
  cf _Thesen und Resolutionen des III Weltkongresses_, p 104.
* Radek, _Genua_, _die Einheitsfront des Proletariats und die
  Kommunistische Internationale_ (Verlag der Kommunistischen
  Internationale, 1922). Radek's account of the development in Germany
  and of the KPD from 1921 to 1924 is based in the main upon his own
  experiences. It is useful to compare with this Paul Levi's _Unser
  Weg_. _Wider den Putschismus_ (Berlin, 1921).
* _Die Lehren der deutschen Ereignisse. Das Präsidium des
  Exekutiv-Komitees der Kommunistischen Internationale zur deutschen
  Frage, Januar 1924_ (Verlag der Kommunistischen Internationale, 1924).
* Zinoviev, _Bericht über die Tätigkeit des Exekutiv-Komitees der
  Kommunistischen Internationale_ (presented to the Fifth World Congress
  in Moscow in 1924).
* _Bericht über die Verhandlungen des IX Parteitages der Kommunistischen
  Partei Deutschlands, abgehalten in Frankfurt a M vom 7 bis 10 April
  1924_ (Berlin, 1924).

### Chapter 10

* Lenin on Stalin; cf _Briefe an Maxim Gorki_ (Vienna, 1924), p 75.
* Stalin, 'Probleme des Leninismus', in _Sammlung von Stalins Reden und
  Aufsätzen aus den Jahren 1924 bis 1925_ (Verlag für Literatur und
  Politik, Vienna, 1926).
* _Plattform der russischen Opposition_ (Verlag 'Fahne des Kommunismus',
  Berlin, 1927).
* _Der Kampf um die Kommunistische Internationale_ (Dokumente der
  russischen Opposition, veröffentlicht vom Verlag der 'Fahne des
  Kommunismus', Berlin, 1927); the declaration of the Five Hundred is to
  be found here; cf pp 149ff.
* Lozowsky, _Der Kampf für die Einheit der Welt-Gewerkschaftsbewegung_
  (Berlin, 1925).
* Sun Yat-Sen, _The International Development of China_ (New York and
  London, 1922).
* _Wofür kämpft China?_ (herausgegeben von der chinesischen
  Nachrichten-Agentur in Europa, Berlin, 1927).
* _Wie die chinesische Revolution zugrunde gerichtet wurde_ (Brief aus
  Schanghai, Verlag der 'Fahne des Kommunismus', Berlin, 1928). On this
  subject my remarks are based on my personal experiences in the years
  1924-27.

### Chapter 11

* Stalin, _Probleme des Leninismus_, Zweite Folge (Verlag für Literatur
  und Politik, Vienna, 1929); this volume contains Stalin's articles and
  speeches in 1927-28.
* Stalin and Peter the Great; cf ibid, p 248.
* Trotsky, 'Die politische Lage in China und die Aufgaben der
  Bolschewiki-Leninisten', _Die Aktion_, 1929, Heft 5-8.
* Trotsky, 'Entwurf einer Plattform der internationalen linken
  Kommunisten zur russischen Frage, _Die Aktion_, 1931, Heft 3-4.
* _Protokoll des VI Weltkongresses der Roten
  Gewerkschaftsinternationale_ (Moskau, 1930).
* The best source of information on the present economic situation in
  Russia is _Die Ostwirtschaft_. _Organ des Russland-Ausschusses der
  deutschen Wirtschaft_; Herausgeber R Glanz. (Cf especially the issues
  from January to May 1932.) Another source is the review _Die
  Volkswirtschaft der Union der Sozialistischen Sowjet-Republiken_,
  herausgegeben von der Handelsvertretung der UdSSR in Deutschland
  (Berlin).
* On the subject of the savings banks in Russia, cf Nagler, _Die
  Finanzen und die Währung der Sowjet-Union_ (Rowohlt, Berlin, 1932), p
  40; also the _Zeitschrift der Handelsvertretung_, Nr 16, 1930, pp
  53ff.
* The following works among others mentioned in the above bibliography
  are now available in English translations from the original Russian
  texts. All the translations mentioned below are published by Messrs
  Martin Lawrence Ltd, 33 Great James Street, London, WC1.
* Lenin's _Collected Works_: an edition of thirty volumes based on the
  revised edition published by the Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute in
  Moscow.
* Lenin, _Was tun?_, translated under the title _What Is To Be Done?_.
* Lenin, _Die drohende Katastrophe_, translated under the title _The
  Threatening Catastrophe and How To Avert It_.
* Lenin, _Staat und Revolution_, translated under the title _The State
  and Revolution_.
* Lenin, _Rede über die Revolution von 1905_, translated under the title
  _The Revolution of 1905_.
* N Krupskaya, _Erinnerungen an Lenin_, translated under the title
  _Memories of Lenin_.

[^01]: Engels seems to have been meant here, rather than Lassalle. --
   Marxist Internet Archive.

[^02]: The word 'provocation' is a mistranslation. The standard
   translation of this passage in _What Is To Be Done?_ is: 'He is no
   Social-Democrat who forgets in practice his obligation to be _ahead
   of all_ in raising, accentuating and solving _every_ general
   democratic question.' -- Marxist Internet Archive.
