---
title: "Karl Marx: His Life and Work"
author: Rühle, Otto
date: 1928
description: Published in German in 1928, in English in 1929. In contrast to other biographies, such as that of Nicolaievsky and Maenchen-Helfen, Rühle is more critical of Marx and more sympathetic to Bakunin, etc. The work is also marked by Rühle's interest in psychology. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/ruhle/1928/marx/index.htm> and <https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.58873>.
use-toc: true
toc-depth: 1
...

## Chapter 01: Preliminaries

### The Historical Setting

At intervals of a century, the European revolution in Holland, England,
and France blew up the gates and opened a way for capitalist
development.

The feudal system, based on a feudalist economy and on serfdom,
stabilized by patriarchal despotism, hereditary dependence, and
enslavement of the conscience, collapsed before the onslaught of the new
economic power.

Money conquered land. The postulates of freedom triumphed over the
traditions of slavery. Day dawned over western Europe.

The rising bourgeois class entered into possession of new fields.
Starting from Holland, it created a colonial power whose gigantic
proportions were rivalled only by the vastness of the wealth which
colonial enterprise brought back to the mother country. Starting from
England, which it transformed into the factory of the world, the
bourgeoisie made that country supreme over all the markets of the world
and all the sources of raw materials. Setting out from France, the
bourgeoisie pressed the greatest of all military powers into its
service, the better to safeguard the social successes of its
emancipation. In its craving for activity, it shrank from no
difficulties. Boldly it wrestled with the most difficult problems, and
its soaring ambition winged it towards the most distant goals. In a
frenzy of achievement, the bourgeois class fulfilled its destiny.

First of all came the fulfilment of its economic destiny. By way of
manufactures and the mercantile system, the relations of production
developed into the system of large-scale industry. The political
revolution was followed by a technical revolution. The traditional
methods of work were transformed. The secrets of nature were disclosed,
her forces were brought under control, and the natural laws of
production were made serviceable to man. In 1764, Hargreaves invented
the spinning jenny; in 1769, Arkwright invented the warp-loom; and in
1779 came Crompton's invention of the mule. In 1781, Watt improved the
old steam-pump in a way which made it applicable as a source of power
for machinery. In 1787, Cartwright revolutionized the textile industry
by the invention of the power-loom. There was also a revolution in the
spinning trade. Cotton made its way into Europe. "Cotton! Cotton!" was
the new watchword of capitalism. Factories grew out of the earth like
mushrooms. Armies of men, women, and children disappeared into the
factories. One mechanical invention followed on the heels of another. In
1802, the first steamboat made its way up the Firth of Clyde; in 1807,
the first passenger steamer navigated the Hudson; in 1819, the ocean was
first crossed by a steamship. From 1804 onwards, came the application of
Watt's steam-engine to locomotive purposes, until in 1825 the first
railway was opened for traffic. Capitalism conquered space and time. In
1835, the electric telegraph began to come into use. Within a few
decades, the frontiers of the world had been marvellously expanded. The
fables of antiquity had been realized. The productivity of human labour
had been increased to an incredible extent. The bourgeoisie was
triumphant. "It has executed works more marvellous than the building of
Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has
carried out expeditions surpassing by far the tribal migrations and the
crusades. ... The subjugation of the forces of nature, the invention of
machinery, the application of chemistry to industry and agriculture,
steamships, railways, electric telegraphs, the clearing of whole
continents for cultivation, the making of navigable waterways, huge
populations springing up as if by magic out of the earth--what earlier
generations had the remotest inkling that such productive powers
slumbered within the womb of associated labour?"

The bourgeoisie fulfilled its political destiny likewise. In France, it
withstood the Bourbon reaction after the fall of the Napoleonic empire,
and seized power in the July revolution of 1830. In England, during a
century and a half, it was able to take advantage of all compromises and
partial solutions, until at length, in 1832, with the passing of the
Reform Bill, it became supreme. It dictated laws to the governments.
Armies marched under its orders. To swell its profits, alliances were
entered into and treaties signed, wars were waged and ended,
proclamations were issued, and diplomatic notes were exchanged. In the
end it had become supreme. Its political position was everywhere secure.

Finally, it had given new tints and new outlines to that ideology which
frames the picture of the world within the minds of men. "It has drowned
pious zeal, chivalrous enthusiasm, and humdrum sentimentalism, in the
chill waters of selfish calculation. It has degraded personal dignity to
the level of exchange value; and in place of countless dearly-bought
chartered freedoms, it has set up one solitary unscrupulous
freedom--freedom of trade. ... The bourgeoisie has robbed of their
haloes all occupations hitherto regarded with awe and veneration.
Doctor, lawyer, priest, poet, and scientist have become its wage
labourers. The bourgeoisie has torn the veil of sentiment from the
family relationship, which has become an affair of money and nothing
more." Thus the bourgeoisie had given the world a new visage, had
furnished human life with a multitude of new aspects.

From the lofty altitude to which it had successfully fought its way, it
looked down with pride and self-satisfaction upon the path up which it
had victoriously climbed with such overwhelming speed.

### Conditions in Germany

Down to the year 1800, the bourgeois class of Germany had taken scarcely
any part in this triumphal march of capitalism.

Three hundred years earlier, capitalism had been ready and willing to
effect a complete transformation in the economic life of Germany. The
freight brought across the Mediterranean in Italian merchant ships was
carried over the passes of the Alps in German caravans. The
revolutionizing influences of the new capitalist developments had begun
to make themselves felt in the blood and the brains of the Germans,
whipping the peasants into revolt, involving the burghers in a conflict
with the papacy and the Church, inciting the towns to rebellion. Then
came the inroad of the Turks, and the discovery of the sea route to
India. The overland roads were blocked, and for Italy and Germany the
sources of capitalist life had been cut off. Capitalism, now restricted
to the coasts of the Atlantic, flourished successively in Portugal,
Spain, the Netherlands, England, and France, transforming them all,
completing its destructive and creative work. At length, after three
hundred years, it resumed the same task in Germany, aided this time by
British machinery and American cotton. Thereupon began a revolutionizing
of production, a transformation of social conditions, a reshaping of the
picture of the world in the minds of men.

On the lower Rhine, on the Ruhr, the Wupper, and the Sieg, in Thuringia,
Saxony, Silesia, Wurtemberg, and Baden, a vigorous manufacturing
industry sprang to life. The Continental System of Napoleon, which cut
off the British from access to the German markets, served as a
forcing-house for the growth of this industry. In Saxony, the number of
spindles in the cotton mills increased within six years from 13,000 to
210,000. In the Rhine Province, mining, smelting, machine-making, and
metallurgy advanced with giant strides. An import and export trade,
considerable in view of German conditions, and extending to all parts of
the world, thereupon developed. As if determined to make up for lost
time, capitalism in Germany strode forward in seven-league boots. New
branches of industry made their appearance. Towns grew apace.
Intercourse with the great centres of the world market became ever
livelier. Capital accumulated in vast masses. Everywhere was an upward
movement, progress, success, the growth of power.

But the bourgeoisie is nothing without the proletariat. The bourgeoisie
creates the proletariat by the very process of its own development. It
must create the proletariat, because the proletariat creates surplus
value, upon whose existence the existence of the bourgeoisie is
grounded. The bourgeoisie cannot dispense with the proletariat unless it
is willing to dispense with its own existence. The mutual dependence of
these two classes is an inexorable necessity.

In Germany, as in England and France, the proletariat was recruited out
of the masses of impoverished and landless peasants and of
handicraftsmen and petty burghers whose means of livelihood had been cut
off by the new developments. Those of the first generation were still
comfortably provided for on the soil. Those of the second generation
devoted part of their labour power to home industry. Those of the third
generation thronged through the gates of the factories and became a wage
proletariat. Forcibly assembled in the process of production, organized
in militarist fashion, they were shamelessly exploited under the
supervision of the manager, the stimulus of the master, and the whip of
the foreman. Thenceforward their existence was nowhere the expression of
any sort of human interest; it had an exclusively capitalist
significance, that of one who produced commodities, created surplus
value, served the purposes of the master class. The proletarian had
himself become a commodity, having to sell himself day by day. He was a
beast of burden; something even less than this, an instrument, a wheel
in the machinery of exploitation, a dead thing. Impotent, in a spirit of
dull resignation, he must accept his lot, under pain of starvation
should he refuse. Hopeless, despairing, he submitted to an inevitable
destiny. Casual outbreaks of disorder and tumult, like that of the
Solingen cutlers in 1826, or that of the Crefeld silk weavers in 1828,
had as their only result that the terrors of the criminal law were
superadded to the pangs of hunger.

Where large-scale industry had not yet established itself, home industry
was dominant. Especially was this so in Silesia, where manorial
privileges favoured the industrial enslavement of the impoverished
peasants; and in the Erzgebirge, where the sterility of the soil drove
the hungry smallholders and cottars into the arms of the sweater. In the
towns, however, the craft guilds, working cumbrously and with a narrow
horizon, obstinately rejecting technical innovations, continued to
supply their local customers after the traditional manner. Here, as in
the countryside (where seventy-five per cent of the population was still
engaged in rural dwarf industries), the social and intellectual
atmosphere remained the oppressive one of the Middle Ages.

### Utopian Socialists

Capitalist development, especially in England and France, was acclaimed
with jubilant admiration in the camp of bourgeois society.

A few persons only, men of critical intelligence, were sceptical of the
glamour; a few only looked beneath the surface, tried to discover what
lay under the fair seeming. These investigators noted the sinister
contrast between the success, the wealth, the upward progress of the
few, and the exploitation, the impoverishment, and the subjugation of
millions. It seemed to them that the gain in material progress was
dearly bought at the cost of its accompaniment of barbarism. Their
conscience was outraged. Their reason told them that a development
characterized by such glaring contrasts must necessarily lead to a
social catastrophe. Their sense of responsibility impelled them to raise
a warning voice; to call upon their fellows to bethink themselves; to
urge better counsels; to enrol recruits on behalf of a more harmonious
social order, one which should bring happiness to all sections of
society.

In especial, it was the Frenchmen Saint-Simon and Charles Fourier and
the Englishman Robert Owen who, in the name of reason, justice,
humanity, and socialism, appealed to the forum of their day.

They appealed in the name of reason. Had not this been the watchword of
all the bourgeois revolutions? Had not Rousseau's theory of the social
contract, on which had been moulded the political ideals of the French
revolution, found its most classical embodiment in the demand for a
reasonable State? The bourgeoisie had established such a State. What
face did it present? It was a State characterized by the crudest class
contrasts, one in which superfluity issued out of hunger, exaltation out
of debasement, splendour out of the darkness of vice and shame. This was
the very State against which the voices of the critics and reformers
declaimed. What sort of reason was to organize the State of the future?

They appealed in the name of justice. Had not this been the watchword of
the bourgeoisie likewise? Well, the old feudalist order had been
abolished, the storms of the revolution had swept privilege away;
bourgeois freedoms such as feudalism had scarcely dreamed of had been
established, and all citizens were equal before the law. Had not the
demand for justice thereby been satisfied? The bourgeois State claimed
to be a just one. Upon what good ground could it be reformed, or
replaced by another State?

They appealed in the name of humanity. What had hitherto been nothing
more than an emotional gesture, a propagandist declamation, was now to
be fulfilled. In time to come, not only the owners of property, but also
the dispossessed, were to have a good time. The aim must be to improve
the position of all the members of society. But this aim was not to be
achieved by revolutionary means, since the terrors of the revolution
were still fresh in men's memories. It was to be achieved by means of
labour and education, of culture and morality; by means of a new
Christianity, a remodelling of life with the aid of phalansteries, a new
form of marriage, a transformation of the State, a new system of
property.

They appealed in the name of socialism. In this demand, the three great
social reformers were at one. But in those days socialism was an
economic theory which demanded the regulation of economic life from the
standpoint of industry--that is to say from the standpoint of the
bourgeois, not of the proletarian class. Nevertheless, however much at
odds they may have been in their conceptions of reason and justice and
liberty and truth, however chaotic and confused may have been their
imaginary pictures of the social order they hoped to establish--in this
respect they were fully agreed, that a reconstruction of society must be
achieved upon the foundation of communal ownership, communal labour, and
communal life. That is why these reformers, these critics of bourgeois
society, are entitled to the name of socialists.

But their socialism was a compost of dreams and wishes, a product of
speculations and artifices, an outcome of imagination and will, a work
of humanity and philanthropy, a creation of a kindly heart and a tender
conscience. Their socialism was to be established from above, in
accordance with a ready-made plan. It was thought out in all its
details. The proletariat, which would play no part in its making, was to
accept it in all gratitude as a gift from wise and good donors. This
socialism was utopian.

Who can fail to admire the genius of Saint-Simon, the genius that
flashes fitfully through the heavy-laden and cloudy atmosphere of his
historical, philosophical, and social theorizing? Who can fail to be
powerfully impressed by the overwhelming force of the criticism with
which Charles Fourier belabours the much-detested capitalism? Who can
fail to be deeply moved at sight of the unselfishness, the indefatigable
self-sacrifice, with which Robert Owen voices his ideas against a world
of adversaries?

Yet how illusory, how romantic, is the hope that the world will be
reborn in accordance with the prescriptions of an isolated thinker's
brain! How childish is the fancy that factory-owners, bankers, and
stockjobbers will, on their own initiative, and impelled by the power of
a moral transformation, devote themselves to freeing mankind from the
yoke of capitalism! How grotesque it seems to us nowadays that none of
these earlier socialists should ever have happened upon the idea that a
new and higher social order will be the outcome of a historical process
whose instrument must be the proletariat, and which must spontaneously
come to pass in a definite phase of social evolution.

This idea was far beyond the scope of the utopists. The preliminaries
which could have made it intelligible to them were still lacking.
Bourgeois theoreticians were still incapable of thinking in terms of
historical evolution, and the proletariat in those days was still weak
and politically insignificant. At that time, therefore, such an idea
would have seemed an absurdity.

Yet the notion had to be conceived, for it reveals the only possible
solution of the problem. It is the business of science to formulate in
the abstract that which practical development needs, and embodies in the
concrete. The notion, therefore, was conceived.

The titanic lifework of Karl Marx is concentrated upon the
universalization of this thought.

### Karl Marx

Karl Marx was not of proletarian origin, nor did he come from the ranks
of the utopian socialists.

His career was not remarkable in respect of birth, class affiliations,
environment, or education. It only began to become remarkable when his
path as an individual led him into the great arena of the social
movement.

Marx was born at Treves on May 5, 1818. For many generations, all his
male forbears, both on the father's side and on the mother's, had been
rabbis. Fanatical believers in heredity may infer from this that he had
an inborn predilection for sophistry and logic-chopping. Without going
so far, we may take note that his ancestors were men who must have
systematically and successfully devoted themselves to intellectual
pursuits, to the cultivation of keenness of the understanding. The
descendant, when he became an intellectual, was walking in the footsteps
of his forefathers.

His father, however, was not a rabbi, but a lawyer. Versed in the
writings both of Voltaire and of Leibniz, Hirschel Marx had absorbed
French culture as well as German; his mind was filled with the
traditions of the great French revolution no less than with those of the
imperial age of Germany. Politically, he was a Prussian patriot, but,
being a "moderate" by temperament, he was content to play the part of
respectable man and good citizen. He was married to an excellent
housewife not overburdened with brains, who never learned to speak or
write German correctly.

When Karl was six years old, Hirschel Marx and his family became
Protestants, Hirschel being baptized as Heinrich. A change of creed is
usually determined by cogent reasons, especially when (as in the case of
the Marx family) people are bound to the old faith by strong ancestral
ties. It was not until after his mother's death that Hirschel Marx
became a Christian, and we have no definite information as to the causes
of this decisive step. So much is certain, that in Rhineland a century
ago the Jews were detested and shunned, and that to be a Jew was a
serious handicap in a bourgeois career. It may be presumed, therefore,
that the conversion of the elder Marx--a peace-loving man, always
inclined to compromise--was the outcome, not only of the wish to free
himself from what was regarded as a stigma by his Christian fellow
citizens, but also of the resolve to facilitate his son's entry into the
domain of European culture.

In the absence of detailed information regarding the early childhood of
Karl Marx, we are left to conjecture as concerns the influence his
Jewish birth and upbringing must have had upon his mind. As soon as he
began to come into contact with the Gentile world, and was intelligent
enough to make comparisons, it was inevitable that he should feel his
Jewish origin to be a disadvantage, a shackle upon his aspirations. This
may have furnished the incentives for ambition, may account for the
vehemence of his determination to force his way upwards in the
intellectual world. In that case we must regard his exceptional ability,
his amazingly developed powers of association, his astonishing insight,
his remarkable faculty for exposition, and the breadth of his knowledge,
as tools perfected to the utmost in order that, helping him to fame and
standing, they might compensate for the drawbacks of his Hebraic
descent. We may further suppose that these early impressions gave a
primary twist to the development of the child's character. Delighted
though the father was to note the lad's "splendid natural gifts," he was
made uneasy by the manifestation in Karl of trends towards stubbornness
and defiant harshness with which he himself had no sympathy and which he
found it difficult to understand. Little Karl learned very easily, but
made no friends; in after life he had never a word to say of any of his
schoolfellows. Intellectually, he achieved swift progress in his class
work, but his classmates made no appeal to his affections. His mental
energies were from the first concentrated upon study, performance,
success.

None the less, Marx, having entered the university at the age of
seventeen, fell ardently in love a year later with Jenny von Westphalen,
one of his sister's companions. The two became engaged. Jenny was of
noble birth, daughter of a government official of high standing; she was
both clever and beautiful. We cannot but regard young Marx's impetuous
and successful wooing as an act of conquest, as bravura, as
self-assertion on the part of a youth who at heart was dubious as to his
own prestige. Consider him as he stands on the threshold of life,
equipped with knowledge, supplied with documentary evidence of his
academic acquirements. Now the testing time has come; he must face the
great tasks of life. But he is not yet sure of himself, he lacks
confidence in his powers. The year at Bonn has been disappointing. He
has not fulfilled the expectations of his parents and his friends, who
had looked for a meteoric rise. His father has even urged a change of
plans, a diversion to the study of chemistry and physics. Discouraged,
he needs salient proof of his worth, his superiority. He finds what he
seeks when he wins the heart of the loveliest and most hotly courted
maiden of his circle. His father, alarmed to begin with, consents ere
long. Westphalen, too, is won over, and accepts the situation cordially.
Thus the young hothead overcomes all obstacles. He is filled with pride,
he overflows with self-confidence, now that he has compelled others to
recognize him as a man of mark, and has thus established his own
spiritual poise. Years afterwards, when revisiting his birthplace, he
wrote to his wife in terms of affectionate vanity: "Almost every one I
meet asks me for news of 'the prettiest girl in Treves,' for tidings of
'the queen of the ballroom.' It cannot but tickle a man to find that in
the fancy of a whole township his wife is enshrined as 'fairy
princess.'"

### Studies

In the autumn of 1836, Marx went to the University of Berlin. From that
centre of learning there radiated a powerful magnetic attraction,
drawing towards it the studious youth of all Germany. The names of
Hegel, Schleiermacher, Savigny, Gans, and Alexander von Humboldt had
made Berlin widely celebrated. In especial, the philosophy of Hegel
exercised a powerful influence upon contemporary minds. Marx chose
jurisprudence as a special topic of study, regarding it, however,
"merely as a subordinate discipline compared with philosophy and
history." Besides attending lectures, he devoted himself with the utmost
zeal to the most diversified domains of science and literature, trying
all things by turns. He read, made extracts, translated, studied
languages, wandered into solitary paths, listened to echoes from afar,
sought forgotten springs, clambered towards inaccessible peaks. In quiet
hours of leisure, he gave expression to his yearning for his beloved in
distant Rhineland by writing numerous verses, which must rather be
regarded as clumsy products of constructive industry and reflective
rhetoric than as manifestations of poetic talent.

Hitherto he had known the writings of Hegel only in broad outline. He
had read no more than fragments of the great idealist's philosophy, and
its "grotesque craggy melody" had seemed to him "unpleasing." Hegel was
one for whom the mainspring of world happenings was not in matter but in
the idea; he was one who regarded the content of experience and the
rhythmical movement of history as products of the law-abiding activity
of the absolute world spirit; he was one for whom thought and being were
characterized by a metaphysical identity. Hegel was a man with whom he,
Marx, would have to measure swords, and he still shrank from the
immensity of the venture. More and more strenuously he wrestled, after
the manner of Faust, with himself, with traditional philosophy, and with
the monumental grandeur of the Hegelian system. In a letter to his
father--a letter penned with a feverish brain, and characterized by
ecstatic outbursts of feeling--we find evidence of his mental condition
at the time.

>"Dear Father,
>
>"Berlin, November 10, 1837.
>
>"There are moments in life which are placed like boundary stones to
>mark the close of a period, but which at the same time definitely point
>in a new direction.
>
>"At such a point of transition, we feel constrained to contemplate the
>past and the present with the eagle eye of thought, that we may become
>aware of our actual position. Indeed, universal history itself loves
>such a retrospect, and looks round and about, which often produces the
>semblance of a retrogression or an arrest of movement, when in reality
>the spirit of history has merely thrown herself back in an arm chair
>that she may collect her thoughts, may impregnate her mind with a
>knowledge of her own doings.
>
>"In such moments, however, the individual grows lyrical, for every
>metamorphosis is to some extent a swansong, to some extent the overture
>of a great new poem, which in still blurred yet brilliant tints strives
>to attain harmony. But we should like to erect a memorial to that which
>has already been experienced, so that it may regain in sentiment the
>place which it has lost in the world of action; and where could we find
>a holier site than in the heart of a parent, the most clement of
>judges, the most ardent participator, the sun of love, whose fire warms
>the innermost centre of our endeavours! How could much that is
>objectionable, that is blameworthy, better find compensation and
>excuse, than when it becomes the manifestation of an essentially
>necessary condition; how [else], at any rate, could the often hostile
>play of chance, and the aberration of the spirit, escape the reproach
>of being due to an unkind heart?
>
>"When, therefore, at the close of a year lived here, I now glance back
>upon what has passed therein, and in this way, my dear Father, answer
>your most affectionate letter from Ems, you will allow me to
>contemplate my circumstances, like life in general, as the expression
>of a mental activity which shapes itself in all directions, in science,
>art, private affairs.
>
>"When I left you, a new world had just opened for me, the world of
>love--indeed to begin with a love that was frenzied in its yearnings
>and void of hope. Even the journey to Berlin, which would otherwise
>have delighted me in the extreme, would have incited me to the
>contemplation of nature, would have inflamed me with the joy of life,
>left me cold. Nay, it depressed me profoundly, for the rocks which I
>saw were no rougher, no harsher, than the sentiments of my mind; the
>great cities were not more animated than my blood; the groaning tables
>in the inns were not more overladen, the food they bore was not more
>indigestible, than were the contents of my own imagination; and, to
>conclude, art was not so beautiful as my Jenny.
>
>"When I reached Berlin, I broke all existing ties, paid very few visits
>and those reluctantly, and sought to immerse myself in science and art.
>
>"In my then state of mind, it was inevitable that lyrical poetry should
>be my first topic of interest, at any rate the most agreeable and most
>obvious; but, in accordance with my position, and my whole previous
>development, this was purely idealistic. An equally remote beyond, my
>love, became my heaven, my art. Everything real grows vague, and all
>that is vague lacks boundaries. Onslaughts on the present, broad and
>shapeless expressions of feeling, nothing natural, pure moonshine, the
>complete opposite of what is and what ought to be, rhetorical
>reflections instead of poetical thoughts; but perhaps, in addition, a
>certain warmth of sentiment and a struggle for impetus characterize all
>the poems of the first three volumes I sent to Jenny. The whole width
>of a longing which sees no frontiers, assumes multifarious forms, and
>finds 'expansion' in 'poetizing.'
>
>"But poesy could only be, must only be, a casual companion. I had to
>study jurisprudence, and above all I felt an urge to wrestle with
>philosophy. The two were so closely interconnected, that I read
>Heineccius, Thibaut, and the sources, in schoolboy fashion more or
>less, quite uncritically, translating, for instance, the first two
>books of the _Pandects_ into German; but I also tried, when studying
>law, to work out a philosophy of law. I prefixed, as introduction, some
>metaphysical propositions, and in this ill-starred opus carried on the
>discussion down to the topic of international law--a work of nearly
>three hundred pages.
>
>"Most notably, here, I was greatly disturbed by the conflict between
>what actually is and what ought to be which is peculiar to idealism,
>and this gave rise to the following hopelessly inaccurate
>classification. First of all, what I graciously christened 'metaphysics
>of law,' that is to say, principles, reflections, determinative
>concepts, were severed from all actual law and from every actual form
>of law; as in the writings of Fichte, only in my case in a more modern
>and unsubstantial fashion. Furthermore, the unscientific form of
>mathematical dogmatism (wherein the subject wanders about the topic,
>argues hither and thither, while the topic itself is never formulated
>as something rich in content, something truly alive) was from the first
>a hindrance to the comprehension of the truth.
>
>"The mathematician may construct a triangle and demonstrate its
>properties; but it remains a mere idea in space, and undergoes no
>further development. We must put one triangle beside another, then it
>assumes different positions, and these differences in what is
>essentially the same endow the triangle with different relations and
>truths. On the other hand, in the concrete expression of the living
>world of thought--as in law, the State, nature, philosophy as a
>whole--the object must be studied in its development; there must be no
>arbitrary classifications; the rationale of the thing itself must
>disclose itself in all its contradictoriness, and must find its unity
>in itself.
>
>"As second part, there now followed the philosophy of law, this
>meaning, as I then saw the matter, the study of the development of
>ideas in positive Roman law, as if positive law in the development of
>its ideas (I do not mean in its purely final determinations) could be
>anything different from the configuration of the concept of law, which
>the first part ought to embrace!
>
>"This part I had, over and above, divided into the formal and the
>material doctrine of law: the former being the pure form of the system
>in its succession and its interaction, the classification and the
>scope; the latter, on the other hand, the content, the condensation of
>the form in its content; such was to be the aim of my description. This
>was the outcome of an error which I share with Herr von Savigny, as I
>was to learn later when reading his learned work _Right of
>Possession_--but with this difference, that he speaks of formal
>determinative concepts as 'finding the place which this or that
>doctrine occupies in the (supposititious) Roman system,' and of
>material determinative concepts as 'the doctrine of the positive which
>the Romans ascribe to a concept fixed in this way'; whereas I have
>understood by form the necessary architectonic and the configurations
>of the concept, and by matter the necessary quality of these
>configurations. My mistake was that I believed one could and must
>develop apart from the other, with the result that I did not achieve
>any genuine form, but only constructed a desk with a number of drawers
>which I subsequently filled with sand.
>
>"The concept is, really, the intermediary between form and content. In
>a philosophical disquisition on law, therefore, one must be shown as
>arising out of the other, for form can only be the continuation of
>content. Thus I arrived at a classification (for the subject lends
>itself readily to shallow classification); but the spirit of law and
>its truth had perished. All law was subdivided into covenanted and
>uncovenanted. I even ventured upon a classification of jus publicum
>(which has also been formally elaborated) in order to materialize the
>scheme better...
>
>"But why should I fill pages with an account of things I have
>discarded? The whole is permeated with trichotomous classifications,
>penned with wearisome prolixity, the Roman notions being barbarously
>misused in order to force them into my system. Still, to some extent I
>gained an affection for my topic, and achieved a general survey of its
>subject matter.
>
>"When I had reached the close of the discussion of material private
>right, I perceived the fallaciousness of the whole, which in its
>fundamental scheme borders on the Kantian, though differing wholly from
>Kant in matters of detail. Once more it had been made clear to me that
>I could get no farther on my way without philosophy. I was therefore
>again able, with a good conscience, to throw myself into the arms of
>philosophy, and I wrote a new metaphysical elementary system, but when
>it was finished I was again constrained to recognize its futility, and
>the futility of the whole of my previous endeavours.
>
>"Meanwhile I had acquired the habit of making extracts from all the
>books I was reading; as from Lessing's _Laokoon_, Solger's _Erwin_,
>Winckelmann's _Kunstgeschichte_, Luden's _Deutsche Geschichte_, writing
>critical reflections in comment thereon. At the same time I translated
>Tacitus' _Germania_, Ovid's _Tristium libri_. I began the private study
>(with the aid of grammars) of English and Italian, but as yet have made
>no progress; I read Klein's _Kriminalrecht_ and his _Annalen_; and a
>mass of modern literature, though this latter only in passing.
>
>"At the end of the session, I once more tried my hand at the dance of
>the muses and at the music of satire; and already in the last pages I
>sent you, idealism plays its part in the form of forced humour
>_(Skorpion und Felix)_, and in an unsuccessful imaginative drama
>_(Oulanem)_, until at length it utterly miscarries, and is changed into
>a purely formal art, for the most part without any stimulating objects,
>without any enthusiastic movement of ideas.
>
>"Nevertheless these last poems are the only ones in which suddenly, as
>if by the wave of a magician's wand (the experience was, to begin with,
>overwhelming), the realm of true poesy flashed open before me like a
>distant faery palace, and all my creations were shivered to fragments.
>
>"During the first term, I sat up night after night engaged in these
>multifarious occupations; I went through many struggles, and
>experienced both objective and subjective perturbations; and in the end
>I found that my mind had not been greatly enriched, while I had
>neglected nature, art, and the world, and had alienated my friends.
>These reflections seemed to disorder my body, a doctor advised country
>air, and so for the first time I traversed the whole widespread town
>and went through the gate to Stralau. It never entered my mind that
>there from being an anemic youth I should ripen to a robustness of
>frame.
>
>"A curtain had fallen, my holy of holies had been shattered, and new
>gods had to be found for the vacant shrine.
>
>"Setting out from idealism (which, let me say in passing, I had
>compared to and nourished with that of Kant and that of Fichte), I
>proceeded to seek for the idea in the real itself. If in earlier days
>the gods had dwelt above the world, they had now become its centre.
>
>"I had read fragments of the Hegelian philosophy, and had found its
>grotesque craggy melody unpleasing. I wished to dive into the ocean
>once again, but this time with the definite intention of discovering
>our mental nature to be just as determined, concrete, and firmly
>established as our bodily--no longer to practise the art of fence, but
>to bring pure pearls into the sunlight.
>
>"I penned a dialogue of about twenty-four pages, entitled _Cleanthus,
>or the Starting-Point and the Necessary Progress of Philosophy_. Here,
>after a fashion, art and science, which had been wholly severed, were
>reunited; and now, a lusty vagrant, I set myself to the main task, a
>philosophico-dialectical discussion of the godhead, manifested as a
>concept per se, as religion, as nature, and as history. My last thesis
>was the beginning of the Hegelian system, and this work (for which I
>had more or less prepared myself with the aid of natural science,
>Schelling, and history, and which--since it was really designed to form
>a new logic--had been so [adverb illegible] written that even I myself
>can now scarcely make head or tail of it), this darling child of mine,
>nurtured in moonshine, bears me like a false-hearted siren into the
>clutches of the enemy.
>
>"Overwhelmed with vexation, I was for several days quite unable to
>think. Like a lunatic I tore up and down the garden beside the Spree's
>dirty water 'which washes the soul and dilutes tea.' I even went out
>shooting with my host; and then returned hotfoot to Berlin in the mind
>to embrace every loafer at the street corners. Thereafter I confined
>myself to positive studies: Savigny's _Right of Possession_, Feuerbach
>and Grolmann's work on criminal jurisprudence, Kramer's _De verborum
>significatione_, Wenning-Ingenheim's _Pandektensystem_ and
>Mühlenbruch's _Doctrina pandectarum_ (which I am still reading), and
>finally some of Gauterbach's works, books on civil law and especially
>on ecclesiastical law. As regards this last, I have read and made
>extracts from almost all the first part of Gratian, the _Concordia
>discordantium canonum_, with the appendix, Lancellotti's
>_Institutiones_. Then I translated part of Aristotle's _Rhetoric_, read
>the _De augmentis scientiarum_ of the famous Baco of Verulam, and
>perused with much delight Reimarus' book _Von den Kunsttrieben der
>Tiere_. Next I turned to German law, but mainly concerned myself with
>the capitulations of the Franconian kings, and the letters of the popes
>to them.
>
>"From grief on account of Jenny's illness and because of the futility
>of my lost labours, from intense vexation at having to make an idol of
>a view I detested, I fell sick, as, my dear Father, I have previously
>related. When I had recovered, I burned all my poems, my sketches for
>novels, etc., being under the illusion that I could henceforward
>refrain from anything of the kind--and indeed there is as yet no
>evidence to the contrary.
>
>"While out of sorts, I had got to know Hegel from beginning to end, and
>most of his disciples likewise. Through the instrumentality of friends
>I made while in Stralau, I became a member of a Doctors' Club, to which
>a number of instructors and Dr. Rudenberg (my most intimate friend in
>Berlin) belonged. In discussions here, many conflicting opinions were
>voiced, and I became more and more closely involved in the study of
>contemporary philosophy, from which I had thought to escape; but all
>tones were muted, a frenzy of irony had taken possession of me, as was
>natural enough after so many negations. The trouble of Jenny's silence
>was superadded; and I could not rest until I had purchased modernity
>and achieved the standpoint of contemporary science by some poor
>productions, such as _Der Besuch_.
>
>"If I have perhaps failed to explain this session clearly to you as a
>whole, and to recount all its details, if its nuances are left hazy,
>you will excuse me, dear Father, recognizing how eager I am to speak of
>the present.
>
>"H. v. Chamisso has sent me a few insignificant lines, in which he
>informs me of his 'regret that the _Almanac_ can make no use' of my
>contributions, 'having long since gone to press.' I had to swallow my
>vexation. Wigand the bookseller has sent on my plan to Dr. Schmidt,
>manager of the "Magic Warehouse of Good Cheese and Bad Literature." I
>enclose Wigand's letter; Schmidt has not answered yet. Meanwhile I have
>by no means abandoned the scheme, all the more seeing that the
>aesthetic notabilities of the Hegelian school have promised to
>co-operate, influenced thereto by Instructor Bauer, who is a big gun
>among them. Dr. Rudenberg will also lend a hand.
>
>"As regards the question of an official career, I have recently made
>the acquaintance of an assistant judge, Schmidthänner by name, who
>advises me to enter upon this after passing the third of my law
>examinations. The plan smiles to me, since I really prefer
>jurisprudence to administrative science. This gentleman told me that
>from the Münster provincial court of appeal he and many others had in
>three years attained the position of assistant judge, which is easy
>enough (provided, of course, that one works hard), since in that part
>of the world the stages are not, as in Berlin and elsewhere, very
>strictly marked out. If, as assistant judge, one becomes doctor of
>laws, there are excellent chances of speedy appointment as professor
>extraordinary. This is what happened to H. Gärtner in Bonn, after he
>had written a mediocre book on provincial law-codes, his only other
>title to fame being that he proclaims himself a member of the Hegelian
>school of jurists. But dear Father, best of fathers, cannot I talk all
>this over with you face to face? Eduard's illness, dear mother's
>trouble, your own indisposition (I hope it is nothing serious), all
>combine to make me long to return home without delay. It is almost
>imperative that I should come. Indeed, I should already be with you,
>were I not in doubt as to your approval.
>
>"Believe me, this is not a selfish wish (though I should be so happy to
>see Jenny again). I am driven by a thought which I cannot put into
>words. Actually, in many respects, it would be difficult for me to
>come; but, as my darling Jenny writes, these considerations all give
>way before sacred duties. "I beg you, dear Father, whatever you may
>decide, not to show this letter (or at any rate this page of it) to
>mother. My sudden arrival might upset her.
>
>"My letter to her was written long before Jenny's dear letter came to
>hand, so I may unwittingly have written too much about unsuitable
>matters.
>
>"In the hope that the clouds which hang over our family will gradually
>disperse; that I shall be permitted to share your sufferings and mingle
>my tears with yours, and, perhaps in direct touch with you, to show the
>profound affection, the immeasurable love, which I have not always been
>able to express as I should like; in the hope that you too, my fondly
>and eternally loved Father, bearing in mind how much my feelings have
>been storm-tost, will forgive me because my heart must often have
>seemed to you to have gone astray when the travail of my spirit was
>depriving it of the power of utterance; in the hope that you will soon
>be fully restored to health, that I shall he able to clasp you in my
>arms, and to tell you all that I feel,
>
>"I remain always your loving son,
>
>"KARL
>
>"Forgive, dear Father, both the illegible handwriting and the defective
>style. It is nearly four in the morning; the candle has burned out and
>my eyes are clouded. Unrest has mastered me; I shall not be able to lay
>the spectres that haunt me, until I am in your dear presence.
>
>"Please give my best love to my darling Jenny. I have already read her
>letter a dozen times, finding new charms in it each time. In every
>respect, style included, it is the most beautiful letter I can imagine
>a woman writing."

As we learn from the foregoing letter, Marx was revolting against
formalism and the abstract speculations of the traditional idealist
philosophy. This philosophy had isolated thought from the objective
happenings of nature. The idea had been made the guiding authority, the
animating principle, of the world process, and was regarded as something
self-existent, apart from reality and the happenings of experience.
Reality was nothing more than plastic stuff, material waiting to be
kneaded, the clay in which reason became manifest.

Marx now set out "to seek for the idea in the real itself," endeavouring
to evolve it from reality. But in this way, abandoning the standpoint of
the idealist philosophy, he was led (without wishing it, and indeed
against his will) straight to Hegel. That philosopher, though an
idealist, had transcended the opposition between thought and being,
resolving them into a unity. To him, the real was no longer a mere
object for reason to work upon, no longer passive clay waiting to be
animated by spirit. On the contrary, he regarded thought as a result of
the process of nature; he looked on the world of experience as the
living self-disclosure of the idea, as the positive elaboration of the
world spirit in an autonomous activity. From the vacuum of pure
abstraction, he had brought philosophical contemplation back to the
world of reality.

Thus far had Hegel gone, but no farther. For him, the conceptual unity
of thought and being remained purely metaphysical. Against this, Marx's
whole nature rebelled. His interest was concentred in the real; he
detested metaphysics, and he began to see that that was where Hegelian
idealism could be given its quietus. The thought fascinated him. What an
undertaking, to vanquish the titan of the intellectual world! What a
triumph, could he be successful in the endeavour! Marx began the
critical study of the environing world; began to examine the realities
amid which he lived, that he might test the validity of the Hegelian
system. His vision grew keener, and he girded up his loins for the task.
More and more frequent, more and more cogent, became the times when he
considered the possibility of unthroning Hegelianism. More and more
attractive seemed the prospects of success. The goal was now clearly
visioned; and with all the impetuosity, the industry, and the
consistency that were characteristic of the man, he set forth to attain
it.

### The Young Hegelians

The origin of the Hegelian philosophy coincided with the rise of the
Prusso-German bourgeoisie. With the growth in economic strength of the
bourgeois class there ensued a social recognition of the bourgeois
members of society and an awakening self-consciousness of the
bourgeoisie. These changes secured representation and expression in
Hegel's thought system. The classical proposition, "all the real is
rational and all the rational is real," was transmuted into the ideal of
a constitutional State which would be, so it seemed to the bourgeois,
the realization of the moral ideal, the absolutely rational.

Since then, almost two decades had elapsed. The reality of the bourgeois
State and the capitalist order had had an opportunity of demonstrating
itself in practice. As a result, idea and reality, reason and being,
showed themselves crudely opposed. Actual life did not achieve the
philosophical conjuring trick whereby, in the metaphysical world,
thought and being constituted a unity. The moral ideal incorporated in
the monarchical apex of the State conflicted more and more with the
vital and developmental needs of the compact mass of the bourgeoisie,
which now began to develop its own ideas in conflict with the moral
consciousness it proclaimed. The Prussian monarchy, although it had
raised Hegelianism to the status of an official philosophy, had not been
able to raise itself to the position of a real State in the Hegelian
sense. The ideal "ought" of the utopian and socialist demands, as voiced
by Saint-Simon, Fourier, and Owen in a region outside the realities of
Prusso-German life, was setting itself up as a contrast to the
actualities of the political and social world.

But the first things to attract Marx's attention were not these social
contradictions and political contrasts. For him, who still felt most at
home in the world of theories and systems, the discrepancies and
discords which resulted from the application of Hegel's fundamental
ideas in the domain of psychology and philosophy were far more
conspicuous. Moreover, in the atmosphere of the Doctors' Club, a circle
of Hegel's disciples, his critical faculties were being sharpened in a
way which made more and more clear to him that his path was diverging
from that of Hegel, and that he must pursue an independent course of
development.

Superadded was the influence of an ideological movement whose powerful
waves of criticism and opposition began to break upon the shores of the
world of religious life.

The July revolution in France (1830) had been followed in Germany
likewise by a disturbance of the graveyard tranquillity established
under Metternich's regime. Here and there there had been students' riots
and abortive risings, but these disturbances had been put down with the
strong hand. The press, which had become too outspoken, had been
remuzzled; rebellious teachers and professors had been cudgelled into
silence; the universities had been purged of liberalism and
revolutionary doctrinairism. The Central Committee of Inquiry in
Mayence, in its endeavours to maintain the State, had resumed the
practice of persecuting demagogues. A meeting of the Prussian, Austrian,
and Russian premiers in Teplitz, and another meeting of the monarchs of
these three countries in Münchengrätz, had solemnly revived the
inquisition of the Holy Alliance. A ministerial conference in Vienna had
endorsed the decisions of the reactionary dictatorship.

In especial, the rulers had been at one in considering that the
insubordinate masses must once more be made humble and obedient--and
that to this end, in addition to dog-whip and dog-collar, the wholesome
narcotic of religion must be used in increasing doses. The Prussian
court, where, under the growing influence of Prince William, everything
was draped in the rags of mediaeval romanticism, aspired to the lead in
the training and utilization of a spiritual police. Here the
"illuminates" and the "pietists" had their headquarters. Here the social
question was being solved by means of devotional exercises, psalm
singing, and the circulation of unctuous tracts. Perfervid generals,
courtiers and State officials with their eyes turned heavenward, and
ranting ecclesiastical magnates, joined their voices in a holy chorus
for the salvation of the State. To counteract this pietist plague, the
intellectuals of the Hegelian school made their protest in the form of
an increasingly rationalist analysis of the Christian legend.

In 1835, David Friedrich Strauss, a young Swabian, published his _Life
of Jesus_. Voicing the outlook of the bourgeois enlightenment, he
unsparingly stripped the gospels of their haloes, deprived them of the
right to claim historical value. By strictly scientific methods of
investigation, he showed that the Christian tradition was but myth or
saga, was an epic deliberately composed in pious ecstasy by the early
Christian community. This demonstration was effected under the very eyes
of the intimidated faithful. The result was stupendous. The book marked
an epoch in the critical study of religion.

It need hardly be said that Strauss's book, and the whole group of
problems arising in connexion therewith, were eagerly discussed in the
Doctors' Club. The members of this club (headmasters, men of letters,
instructors--Young Hegelians one and all) considered themselves the
vanguard of the new intellectuals, took delight in the philosophical
campaign against hypocrisy and romanticism, and sharpened their wits for
the fray. For them, it is true, the shot fired by Strauss was not yet
sufficiently well aimed, and did not prove mortal. Bruno Bauer, in
especial, an instructor at the University of Berlin and regarded as one
of the most brilliant of the Young Hegelians, entered the lists against
Strauss. "The contest between the two," as Engels wrote subsequently in
his _Ludwig Feuerbach_, "was carried on in the philosophical trappings
of a contest between 'self-consciousness' and 'substance.' The question
whether the miracles recorded in the gospels had found their way into
Holy Writ as the outcome of an unconscious exercise of the mythopoeic
faculty in the early Christian community, or whether they had been
deliberately invented by the evangelists, was, inflated into the
question whether in universal history 'substance' or
'self-consciousness' had been the decisive factor. Then Stirner came
along, the prophet of contemporary anarchism, and outtopped sovereign
'self-consciousness' by his sovereign 'individual.'"

For Bauer, this controversy became the fulcrum of his scientific work.
He never let the subject drop, but carried on to keener and profounder
issues the criticism of the gospels begun by Strauss. Whereas in 1841,
in his _Kritik der evangelische Geschichte_, he voiced the opinion that
the self-consciousness of the primary evangelist Mark, nourished at the
sources of Greek, Graeco-Alexandrian, and Graeco-Roman literature, had
found expression in the gospels--in 1843, in _Das entdeckte Christentum_
(seized while in the press, and not until recently made available by
republication) he carried this idea a stage further, to the extreme of
antitheology and atheism. In a work published three decades later, _Der
Ursprung des Christentums aus dem Römischen Griechentum_, he contended
that not Jesus and Paul, but Seneca and Philo were the creators of
primitive Christianity.

Among the Young Hegelians, these religious disputations and
philosophical passages of arms had another outcome; they led to the
foundation of the "Hallische Jahrbücher," which was planned to be a
rallying point for the new intellectuals. The founder of this annual,
Arnold Ruge (an instructor in Halle), although a revolutionist, was not
especially profound or trustworthy, nor yet a man of markedly
independent mind. No doubt, as a victim of the persecution directed
against the demagogues, he had had to spend six years in prison, but
this had not made his convictions firmer or his character more
consistent. None the less, he did invaluable service to the forward
movement, and promoted the liberation of people's minds, by providing a
tribune. With the advance of the reaction, when all the professorial
chairs were packed with obscurantists, and when all periodicals
distasteful to the government were subjected to a rigid censorship and
plagued with orders of suppression, Ruge found it necessary to transfer
his headquarters from Halle to Dresden, and the "Hallische Jahrbücher"
became the "Deutsche Jahrbücher." This implied, not merely a change in
place of publication and in title, but also an intensification of tone
and an improvement in the quality of the collaborators. In particular
Strauss, who had been a dominant figure of the "Hallische Jahrbücher,"
was replaced by Bruno Bauer and Ludwig Feuerbach.

### Bauer and Feuerbach

Bruno Bauer, involved in a new feud with Hengstenberg, the leader of
Berlinese orthodoxy, had removed from Berlin to Bonn. He brought with
him thither a pledge from his protector, Altenberg, the minister of
public worship and education, to the effect that his instructorship in
Bonn should become a fixed professorship. But Altenberg died, and with
him disappeared the last relics of the Hegelian tradition. He was
succeeded by Eichhorn, a reactionary, entirely under the influence of
the pietists. This was an end of Bauer's hopes of an academic career;
all the more since his collaboration in Ruge's "Jahrbücher," and the
radical position he had assumed in theological questions, had not tended
to promote the number of his friends in the leading circles of the
university. Worst of all, there now appeared his _Criticism of the
Gospel History of the Synoptics_, which aroused a storm of indignation.
Bauer was dismissed from his instructorship, and the freedom of teaching
was curtailed at the universities.

Therewith Marx's plans, too, came to naught. He had never seriously
considered the question of earning a livelihood, although his father had
frequently put him in mind of the need. In 1838, his father had died.
Now his concern for his mother, and his eagerness to be able to support
a wife, made it necessary for him to seek some remunerative occupation.
He had thought of following his friend Bauer to Bonn, in the hope of
getting an instructorship there, and perhaps of joining with Bauer in
the issue of a scientific periodical. He had not as yet, however, passed
his legal examinations, or taken his doctor's degree. He was affected
with strong inhibitions against academic studies and examinations,
although Bauer was continually urging him forward. "Do make an end of
your hesitations, of your dilatory attitude towards a piece of nonsense
and a pure farce like an examination," Wrote Bauer to Marx. In the end,
Marx pulled himself together, wrote a thesis _On the Difference between
the Democritean and the Epicurean Natural Philosophy_, and therewith, in
April 1841, was "in absentia" granted his doctor's degree by the
University of Jena. But with the new turn of events, there was no
professorship for Bauer, nor any hope of an academic post for Marx.
Furthermore, in the stifling atmosphere of the reaction, there was no
chance of realizing the plans for a progressive periodical. Bauer
returned to Berlin, and devoted himself to collaboration in the
"Deutsche Jahrbücher" now being published in Dresden.

But while Bauer, like Strauss, was trying to elucidate the origin of
Christianity, Feuerbach had gone a step further, throwing open for
discussion the very essence of Christianity. Ludwig Feuerbach, a son of
the great authority on criminal jurisprudence, Anselm Feuerbach, and a
pupil of Hegel, had had to abandon his position as instructor in
Erlangen, after the publication of revolutionary writings (which were
suppressed) had deprived him of any prospect of advance in his
university career. Living in rural seclusion, far from the busy world of
affairs, he devoted himself to philosophical study, moving continually
farther away from Hegel. In 1839, he published his _Kritik der
Hegelschen Philosophie_, in which he stripped Hegel's "absolute spirit"
bare of its trappings, showed it to be the "departed spirit of
theology," a metaphysical spook, a "theology made over into logic," a
"rational mysticism." If Hegel had taught that nature was postulated by
the idea, this was nothing more than a philosophical dressing-up of the
biblical contention that God had created the world. The absolute spirit
was in reality nothing other than the finite subjective spirit of man,
considered abstractly. If, according to Hegel, the absolute spirit
manifested itself in art, religion, and philosophy, this could only mean
that art, religion, and philosophy were the highest and most absolute
things in the human spirit. Ruthlessly he inverted the Hegelian system.
Nature and reality ceased to be "manifestations" and "degradations" of
the idea. They became independent, became entities having a worth of
their own. Man moved forward into the front of the picture, and was
activated, although only in the religious domain. Hitherto nothing more
than an object, he became essentially a subject. Materialism was raised
to the throne.

This furnished Feuerbach with a platform for his philosophy of religion.
From man he proceeded to the study of the interconnexions whose tissue
presents itself as religion. According to him, man is independent of all
philosophy. Man, the highest of beings, is the beginning, middle, and
end of religion. Ideas are reflexions of nature; gods are merely
creatures of the human imagination, idealist personifications of human
qualities and feelings, projected into a heaven. Religion is the
relation of feeling, the relation of hearts, between man and man; and
the basis of all ethic is the relation between the ego and the tu.

Feuerbach's _Wesen des Christentums_ [Essence of Christianity], in which
these thoughts were first developed, was published in 1841. It had the
effect of an act of enfranchisement. The spell of the Hegelian system
had been broken. All contradictions seemed to be solved. Out of the
region of ideas, people had got back once more to solid earth. Engels,
to whom at this time Feuerbach was revealing "the true life of man,"
wrote: "One must oneself have experienced the liberating influence of
this book to gain any notion of what an experience it was. Enthusiasm
was universal. For the time, we were all Feuerbachians." Marx, likewise,
greeted the new outlook with enthusiasm. "Who has annihilated the
dialectic of concepts, the war of the gods which the philosophers alone
knew? Feuerbach. Who has put man in place of the old lumber, and in
place of the infinite consciousness as well? Feuerbach, and no one else!
Feuerbach, who completed and criticized Hegel from a Hegelian
standpoint, resolving the metaphysical absolute spirit into the real man
standing on the foundation of nature, was the first to complete the
criticism of religion--inasmuch as, at the same time, he undertook a
critique of Hegelian speculation, and thereby sketched the great and
masterly outlines of all metaphysics." Thus did Marx voice his
enthusiastic approval.

### Revolutionary Flight

The dethroning of the gods and the dissolution of the ties with a
suprasensual world could not be restricted to the domains of religion
and philosophy. Once authority had been challenged, dualism questioned,
the rights of tradition contested, there could be no limit to the
resulting effects. When the absolute monarch in heaven had been
dethroned, the throne of the absolute king on earth tottered. When the
sovereignty of the idea had been shown to be nothing more than an empty
phrase, the nimbus of god-given governmental wisdom and statecraft
paled. When it had been recognized that men had had the power to create
gods, men were not likely to shrink in future from the thought that they
were also capable (without sanction from above) of creating their own
political and social conditions.

Thus it was that the Young Hegelians, whose activities had hitherto been
confined to the battlefield of theory, became--though not of set
purpose--active in the world of political practice. This was the
outcome, not of political considerations, not of the formulation of
definite aims, but merely of the logic of their own philosophical
evolution.

The situation of the Prussian State sufficed to show that reason and
reality were not, as Hegel had taught, necessarily coincident. Since the
July revolution in France, the demands of reality had diverged more and
more conspicuously from the insight and wisdom of the government. In the
"Hallische Jahrbücher," Ruge had again and again pointed out that the
demand for a constitutional State had not as yet been complied with,
that the existence of the censorship betrayed a lack of confidence in
the spirit and in science, and that the reactionary revision of the
Towns' Ordinance of 1808 implied treason to the Prussian mission. It
became more and more obvious that the unity of reason and reality could
only be achieved when the rational, which had not hitherto attained form
and life, had been purposively translated into reality by human
activity.

In the view of the Young Hegelians, this purposive activity would not be
a revolutionary transformation, but would be the expression of an
organic renewal from within. They considered that the process must take
its start where the reforms of Stein and Hardenberg had ended. Only
thus, by keeping step with historical reality and with progressive
ideas, could Prussia fulfil her mission in universal history, her
mission to complete the liberation of the human spirit that had been
begun by the Reformation and continued by the Enlightenment. To the
Young Hegelians it seemed beyond question that Prussia was predestined
by history to conduct the evolution of mankind to its climax. By birth,
education, and temperament, they were Prussian to the core; and,
belonging as they did to the cultured and possessing strata of society,
they were full of the self-satisfaction of an aspiring class. In an
address penned by Friedrich Köppen, for a festival in commemoration of
Frederick the Great, and dedicated "to my friend Karl Heinrich Marx of
Treves," we read, among other turgid outpourings of patriotic
enthusiasm: "Prussia can never forget that it was cradled in the
cradle-days of the Enlightenment, and that it was led on to greatness by
the Hero of the Enlightenment. Heaven does not rest more securely upon
the shoulders of Atlas, than Prussia rests upon the seasonable
progressive development of the principles of Frederick the Great."

The hopes for the establishment of a Prussian emporium of spiritual
freedom were no better fulfilled than were the dreams of a Prussian
constitution with a liberal monarch at the head. A transient alleviation
of the censorship, an alleviation which from the nature of things could
be nothing more than an expression of despotic caprice, did, indeed,
arouse ecstatic delight in the minds of the perennially unteachable
philistines; but the headache which speedily followed this brief
intoxication was a severe one. Marx had foreseen the coming of the
reaction, and had written on the topic for Ruge's "Jahrbücher." In this
matter, he made a good start, for his first essay on public affairs was
forbidden by the censor. Since the "Jahrbücher" had an offshoot in
Switzerland, Ruge had the article, together with some other victims of
the censorship, published as _Anecdota philosophica_ by Julius Fröbel of
Zurich. It was entitled _Bemerkungen über die neuste preussische
Censurinstruktion_ [Remarks on the latest Prussian Censorship Order],
and was described as being "by a Rhinelander."

Meanwhile, Marx had turned his attention towards another press organ,
which had been appearing in Cologne since January 1, 1842. It was called
the "Rheinische Zeitung," had been founded by a group of well-to-do
Rhenish merchants and entrepreneurs, and could be regarded rather as a
moderate governmental organ than as an opposition journal. Marx,
however, was brought into touch with the newspaper by the fact that some
active Young Hegelians (friends of the Young Hegelians in Berlin) were
on the editorial staff. For a time Marx had it in mind to settle in
Cologne, but in the end decided in favour of Bonn.

As contributor to the "Rheinische Zeitung," Marx for the first time had
an opportunity of sharpening the theoretical reasoning of philosophy
upon the whetstone of the practical realities of political life. He set
himself vigorously to the task, taking a firm stand on the platform of
contested opinions, and using his rapier with a master hand. Thus it was
that the "Rheinische Zeitung" served as a door by which he entered upon
his brilliant journalistic and political career.

### Rise of the Bourgeoisie

Thanks to the economic boom of the thirties, the Prussian bourgeoisie
had greatly improved and stabilized its position as compared with a
couple of decades earlier.

The application of steam-power to production had advanced rapidly. Under
the stimulus of improved technique, manufacturing industry had
flourished abundantly. New fields of enterprise had disclosed
themselves. The utilization of coal and metallic ores had been greatly
promoted by the development of railways. The growth of large-scale
industry and commerce was leading to the growth of large towns. In
certain industries, especially in metallurgy and cotton textiles,
gigantic enterprises were being formed. The landed proprietors were
emerging from their isolation, were shaking off the fetters of
feudalism, and, as distillers and sugar growers, were adopting the more
lucrative methods of capitalist production. The revolutionizing of
production and distribution was transforming social life. Old traditions
were being abandoned, outworn institutions were being scrapped,
time-honoured opinions were being revised. The pulses of the bourgeoisie
were tingling with the consciousness of power. The minds of members of
the rising class were filled with self-confidence. There loomed upon the
horizon the image of vigorous individuality, which brooks no
restrictions, rebels against oppression, mocks at tutelage, refuses to
bow beneath the yoke. This mood began to find expression in literature.

The heroes of classical literature, affrighted by the roughness and
barbarity of everyday life, had fled, discouraged, withdrawing into a
world of aesthetic illusion, where imagination reigned supreme, and
where they could find compensation for the impotence from which they
suffered in the real world. The longer the incubus of social slavery and
political subjection continued, the more did the most sensitive and most
creative among men feel at home in the realm of illusions. The region of
ideas is a secure refuge for those who are threatened or maltreated by
the realities of the world. The ageing Goethe, despite the universality
and the cosmopolitan superiority of his genius, was unable to emerge
from the classical domain of a sublimity remote from the actualities of
life. But Klopstock, Lessing, and young Schiller were ready for the new
world that was in course of formation; its coming struck sparks in their
minds, and nourished revolutionary flames. Chamisso drew near to the
domain of contemporary social reality. Platen, a bold St. George,
fiercely attacked the dragon of reaction, corruption, and subjugation by
force. Grabbe inveighed against the cramping particularism of German
life with all the clamour and defiance of a titan.

In the thirties and forties, when from the crumbling walls of reaction
young green shoots and fresh rice were everywhere thrusting heavenward,
a bold, cheerful, self-confident swarm of singers and apostles of
freedom appeared in the forest of German poesy. Georg Herwegh, the "iron
lark," published his _Gedichte eines Lebendigen_ [A Live Man's Poems],
and in his triumphal campaign through Germany, set the hearts of
thousands aflame. Franz Dingelstedt, in _Lieder eines kosmopolitischen
Nachtwächters_ [Songs of a Cosmopolitan Night Watchman], unsparingly
lashed the police, the clergy, the ministers of State, and "the whole
pack of refined and distinguished persons." In the comedy entitled _Die
politische Wochenstube_ [The Political Lying-in Room], Robert Prutz
poured the vials of his scorn and mockery on the German people as
slaves, and on the German princes as tyrants. Hoffmann von Fallersleben
paid forfeit of his official position and his means of livelihood for
the political sallies in his _Unpolitische Lieder_ [Unpolitical Lays].
Ferdinand Freiligrath, whose exotic verses about deserts and lions had a
brilliant success, devoted his rhetorical powers to the service of the
awakening revolution. Gottfried Kinkel, Karl Beck, Moritz Hartmann,
Alfred Meissner, Kühne, Jung, and many others, singing enthusiastic
battle-songs and paeans on behalf of liberty, joined in the chorus of
Germany's awakening after the night of the Middle Ages. From across the
frontiers, Heinrich Heine and Ludwig Börne, publishing a succession of
criticisms, polemics, and pamphlets, were indefatigable in their fierce
onslaughts on the Prussian reaction. They made merry over the blunders
of the police; they stigmatized the narrow-mindedness and the
obscurantism of the authorities; they pilloried the drowsy inactivity of
the philistines; and, filled with moral indignation, they depicted the
behaviour of the reactionary despotism in a way that made Europe rock
with laughter. Treading in Heine's footsteps, but working independently
of him, were the champions of Young Germany, who took up arms against
the obsolete and the outworn, and fought on behalf of the new. Gutzkow,
Laube, Wienbarg, Mundt, and others had a fine flair for all that was
springing into life, and felt it their mission to collaborate in the
birth. They wrote about the historical conditions requisite for a
Prussian constitution, the principles of democracy, the unity of Germany
and its significance for the political and intellectual development of
the country, and so on; and although they were anything but
revolutionists, the very fact that they were so closely watched by the
Prussian police made them contribute nobly towards dispelling the
prevalent spirit of dull subserviency. The more suspiciously the
reaction supervised and persecuted every tendency towards free movement,
the more did even timid appeals acquire the significance of trumpet
blasts, of calls to arms, and of apotheoses of freedom.

The significance of these poetic revellies was underlined by the results
of pioneer work in the scientific field. The capitalist method of
production, in its need for the unsealing of nature's treasure houses
that commodity production might be intensified, had called natural
science and technical acquisitions to its aid. Research was stimulated,
experiments were encouraged, people's senses were sharpened for the
observation and discovery of natural processes which might be turned to
account for the purposes of the new developments. In the laboratories,
the workshops, and the lecture theatres, the secrets of a new world were
being disclosed. Theodor Schwann discovered the cell as the basic
element in the bodies of animals and plants. Justus Liebig enunciated
new views on chemistry, founded a new theory of plant nutrition, and
thus inaugurated a new epoch in agriculture. Johannes Müller created the
foundations of modern physiology. In a series of mathematical, physical,
and astronomical discoveries, Karl F. Gauss enlarged the boundaries of
knowledge. Alexander von Humboldt, geographer and naturalist, gave
people a new conception of the world by the record of his extensive
travels, and did pioneer work in the fields of geology, mineralogy,
zoology, botany, meteorology, and climatology. Robert Mayer formulated
the mechanical theory of heat and enunciated the principle of the
conservation of energy. The Siemens brothers, making numerous
discoveries in the matter of the production of alcohol and of sugar, in
electrotechnique, telegraphy, etc., laid the foundation of a number of
new industries. A rebirth of society was in progress amid this general
competition of active minds. Society, inasmuch as it would only pay heed
to what was manifest to human senses and demonstrable by the methods of
exact research, freed itself intellectually from dependence on all the
old codes, and would now give credence only to the principles of a
materialist philosophy, a philosophy with concrete aims. This
materialism, an emphatic protest against theological and idealist
outlooks, formed the soil on which Feuerbach's trenchant criticism of
religion was able to grow so vigorously.

In 1842, when Marx became one of the contributors to the "Rheinische
Zeitung" of which he was soon to be editor-in-chief, it was plain to him
that in the general paean to liberty this newspaper could only be one
chord. But he was determined that it should be a chord having a timbre
of its own.

### The "Rheinische Zeitung"

Frederick William III had promised to give the Prussian people a
constitution. This promise had not been fulfilled. Consequently, the
pledge given to the creditors of the State that every new loan should be
sanctioned by the estates of the realm, could not be kept. For the sake
of appearances, however, provincial diets were established, impotent
bodies, vegetating under the shelter of secrecy, bodies in which the
squirearchy continued to exercise its territorial despotism behind the
mask of parliamentary procedure. Even the Rhenish diet, in respect of
political initiative and status, was no better than the feudalist
servants' halls which sat eastward of the Elbe.

Frederick William IV, the heir of his father's unfulfilled promise, had
summoned the Rhenish diet in 1841. Taking the minutes of the proceedings
as his text, Marx dealt pitilessly with this masquerade. In a series of
articles, he discussed the question of the freedom of the press, which
had not secured in the diet any advocate against the malicious
onslaughts of the authorities. Then he dealt with the matter of the
imprisonment of the Archbishop of Cologne, with the result that his
article was expunged by the censorship. Finally he referred to the
debates concerning a law to punish thefts of wood in the forests. This
last gave him hard nuts to crack, seeing that "there was no provision in
Hegel's ideological system" for the consideration of social problems and
material interests.

The articles on the freedom of the press were brilliantly written. Ruge
praised them highly, saying: "We can congratulate ourselves upon the
appearance on the journalistic stage of one so highly instructed, so
talented, and with such a sovereign power of marshalling ideas upon a
topic where confusion is apt to prevail." In this matter, Marx was in
his element. He was fully informed regarding the subject matter, and the
vigour of his writing could not fail to attract attention. But when it
came to the third of the before-mentioned topics, he was verging on the
limits of his extant abilities. Proceeding further, when he had to
discuss hunting rights, the prosecution of poachers, and the
difficulties of the small-farming system, with all the involved
questions of property relations, he felt that the task was beyond him;
he knew that he would not be able to cope with it until he had
undertaken a thorough study of political economy, and had faced up to
the problem of socialism. His training in philosophy and law had been
exhaustive, but this was of little use to him in the handling of
economic questions. His idealist outlook upon the State and society
involved him in hopeless perplexities when he had to choose a side where
the interests of bourgeoisie and proletariat diverge.

A further difficulty was that the "Rheinische Zeitung" had to take a
definite line regarding problems and events which were interwoven with
the ideas of the French socialists or affected the interests of Rhenish
proletarians. The perusal of a book by Lorenz von Stein, _Geschichte der
sozialistischen Bewegung in Frankreich_ [History of the Socialist
Movement in France], which was strongly adverse to the outlooks of
Saint-Simon and Fourier, had made Marx realize the necessity of becoming
well acquainted with this matter. A dispute with the "Augsburger
Allgemeine Zeitung" had forced upon him the unpleasant necessity of
openly admitting that he knew nothing about the theories of French
socialism and communism. The "Augsburger" had reproached the "Rheinische
Zeitung" for coquetting with communism. Marx had rejoined that the
"Rheinische" did not concede even theoretical validity to communist
ideas "in their present form," and still less did it desire their
practical realization or regard such a realization as possible. But, he
said, the journal wished to subject these ideas to exhaustive criticism.
The real danger lay, not in any practical endeavour, but in "the
theoretical carrying out of communist ideas." He went on: "Practical
attempts, even if made on a large scale, can be answered with big guns
as soon as they become dangerous; but ideas which gain the victory over
our intelligence and our feelings, ideas to which reason has welded our
conscience, these are chains which we cannot break without breaking our
hearts, these are demons which man can only conquer by subjecting
himself to them." The emotionalism of the words had its due effect; but
Marx was only too well aware that problems as serious as this could not
be permanently shuffled out of the world by declamation or by
"amateurish comment."

In the sequel, the problems of socialism and the revolution played a
part likewise in the differences that arose between Marx and his Berlin
friends. The Doctors' Club had transformed itself into a Society of the
Free, which was being joined by literary men of various shades of
opinion. In these circles there was a mishmash of ideas, the high-flown
theories of cultured academicians being voiced side by side with the
more prosaic and straightforward schemes of Chartists, Owenists, and
Saint-Simonians--schemes which had been imported into Germany from
England and France. It was a crazy amalgam, for the doctrinairism of the
German schools could not mingle satisfactorily with the explosive
notions of foreign origin. Moreover, raw student zeal made a pretence of
being revolutionary efficiency, while crudeness and coarseness were
mistaken for manifestations of mental enfranchisement. Friedrich Engels,
son of a factory owner in Barmen, and at this time doing his year's
military service as an artilleryman in the guards, found his way into
the Society of the Free, and played his part there wittily by composing
a Christian heroic poem _Die frech bedräute, jedoch wunderbar befreite
Bibel oder Triumph des Glaubens_ [The impudently threatened, but
miraculously saved Bible, or the Triumph of Faith], which mirrors in a
fanciful way the intellectual world of these "free spirits."

The only consequence of the hubbub was the vexatious one that Marx was
overwhelmed with correspondence, and with proffered contributions, from
Berlin, "scrawls weighty with plans for a world revolution but empty of
ideas, clumsily written, and tinged with a certain amount of atheism and
communism (which the writers have never studied)." He would have nothing
to do with all this. "I insisted on the need for less vague argument,
pretentious phraseology, and self-satisfied contemplation of one's own
image in the mirror; and upon the need for more definiteness, more
concern with concrete actualities, more accurate knowledge of the
matters in hand. I declared that I regarded it as inappropriate, not to
say immoral, to smuggle socialist and communist dogmas--a new outlook on
the world--into casual columns of dramatic criticism; and I said that if
communism was to be discussed it must be discussed in a very different
and far more thorough fashion." If the members of the Society of the
Free thereupon rejoined that it was time for the "Rheinische Zeitung" to
exchange halfhearted dallying for earnest endeavour, this did not seem
to Marx sufficient reason for doing anything foolhardy; but it was made
evident to him as a logical necessity that he must devote himself to a
thorough study of the problem of socialism.

The censorship, apparently, wished to give him a push in this direction.
The "Rheinische" was harried more and more as its circulation increased,
and as it gained prestige and influence. At length, by a decision of the
ministerial council in Berlin, adopted in the king's presence and
perhaps at the king's instigation, an order for the suppression of the
paper was issued on January 21, 1843.

The protests and petitions of the shareholders were of no avail. The
utmost the authorities would grant was a postponement of the suppression
until the end of the quarter. On March 17th, Marx retired from the
staff. Thereupon he breathed more freely, since for a long time, as he
wrote to Ruge, he had been "weary of hypocrisy, stupidity, the rough
handling of authority, and our own smirking, bowing, scraping, and
quibbling."

The government had "set him free." What was the best use he could make
of this regained freedom? What could he do better than devote himself
wholeheartedly to the study of socialism?

## Chapter 02: Clarification, Part 1

### A New Platform

The enthusiasm with which Marx had devoted himself to his work on the
staff of the "Rheinische Zeitung" had speedily evaporated. A mood of
depression and disillusionment had ensued. In the end, he had withdrawn
from the editorship with a sigh of relief. Yet there was no obvious
cause for his feelings.

He had wielded a vigorous pen, had given his best energies to his task,
had done yeoman's service to the opposition of the day, using all his
knowledge and all his talents in the cause. His period of activity had
been brief, but it had been brilliant and fruitful.

No doubt his wranglings with the censorship and with the publisher had
been wearisome and dispiriting. But such occurrences were a necessary
part of a journalist's life in those days, and things were no worse in
Cologne than elsewhere. Besides, what could these trifles matter to a
born fighter? Marx had only been in harness for five months. Some
champions have to endure worse troubles for decades, and even for a long
lifetime. This was no reason for discouragement.

The root of the trouble lay elsewhere. Marx had sustained a discomfiture
in the dispute with the "Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung." As
editor-in-chief of a great modern newspaper, he had had no definite
opinion and had been able to express no definite views regarding a
topical political matter of outstanding importance, the ideas of the
French socialists. Not an overwhelming misfortune, perhaps, for who can
know everything? But Marx had been shamed by the need to avow his
ignorance, and his activities had been damped down. He was a man of
masterful, not to say dictatorial temperament his vanity was mortified,
his sensitive vanity, which hid a subconscious feeling of inadequacy.
That was why he hastened to evacuate the field; no longer to him a field
of brilliant journalistic successes, but one in which he had sustained a
defeat.

Marx was "greedy" for time and opportunity in which to undertake
"enduring and profound studies" of the contentious matter. He hurled
himself into the new theatre of war, and sought a new platform. Here he
would redeem his losses! Not again should he have to renounce a combat,
not for a second time should he have to avow himself incompetent.
Perhaps in the rivalry for the mastery of the thought world of
socialism, he would one day outdo all competitors!

He had decided to go to Paris, where he could study socialism at the
source. He would join forces with Ruge, for whom the German censorship
was making the issue of the "Jahrbücher" increasingly difficult. They
would publish in Paris. "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," he
enthusiastically exclaimed, "that would be a notable principle, a
remarkable event, an undertaking to which one could devote oneself with
all one's heart."

He married, and thus freed Jenny von Westphalen from a crossfire which
had been going on for seven years, a crossfire of intrigue which her
bigoted and blue-blooded relatives had been directing, in the hope of
bringing about a rupture. The young couple spent a few months of
honeymoon in the house of the elder Frau Marx, who had removed to
Kreuznach after her husband's death. In September, Ruge settled in
Paris, whither Karl and Jenny Marx followed him in November.

Moses Hess, who had accompanied Ruge to Paris, gave the young men their
first introduction into the circle of French socialists. Sprung from a
family of prosperous Jewish manufacturers in Rhineland, Hess was in a
mood of vigorous protest against his father, and was filled with
ruminating unrest. A perpetual seeker after truth, he was trying to
scale all the heights and to plumb all the depths of our spiritual life.
He had taken a considerable part in the foundation of the "Rheinische
Zeitung," and in that connexion had made Marx's acquaintance. He was
well informed concerning the philosophical development of Germany, the
economic development of England, and the political development of
France. Thus he was eminently fitted to play the part of interpreter
between the Young Hegelians, who had been led to the world of politics
and to socialism through the study of Feuerbach, and the French
socialists, who were to be guided to Hegel, and to the "logical insight"
of the Germans, by way of their political experiences. Moses Hess had
been the first to draw his friend Engels' attention to the internal
logical necessity thanks to which the Hegelian way of thinking must
inevitably culminate in communism. Now he made himself useful to Ruge
and to Marx by bringing them into touch with the representatives of
French socialism.

In truth, the result of his labours was nothing to boast of. No doubt
Ruge and Marx became personally acquainted with a number of prominent
socialists: Louis Blanc, Dézamy, Considérant, Leroux, Proudhon, and
others. One and all, however, they were of jealous disposition; or
disputatious, narrow-minded, lacking knowledge of German philosophy, and
with no inclination to weigh the pros and cons of any other theories or
systems than those with which they were already familiar. Thus there was
little scope in Paris for the establishment of a "Gallo-German"
alliance. Still less promising were the prospects of the
"Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher." When Marx wanted to realize the
programme of the new annual, wanted "to make an end of the celestial
policy of the Middle Kingdom, and to replace it by the real science of
human affairs," he found that he would have to depend exclusively upon
German collaborators.

Not until the end of February 1844 was it possible to issue the first
and second parts of the new "Jahrbücher," combined in a single slender
volume. The design had been to publish twelve parts in a year, but this
double part was all that ever went through the press.

From a business standpoint, the undertaking was stillborn. From the
standpoint of socialist evolution, it was a bold onrush into a
new world, a world whose first need was self-knowledge!

### The "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher"

Arnold Ruge opened the ball with a "Plan of the 'Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher.'"

He began by speaking of Prusso-German conditions, and the stifling
atmosphere which the periodical had to breathe.

"In Germany, hypocrisy seems invincible, as if science were indifferent
towards life; or, if not so, as if at least the heaven of science were
unattainable for the masses of mankind. In reasonable circumstances, the
kernel of science will become the property of all in the form of
practice, will be part of the universal consciousness. A practical
thought, however, a word that would fain move the world, is in Germany a
direct onslaught on everything that is regarded as sacred and uplifted
above the mob. German science, like the German State, is sacred and
respectable, not human and free; and it is regarded as treason to both
to make science the common property of mankind. Yet this act of treason
must now be committed."

To say truth, not now first committed, but only continued. Events in
Germany had shown that philosophy had already become of political
importance. "If, for the nonce, the German movement has taken refuge in
a bookish world, which has seemingly, no concern with actual history and
with the revolution in which we live, it will be our business to make an
end of such hypocrisy and indifference, and deliberately to pursue
political aims. We shall stake everything upon freedom. Indifferent
learning does not exist for the philosopher. Philosophy is freedom, and
wishes to create freedom. By freedom we mean genuinely human freedom,
that is to say political freedom, not some sort of metaphysical blue
vapour which a man can conjure up in his study, and even in a prison.

The purpose of the "Jahrbücher" was "to make known to the general
consciousness, in as pregnant a way as possible and in an artistic
manner, everything going on in the old world relating to the great
transformation." The carrying out of this undertaking led to France,
which by its glorious revolution and the conquest of the rights of man
had fought its way to the acquisition of a "cosmopolitan mission" which
applied to the whole world. A hatred for France was always equivalent to
a blind hostility for political liberty. "In Germany, we can appraise in
every one his intelligence and his moral enfranchisement when we know
what opinion he holds regarding France. The more cloudy a German's
intelligence, the more servile his way of thinking, the more unjust and
ignorant will be his opinion of France. He will stigmatize as immorality
the greatness and moral energy of a nation which on its own behalf and
that of Europe has conquered all the freedom which the world now enjoys;
he will say that the French are unfeeling because they have made short
work of his own favourite principle of philistinism; and he will not
admit that the godless French have any conception of family happiness.
One who in Germany understands the French and recognizes their merits,
is by that fact alone a cultured man, a free spirit."

Germany is put to shame by the French. "They study us, they respect us,
indeed they prize us and our transcendental science too highly; and even
if they are not yet acquainted with the mundane trend of the most recent
epoch, it will soon become plain that here for the first time they are
really on a common ground with us." The interchange of their cultures is
the true bond of union between the two nations, and will bring about the
victory of freedom. "We Germans have wasted a great deal of time upon
furbishing up our old ways in religion and politics. While doing this,
we have injured our eyesight, and have become romanticists. None the
less, we have thereby gained a sense of order, and have acquired a
faculty of logical insight which gives us a safe guide in the
metaphysical domain and in the imaginative world, whereas here the
French scud rudderless before the wind." The Hegelian system has done
good service in this way, that it has freed us from arbitrary fancies;
and in like manner it will safeguard the French spirit from the
dangerous illusions and seductions of a "genius that has taken the bit
between its teeth and of an unbridled fantasy." Thanks to the freedom of
the press in France, it will be possible to demonstrate to all and
sundry "that we in the womb of German obscurantism have become strong
enough to bear, of a sudden, the light of the world." This is a new
epoch, in which there is occurring a "fraternization of principles, and
in which the nations will be able to foregather."

The formal introduction is followed by an arranged correspondence
between Marx, Ruge, Feuerbach, and Bakunin. Marx is supposed to be
writing from Holland, and describes the shame inspired by conditions in
Prussia. "The splendid cloak of liberalism has been dropped, and the
most repulsive despotism is exposed in all its nakedness to the eyes of
the whole world. This is also a revelation, though a perverted one. It
is a revelation of the truth, a revelation that certainly enables us to
learn the emptiness of our patriotism, the unnatural character of our
State system; a revelation which discloses our true visage. You smile at
me, and ask what is gained thereby. You say that shame cannot make a
revolution. I answer that shame is itself already a revolution. ... If a
whole nation were really ashamed, the lion crouching for a spring would
refrain." The comedy of despotism will necessarily lead to a revolution,
but "the State is too serious a thing to be made into a harlequinade. A
ship manned by fools might drive before the wind for a good long time;
but it would drive onwards to its fate for the very reason that the
fools did not believe that such a fate was in store for them. That fate
is the impending revolution."

Ruge begins his reply with a quotation from Hölderlin, as a motto to
signify his profound depression. "Do you expect a political revolution?
Do you think that we, the contemporaries of such Germans as live today,
can expect anything of the kind? My friend, the wish is father to the
thought ... More courage is needed for despair than for hope. But the
courage of despair is a reasonable courage, and we have reached a point
when we can no longer delude ourselves." Tearfully, and at great length,
he describes the impression produced upon him by the "despotic maxims"
of the reaction, and by the "eternal submissiveness" of the ordinary
Germans. "Had we not better console ourselves with the thought that
these things are inevitable, that man is not born to be free?" Marx had
said that the ship of fools would not escape its revolutionary destiny;
but he had failed to add that this revolution would only be the
convalescence of the fools. "Your image does no more than lead us to the
idea of destruction, but I will not even concede you this destruction."
In profound resignation, he concludes by saying: "You may reproach me
with being no better than the others; you may challenge me to promote
the coming of a new age with the assistance of the new principle; you
may ask me why I do not show myself to be one of those authors whom a
free century follows. You may say as many bitter things as you please,
but my withers will be unwrung. Our nation has no future, so what is the
use of summoning it to the fray?"

To this "elegy," to this "funeral lay," Marx rejoins that he finds it
utterly unpolitical. "It is true that the old world belongs to the
philistine, but we must not regard him as a spectre before which we flee
in terror. We must face up to him boldly." What does this philistine
look like? "The philistine world is the political world of lower animal
life. ... Centuries of barbarism have created and evolved it, and now it
exists as a consistent system, whose ruling principle is the
dehumanization of the world ... The only idea of despotism is contempt
for man, the dehumanized man. ... The principle of monarchy in general
is man despised, man despicable, man dehumanized. ... Where the
monarchical principle is in the majority, human beings are in the
minority; where no one challenges the monarchical principle, there are
no men at all. ... The philistine is the substance of the monarchy, and
the monarch is never anything more than the king of the philistines. ...
Why should not such a man as the king of Prussia follow his caprices
unhesitatingly? So long as caprice stands its ground, caprice is in the
right. ... I maintain that the king of Prussia will be a man of his time
for just so long as our perverted world is the real world." Marx sets
forth how the king, in his own manner, had tried to effect a reform;
"but the servants of the ancient despotism soon made an end of this
un-German activity." Besides, the lord of all the farther Russians had
been made uneasy by the restless movement in the heads of the hither
Russians, and had insisted upon the restoration of the good old quiet
times. "Such was the unsuccessful attempt to uplift the philistine State
upon its own foundation. ... A brutal system can only be maintained by
brutality." The extant methods of industry and commerce, property, and
the exploitation of man by man, would speedily lead to a rupture within
society, and under the old regime there could be no cure. "From our
side, the old world must be brought fully into the daylight, and the new
world must be developed in a positive sense. The longer the time that
events leave for thoughtful humanity to reflect, and for suffering
humanity to collect its forces, the more finished, when born, will be
the product which the present bears in its womb."

The letters of Bakunin and Feuerbach are likewise full of encouragement.
"This is not the moment for folding our arms, for cowardly despair,"
exclaims Bakunin. "If such men as you no longer believe in Germany's
future, no longer wish to work for the coming of that future, who will
believe, and who will act? We must scourge our metaphysical arrogance,
which does not make the world warm; we must learn; we must work day and
night that we may be able to live like men with men, that we may be free
and may make others free; we must (I always come back to this) enter
into possession of our time by entering into possession of our own
ideas." Feuerbach writes in a similar tone. Thereupon Ruge writes to
Marx: "It is true, Poland has been destroyed, but Poland is not yet
lost. ... The 'Jahrbücher' have been destroyed, the Hegelian philosophy
belongs to the past. Here in Paris we will found an organ in which we
can judge ourselves and the whole of Germany with perfect freedom and
with inexorable uprightness."

In his concluding epistle, Marx acclaims Ruge's decision for action, and
sketches the programme of the new periodical: "We shall not dogmatically
anticipate the coming world, but shall begin by discovering the new
world through criticism of the old one. Hitherto the philosophers had
had schemes for the solution of all riddles lying ready in their desks,
and the stupid exoteric world had merely to open its mouth wide that the
roast pigeons of absolute science might fly into its mouth. Philosophy
has been secularized, the most striking proof of this being that the
philosophical consciousness has itself rushed into the fray, not only
outwardly, but inwardly as well. ... We are developing the principles of
the new world. We do not say to the world: 'Cease your struggles, which
are foolish, for we will give you the true battle-cry.' We merely show
the world for what it is really fighting, and the world must become
self-conscious whether it will or no. ... Our motto must therefore be:
'Reform of the consciousness, not by dogmas, but by analysis of the
mystical consciousness, of the consciousness which is not fully
clarified, whether it be religious or political.'" In conclusion,
summarizing the trends and the aims of the periodical, he writes: "To
make the time fully understand its struggles and its wishes." Thus the
flag was hoisted. Brief, alas, was to be the period in which it
fluttered in the breeze. The "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher" had very
few readers. As a business undertaking, it was unsuccessful. A great
many of the copies were intercepted when the attempt was made to smuggle
them into Germany. Through the instrumentality of Guizot, the Prussian
government took action against the editors. Meanwhile the editors were
quarrelling. They broke away from one another, moving in opposite
directions, Ruge to the right, Marx more and more to the left. Ruge,
being unable to free his mind from personal animus in a dispute about
ideas, cherished a grievance against Marx. As for Marx, he recked little
henceforward of Ruge's personality, and devoted his attention to matters
of greater importance.

### _Zur Kritik der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie_

Rather less than a year elapsed between the suppression of the
"Rheinische Zeitung" and the publication of the "Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher."

Marx had devoted this brief period to intensive culture of the soil of
his own mind. He had made a giant stride forward in his development
towards socialism.

He had criticized Hegel unsparingly, had advanced upon Feuerbach, and
had adopted a position of his own towards the French socialists. He had
put history upon the throne from which he had unseated religion. In his
hands, secularized philosophy had become politics. His world was
spinning on a new axis.

Positively amazing was the amount of scientific literature perused by
Marx in the summer and autumn of 1843. In his notebooks of this year we
find an enormous quantity of extracts from books on the history of
France (Schmidt, Wachsmuth, Chateaubriand, Lacretelle); England
(Lappenberg, Russell); Germany (Ranke); and the United States: also from
Möser's _Patriotische Phantasien_, Machiavelli, Rousseau, and
Montesquieu. He had studied the history of political systems; had read
the economic works of Ricardo and McCulloch; and had even entertained
plans of writing a history of the Convention. In Paris, where he had
access to great libraries, he immersed himself in the relevant
literature. A precipitate from all these studies forms his _Zur Kritik
der Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie_ [Introduction to a Critique of the
Hegelian Philosophy of Right], which appeared in the first section of
the "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher."

In this article, Marx, with the boldness of the man of genius, sketches
the elements of his later system of thought. Daringly, and in letters of
flame, he writes the watchwords of the manifesto of proletarian
enfranchisement on the firmament of the epoch.

Setting out from Feuerbach, briefly and clearly summarizing the results
of that philosopher's criticism of religion, he makes history the
fulcrum of future developments, and therewith comes to politics.

"Man makes religion; religion does not make man. Religion, indeed, is
the self-consciousness and the self-feeling of the man who either has
not yet found himself, or else (having found himself) has lost himself
once more. But man is not an abstract being, squatting down somewhere
outside the world. Man is the world of men, the State, society. This
State, this society, produce religion, produce a perverted world
consciousness, because they are a perverted world. Religion is the
generalized theory of this world, its encyclopaedic compend, its logic
in a popular form. ... The fight against religion is, therefore, a
direct campaign against the world whose spiritual aroma is religion."

"Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the feelings of a
heartless world, just as it is the spirit of unspiritual conditions. It
is the opium of the people."

"The people cannot be really happy until it has been deprived of
illusory happiness by the abolition of religion. The demand that the
people should shake itself free of illusion as to its own condition is
the demand that it should abandon a condition which needs illusion."

"Thus it is the mission of history, after the other-worldly truth has
disappeared, to establish the truth of this world. In the next place, it
is the mission of philosophy, having entered into the service of history
after the true nature of the reputed sainthood of human
self-estrangement has been disclosed, to disclose all the unsaintliness
of this self-estrangement. Thus the criticism of heaven is transformed
into a criticism of earth, the criticism of religion into a criticism of
law, the criticism of theology into a criticism of politics."

"German history plumes itself upon a movement which no other nation in
the historical firmament has ever made before it, and which no other
nation will ever make after it. We have shared the restorations of the
modern nations without sharing their revolutions. We experienced a
restoration, first of all because other nations ventured a revolution,
and secondly because other nations had to suffer a counterrevolution;
the first was because our lords and masters were afraid, and the second
was because our lords and masters were not afraid. Led by our shepherds,
we found ourselves in the company of freedom only on the day of its
funeral."

"It behoves us that the Germans should not be allowed a moment for
self-deception and resignation. Rather should the actual pressure be
intensified, so that the consciousness of pressure should be superadded,
the smart being increased by publication. ... These petrified conditions
must be made to dance by having their own tune sung to them."

"Just as in ancient days the nations knew their primal history in the
world of imagination, in mythology, so have we Germans experienced our
history of days to come in thoughts, in philosophy. We are the
contemporaries of the present in philosophy, without being its
contemporaries in history. German philosophy is the continuation of
German history in the world of the ideal."

"That which, among more advanced nations, is a practical quarrel with
modern political conditions, is in Germany, where these conditions have
not even yet come into existence, a critical quarrel with the
philosophical mirroring of these conditions."

"In the world of politics, the Germans have thought that which other
nations have done. Germany has been their theoretical conscience. The
abstractness and exaggeration of Germany's thought has always kept pace
with the one-sidedness and the inadequacy of the realities of German
life."

"The German people, therefore, must bring its dreamland history into
harmony with extant conditions, and must subject to criticism, not only
these extant conditions, but also their continuation in the abstract
world!"

"The weapon of criticism cannot replace the criticism of weapons.
Physical force must be overthrown by physical force; but theory, too,
becomes a physical force as soon as it takes possession of the masses."

"The criticism of religion ends with the doctrine that man is the
highest being for man; it ends, that is to say, with the categorical
imperative that all conditions must be revolutionized in which man is a
debased, an enslaved, an abandoned, a contemptible being. ... A radical
is one who cuts at the roots of things. Now, for man, the root of things
is man himself."

"A radical revolution, the general emancipation of mankind, is not a
utopian dream for Germany; what is utopian is the idea of a partial, an
exclusively political revolution, which would leave the pillars of the
house standing. Upon what does a partial, an exclusively political
revolution rest? Upon this, that a part of civil society emancipates
itself, and attains to general dominion; upon this, that a particular
class, from a position peculiar to itself, should undertake to effect
the general emancipation of society. That class can free the whole of
society, but only on the proviso that the whole of society is in the
position of that class."

"Only in the name of the general rights of society is a particular class
entitled to claim universal dominion. Abundant revolutionary energy and
mental self-confidence will not be enough to enable it to take this
emancipatory position by storm, and thus to effect the political
utilization of all spheres of society in the interests of its own
sphere. If the revolution of a nation is to coincide with the
emancipation of a particular class of civil society, if one particular
estate is to be an estate tantamount to the whole of society, then,
conversely, all the defects of society must be concentrated in another
class, one particular estate must sustain the general attack, must be
the incorporation of the general restrictions; one particular social
sphere must be the scapegoat for all the sins of society, so that the
enfranchisement of this sphere will be equivalent to a universal
self-enfranchisement. If one estate is to be preeminently the estate of
liberation, then, conversely, another estate must manifestly be the
estate of subjugation."

"What, then, are the practical possibilities of German emancipation?
Here is the answer. They are to be found in the formation of a class
with radical chains, a class of civil society which is not a class of
civil society; of an estate which is the dissolution of all estates; of
a sphere which is endowed with a universal character by the universality
of its sufferings; one which does not lay claim to any particular
rights, the reason being that it does not suffer any one specific
injustice, but suffers injustice unqualified; one which can no longer
put forward a historically grounded title, but only a general human
title; one which is not in any sort of one-sided opposition to the
consequences, but only in a general opposition to the presuppositions of
the German political system; and, finally, a sphere which cannot
emancipate itself, without emancipating itself from all the other
spheres of society--one which, in a word, has been completely deprived
of its human privileges, so that it can only regain itself by fully
regaining these human privileges. This dissolution of society as a
particular estate--is the proletariat."

"If the proletariat heralds the dissolution of the world order as
hitherto extant, it is merely, thereby, expressing the mystery of its
own existence, for it is the actual dissolution of this previous world
order. If the proletariat demands the negation of private property, it
is only raising to the level of a principle of society that which
society has made the principle of the proletariat, that which is
incorporated in the proletariat as the negative result of history
without any cooperation on the part of the proletariat."

"The only practically possible liberation of Germany is liberation upon
the standpoint of the theory which declares man to be the highest being
for man. ... The emancipation of the German is the emancipation of
mankind."

"Philosophy cannot be realized without the uprising of the proletariat;
and the proletariat cannot rise without the realization of philosophy."

The foregoing extracts will give the reader a general idea of the
thought process of the essay from which they are taken; but they serve
very inadequately to convey the originality and momentum of the ideas,
the elemental force of the logic, the compactness of the argumentation,
and the creative imagery of the phrasing, which combine to make a
masterpiece of this pioneer revolutionary document, and thanks to which
its general conclusions form a brilliant prophecy of the proletarian
revolution.

In later years, Marx summarized the contents of the article in the
following terms: "My investigation culminated in the recognition that
legal and political forms are not comprehensible of themselves, nor yet
explicable in terms of the so-called evolution of the human mind, but
are rooted in the material conditions of life, whose totality Hegel,
following the example of English and French eighteenth-century writers,
subsumed under the name of 'civil society'; and in the recognition that
the anatomy of civil society is to be sought for in political economy."

With this recognition, Marx had laid the foundation stone and built in
the corner stone of the monumental edifice of his future social theory.

### The Jewish Question

Another of Marx's contributions to the "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher"
dealt with the Jewish question. He took as his theme an article on the
same topic which had been contributed by Bruno Bauer to the "Deutsche
Jahrbücher," and had subsequently been published as a pamphlet.

The Jewish question was a topical one. Those who then used the phrase,
had in mind the political and civic liberation of the Jews from their
exceptional position before the law, a position which was a relic of the
Middle Ages. The reactionaries, naturally, had done nothing to bring
about this emancipation. Nay more, they had deprived the Jews of certain
advantages gained in Germany under the stimulus of French advocacy of
the rights of man. In Prussia alone, says Mehring, there were no less
than eighteen laws dealing with the Jews.

On the other hand, the Jews had themselves shown little inclination to
come into close contact with the intellectual life of the German nation.
Thanks to the conservatism of their Old Testament ideology, they could
not but seem foreign bodies in the community during a period of growing
enlightenment and emancipatory movement. In so far as they had become
objects of political attention, it was because their most notable
representatives (moneylenders who kept the princes and other feudal
magnates in funds, farmers of the taxes, debasers of the currency,
financiers of one kind and another) were regarded with detestation as
being the secret and last but powerful props of the feudal system.

The general economic progress of the times was advantageous to Jews as
well as Gentiles. Jews had become of economic importance, and in
proportion to this development there was a tendency towards the growth
of their civic and political importance. But whereas in the actual world
they had already acquired a better position, their legal and ideological
positions lagged behind. Such was the content of the Jewish question.
Amid the chorus of the voices of the day, Jewish voices were raised ever
more insistently in criticism of the injustices from which the Jews
suffered. Thus Jews made common cause with liberals and even with
revolutionists, turning the mental and moral sciences, and philosophy
itself, to account in the struggle for Jewish emancipation. The Young
Hegelians' fierce attack on Christianity and religion brought grist,
here, to the Jewish mill.

Bruno Bauer, like Feuerbach, had taken a definite line upon the Jewish
question. But neither of these champions had freed the problem from its
entanglement in the web of theological, religious, and philosophical
criticism.

Marx tore the meshes of this speculative net in sunder, envisaged the
question from a clear outlook, and discussed it upon the concrete basis
of its secular determinants. What had been a theological problem became
in his hands a mundane one.

Then he turned upon his old friend and opponent with the challenging
technique of a fighter who is sure of his own ground. His training had
been one which gave him enormous advantages over Bauer, and disclosed to
him the weaknesses of his adversary. He was victor from the first thrust
of his lance.

If the German Jews, he said, covet political, civic emancipation, they
must be told that the State cannot emancipate itself as long as it is
Christian, any more than the Jew can be emancipated so long as he
remains a Jew. "Upon what title do you Jews ground your claim for
emancipation? On your religion? It is the mortal foe of the State
religion. As citizens? In Germany there are no citizens. As human
beings? You are not human beings, any more than those to whom you are
appealing."

In Bauer's view, the Jew, if he wished to become free, must first become
a Christian, and must then transcend Christianity with the aid of the
Hegelian philosophy.

Things must go the other way about, said Marx. If, as Feuerbach had
proved, the existence of religion was the outcome of the existence of a
lack, and if the source of this lack were to be found in the nature of
the extant State, then it logically followed, not that it was incumbent
upon the Jews to rid themselves of their "religious limitations" in
order that they might thereafter free themselves of their secular
limitations; but, conversely, that their religious limitations would
spontaneously disappear as soon they had freed themselves from their
secular limitations.

In this way the question of the relation of political emancipation to
religion had become the question of the relation of political
emancipation to human emancipation.

The modern bourgeois State represents the result and the reservoir of
political emancipation. A man need not, because he is a citizen, cease
to be a Christian, a Jew, an adherent of one creed or another. As
citizen, he is a member of a species, but as Christian or Jew he is a
private individual. "The State can free itself from a limitation without
the individual human being having really freed himself from that
limitation; the State can be a free State although the individual is not
yet a free man."

Marx goes on to say, in illustration of his argument, that the religious
question finds an analogy in the question of property. Politically, the
State abolishes private property when it abolishes the property
qualification for the exercise of the suffrage. After its own manner, it
abolishes distinctions of birth, standing, education, and occupation,
when it declares birth, standing, education, etc., to be differences
devoid of political significance, and when it allows every member of the
community to participate equally in the exercise of popular sovereignty
regardless of such distinctions. Yet at the same time, property,
education, standing, birth, and so on, remain intact as concrete
distinctions between private individuals. Indeed, the State "only exists
on the proviso that these differences exist, and only makes its
universality valid in contrast with these elements of itself."

Thus the individual human being leads a double life: one life
politically, in the State, as a member of the species; and another life
as a private individual in civil society. "The conflict in which a man
is involved between his position as one who professes a particular
religion and as one endowed with citizenship in a State (wherein he is
related to his fellow-men inasmuch as he and they are all members of a
community), reduces itself to the secular cleavage between the political
State and civil society." It is thus an outcome of the contradiction
between the State and its presuppositions; or, to put the matter yet
more simply, of the contradiction between general interest and private
interest. In the bourgeois State, this contradiction is illimitable; and
in that State, therefore, the Jewish question, as an expression of this
contradiction, can find no solution. "If you Jews desire political
emancipation before you have emancipated yourselves humanly, the
halfheartedness and the contradiction do not exist only in you, for they
are also to be found in the nature and the category of political
emancipation. If you are yourselves entangled in this category, you
share in its general entanglement. If the State proselytizes, in so far
as it, although a State, assumes a Christian attitude towards the Jews,
so, likewise, does the Jew enter the field of politics when he, although
a Jew, demands civil rights."

But how should human emancipation be realized?

If the political revolution has reduced civic life into its constituents
without revolutionizing it, so that the egoistic individual is the
passive, unrevolutionized result of this process of dissolution, is a
constituent of the dissolved society--then human emancipation, or the
social revolution, will be characterized by "the leading back of the
human world, of relations, to the human being himself."

"Not until the concrete individual human being takes back into himself
the abstract citizen of the State, and, as an individual human being,
has become a member of the species in his empirical life, in his
individual work, in his individual relations; not until the human being
has recognized and organized his own forces as social forces, so that
social force is no longer severed from itself in the form of political
force not until then will human emancipation be completed."

The splendid conclusion of the argument therefore runs as follows. Man
is for man the highest being, and as such--as individual and as member
of the species rolled into one--has to mount the throne of human
history.

The gods have been dethroned. Their existence has been shown to be the
outcome of men's attempts to find compensation for their own defects and
weaknesses. Ideas are but reflexions of the soul's anxiety.

Nor can matter, unaided, achieve anything. It needs man as fulfiller of
its dynamic conformity to law, which finds expression as the necessity
of interests.

The political revolution has cloven man in twain, into the member of the
species, who leads an abstract life, and the private individual, who is
a slave to his own egoism.

The member of the species belongs to the State, which is not (as Hegel
thought) the realization of the moral idea, the manifestation of the
absolutely rational, but only the framework for the anarchical conflict
of individualities, the fight between individual interests. The private
individual belongs to civil society, which makes him pay for his
apparent freedom and independence by depriving him of his power to be a
real human being.

Mankind will only be able to pursue its emancipatory ascent
successfully, when it becomes competent to make every individual willing
and able to bring his subjective scheme of life into harmony with the
objective evolutionary scheme of society--when the private individual is
wholly merged in the member of the species.

Only the objectively socialized and subjectively communalized human
being will be able to effect the emancipation of mankind, thus becoming
master of his own fate.

### Friedrich Engels

In September 1844, Marx had an encounter which was to exercise a
decisive influence upon his career.

He made the acquaintance of the man whose activities were thenceforward
to be indissolubly associated with his own, so closely intertwined that
the name of one can never be mentioned without calling up the name of
the other.

This man was Friedrich Engels. On his way from Manchester to Barmen, he
spent ten days in Paris, met Bakunin for the first time, and sought out
Marx.

The two had corresponded before, and had even had a brief interview,
when Marx was still editor of the "Rheinische Zeitung." Engels had
contributed to the paper. Later he had sent from England two articles
for the "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," _Die Lage Englands_ [The
Position of England], and _Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie_
[Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy]. Now, at length, he and
Karl Marx came into close contact.

Friedrich Engels was born in Barmen on November 28, 1820. His father was
a well-to-do manufacturer, partner in the great textile firm of Ermen
and Engels, which had a lucrative cotton-spinning enterprise in
Manchester in addition to its German plants. Friedrich's mother was a
woman of culture, daughter of the headmaster of the high school in Hamm.
She had eight children, of whom Friedrich was the eldest. He had had the
advantages of a prosperous bourgeois upbringing, in a household governed
by strict principles--but one where intellectual development was
crippled by the restrictions of a Calvinistic pietism. Outside the
immediate family circle, the life of a manufacturing town of the day,
where the workers were badly housed, where proletarian misery in all its
forms was rife, where alcoholism flourished, and where children were
ruthlessly exploited, formed the environment of his early years, and
supplied the leading impressions of his childhood.

Up to the age of fourteen, he attended the middle school at Barmen,
subsequently going to the high school in Elberfeld. He made good
progress in the natural sciences, and was especially distinguished by
his talent for languages. To his father, his character trends gave rise
to considerable anxiety, for as the years passed young Friedrich
manifested an unmistakable, if not unduly aggressive, attitude of
protest against the sanctimonious atmosphere of the home and against all
orthodox and conservative dogmatism. Quitting the Wuppertal when he was
eighteen, he went to Bremen, to enter as a mercantile pupil the business
house of one of his father's friends. In his eagerness for knowledge, he
read all the books he could get hold of. At length, one day, Strauss's
_Life of Jesus_ fell into his hands, and a breach with orthodoxy was the
result. Although young Engels did not escape a period of religious
struggle, he pursued to their logical conclusion the new ideas he had
absorbed. In this way he was led to Hegel, whose writings were a
revelation to him. "These colossal ideas," he wrote to a friend,
"exercised a formidable influence upon me."

Simultaneously, Engels discovered the existence of Young Germany, the
bold disrespect and swashbuckling onslaughts of the members of that
militant group arousing his enthusiasm. To this offshoot from pietist
circles, such exuberant tones were most alluring, and he tells us that
he could not sleep of nights because his head was filled with "the ideas
of the century." An additional step forward was taken when he became
acquainted with the writings of Börne, whose _Paris Letters_ made known
to him the political conceptions of western European radicalism. He got
into personal touch with the leading spirits of Young Germany. When his
period of apprenticeship in Bremen was finished, he travelled in
Switzerland and Italy. Then came his year of military service in Berlin,
and, under an alias necessitated by his position in the army, he entered
the circle of the Young Hegelians. As "Dr. Oswald," he played his part
in the Doctors' Club, the only oasis in the intellectual desert of the
Prussian capital prior to the March revolution, joining in the attempts
of the energetic but unsystematic group of talented youths who were
setting themselves to solve the riddle of the universe. While this was
going on, he was attending lectures at the university, which had then
entered upon a reactionary phase.

Schelling, now well on in years, had been summoned to Berlin by the
reaction, and was to deliver a course of lectures on the philosophy of
revelation. The first of these lectures was a bitter disappointment to
Engels, being full of "invectives over Hegel's grave." Engels, enraged
at this, was moved to action, and penned a fierce polemic, published
anonymously, entitled _Schelling and the Revelation, a Criticism of the
Reaction's Latest Onslaught upon the Freedom of Philosophy_. This had so
striking a success that the authorship was actually ascribed to Bakunin.
From this time onwards Engels, equipped with the reputation of being a
philosophical and literary force, was numbered with Bruno and Edgar
Bauer, Köppen and Buhl, Stirner and Meyen, Rutenberg and Jung, among the
champions who rallied to the support of Ruge and the "Jahrbücher," of
Marx and the "Rheinische Zeitung." Returning to Barmen by way of
Cologne, when his year of military service was finished, Engels met
Moses Hess, who pointed out to him the political implications of the
Hegelian philosophy, and made him acquainted with the ideas of the
French socialists. Writing in 1843, Hess said: "Last year, when I was
about to start for Paris, Engels came to see me on his way from Berlin.
We discussed the questions of the day, and he, a revolutionist of the
Year One, parted from me a convinced communist. Thus did I spread
devastation." At the end of 1842, Engels went to England.

In the model land of capitalism, his attention was primarily attracted
by economic developments and problems. No less interesting, however, was
the Chartist movement, the first of the great political mass movements,
which had begun in 1837, and in 1842 had attained its climax in imposing
strikes and self-sacrificing struggles. He met Feargus O'Connor, the
great Chartist leader, whose eloquence was able from time to time to
infuse new vigour into a movement that was already decaying; and he
wrote for the "Northern Star," the central organ of the Chartists. He
also became involved in Cobden's Anti-Corn-Law movement. Finally, he was
lucky enough to make the acquaintance of Robert Owen, whose long life
had been devoted to the cause of utopian socialism. He frequently
attended the Owenite meetings held on Sundays in the Manchester Hall of
Science, but did not play an active part in this movement, whose
primitive, utopian, and obsolete character was at once plain to him.
Nevertheless, he contributed to Owen's newspaper, the "New Moral World,"
writing an article on the progress of social reform on the Continent.

But the most important of the new relationships entered into by Engels
in the year 1843 was that he came into touch with the Communist Workers'
Educational Society, which had been founded in London by refugees from
Paris in the year 1840. "Three real men," says Engels, "Schapper, Moll,
and Bauer, were the leaders of this organization. ... In Manchester, it
had been borne in on me that economic phenomena, to which historians had
hitherto ascribed little or no importance, are unquestionably a decisive
historical power in the modern world; that they form the groundwork for
the development of contemporary class oppositions in the countries where
such class oppositions have been intensified by the growth of
large-scale industry--especially in England; that they also form the
groundwork for the development of political parties, of party struggles,
and therewith of political history as a whole. Marx had not only come to
the same conclusion, but had already, in the 'Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher,' given utterance to the generalization that the State does
not condition bourgeois society, but that, on the contrary, bourgeois
society conditions and rules the State; this meaning that political life
and its history are to be explained as the outcome of economic
conditions and their development, instead of the converse being true.
When I visited Marx in Paris during the summer of 1844, our complete
agreement upon all theoretical matters became manifest, and from that
time onwards we joined hands in our work."

The first outcome of Engels' studies and observations in England was the
_Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy_, which appeared in the
"Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," and which Marx described as a work of
genius. In this essay we discern, glowing like tongues of flame, the
same thoughts as those which had flashed up in Marx's mind as the
outcome of his analytical study of the French revolution and his
critical examination of French socialism.

### Paris

To Engels, eager for knowledge, England had seemed a unique and
well-stored repository of economic and commercial facts, demanding
political appraisement. In like manner Marx discerned in Paris, in
addition to a past of immense interest, a political present which was no
less momentous, and was ripe for a revolutionary solution.

The July revolution had set up the bourgeois monarchy. Since then,
capital had enjoyed complete freedom of initiative, had had full
opportunity for the development of its impulses and instincts, for
expansion, for the practice of unlimited exploitation. "Enrich
yourselves!" Guizot had exclaimed to the bankers, stockjobbers, railway
kings, mine-owners, contractors for State supplies, and financial
aristocrats. Taking him at his word, they had unhesitatingly engaged in
all possible methods of plunder, corruption, robbery on a gigantic
scale. But while the stock exchange was wallowing in money, while vast
fortunes were being made, while millionaires were being conjured up out
of the ground, the masses were sinking into an abyss of poverty and
despair.

The instinct of self-preservation, in conjunction with vestiges of the
revolutionary tradition, drove them, if they were not to abandon
themselves to utter hopelessness, to form combinations which, under the
pressure of the police and the terrors of the law, could only be secret.
Thus it was that great underground organizations had come into being one
after another, and had spread an invisible network over the country.
Paris was their nodal point. Bernard, Barbès, and Blanqui, were the most
notable among the leaders. In the Friends of the People, the Champions
of the Rights of Man, the Society of Families, and the Society of the
Seasons, the opposition was kept alive, republicanism flourished,
preparations were made for revolution, and the dictatorship of the
proletariat was advocated. The accumulated energy was discharged from
time to time in conspiracies and abortive risings.

In the underworld of the revolutionary movement there was a German
element at work. It consisted of intellectuals, petty bourgeois, manual
workers, and craftsmen, many of whom were enrolled in the Exiles'
League, founded in the year 1834, which issued a small periodical, the
"Exile." Although this league had not freed itself from utopian ideas,
it had made considerable advances in the theoretical field, its members
being familiar with the notions of the class struggle, the concentration
of capital, continually increasing proletarianization, the need for a
social revolution as well as a political one, and the theory of national
workshops. As far as practice was concerned, it was opposed to the use
of force. In 1836, the Federation of the Just came into existence as an
offshoot from the Exiles' League. The two most noted leaders of the
parent body were the sometime instructor Schuster from Göttingen and
Venedey from Heidelberg. Among the leaders of the Federation of the Just
were Schapper, who had at one time been a student of forestry in Nassau,
Bauer, a bootmaker from Franconia, and Wilhelm Weitling, a tailor from
Magdeburg. "The aims were those of the coexistent secret societies in
Paris. It was half a propaganda society, half a conspiracy, Paris being
regarded as the focus of revolutionary action, although the preparation
of occasional risings in Germany was not excluded. Since, however, Paris
was to be the main centre of action, the federation was, in reality,
little more than a German branch of the French secret societies, and
especially of the Society of the Seasons led by Blanqui and Barbès. ...
The French took action on May 13, 1839. The sections of the federation
joined in the fray, and were thus involved in the general defeat."
Schapper and Bauer, who had taken part in the affair, and had spent a
considerable time under arrest, had to leave France, and removed to
London, whither they transferred the central committee of the Federation
of the Just. Marx got into touch with those of the members who remained
in Paris, and they produced both on him and on Engels a "considerable
impression." Marx and Engels continued, therefore, to keep an eye on the
sometime members of the federation.

In the days when Marx was there, Paris was a great crucible full of
socialist and revolutionary ideas. There were relics of Saint-Simonism;
vestiges of Fourierism, cherished by Considérant; Christian socialism of
the Lamennais type; petty-bourgeois socialism such as was advocated by
Sismondi, Buret, Pecqueur, Leroux, Vidal, etc. In the early forties,
Étienne Cabet had reappeared in Paris, after making in England the
acquaintance of Thomas More's _Utopia_ and of the practical activities
of Robert Owen. Out of his impressions and experiences he had woven his
utopian romance _Voyage en Icarie_, which had attracted widespread
attention, and had led to a vigorous propaganda on behalf of utopian
socialism. Cabet professed a communist faith, which was adopted by vast
numbers of the workers. His _Icarian Almanac_ sold to the extent of 8000
copies in 1843 and of 10,000 copies in 1844. His paper the "Populaire"
and his numerous pamphlets found their way into the hands of an
ever-widening circle of readers; but Dézamy, who in 1842 had published
his _Code de la Communauté_, in which he attacked Fourier, Lamennais,
and Cabet, and demanded that socialism should be purged from religious
admixture, had also a considerable number of adherents.

Another movement, characteristically petty bourgeois, was associated
with the names of Louis Blanc, Ledru-Rollin, and Flocon. For them, the
organization of labour and the right to work were the fulcra of their
system, which was expounded in Louis Blanc's book _Organisation du
travail_ published in 1842.

The kaleidoscopic picture of socialist ideas had assumed a dominant tint
since 1840, through the influence of J. P. Proudhon, a talented
compositor from Besançon, whose book _Qu'est-ce que la pro propriété?_
had speedily become famous. Marx thought highly of Proudhon, whom he
regarded as the embodiment of his own speculative gifts. Even at a
considerably later date, when the two men's paths had diverged, Marx
described Proudhon's book as "epoch-making in its new and bold way of
saying everything"; and expressed himself as having been enraptured by
the "vigorous musculature" of Proudhon's style. While staying in Paris,
Marx took all possible opportunities of making Proudhon acquainted with
the Hegelian philosophy and with the means for its critical
supersession. "During prolonged discussions, which often lasted far into
the night, I infected him (to his misfortune) with Hegelianism, which
his ignorance of the German language made it impossible for him to study
properly."

Whereas this acquaintanceship ended in an inevitable breach, the
friendship between Marx and Heinrich Heine established on both sides
strong feelings of mutual esteem. Heine, whose mere name was enough to
arouse a terrified commotion in the Prussian reactionaries he delighted
to stigmatize, was (if only because he was an enemy of the Prussian
reaction) a man after Marx's own heart. Furthermore, a year earlier,
Heine had unreservedly avowed his support of communism. Writing under
date June 15, 1843, he said: "The communists are the only party in
France that is worthy of respect. I might, indeed claim respect for the
vestiges of Saint-Simonism, whose champions still linger on under
strange devices, and also for the Fourierists, who are alive and
kicking; but these worthy persons are moved only by words, by the social
problem as a problem, by traditional ideas; they are not urged onward by
elemental necessity, they are not the predestined servants through whose
instrumentality the supreme world-will carries its titanic resolves into
effect. Sooner or later, the scattered family of Saint-Simon and the
whole general staff of the Fourierists will go over to the growing army
of communism, and, equipping crude necessity with the formative word,
will, as it were, play the part of the Fathers of the Church." Thus what
brought Marx and Heine together, and made their union enduring, was an
inner conformity of ideas. The respect they inspired in one another, as
philosopher and as poet, could not fail to strengthen their alliance.
Marx urged Heine to devote himself to singing the sufferings of the
oppressed instead of the sufferings of passionate lovers, to exchange
the lyrical flute for the satirist's scourge. The advice bore fruit, and
thenceforward Heine was indefatigable in his satires upon reaction,
sanctimoniousness, and philistinism.

Marx and Heine had common sympathies, not only because they were
fighters in the same cause, but also because they shared in the
afflictions of the persecution to which they were exposed. When leaving
Cologne, Marx had thought to escape from the spies by whom he was
surrounded, to break through the network of hostile machinations. But
here in Paris he was once more under the observation of men whose mode
of livelihood was, to say the least of it, ambiguous. Now Arnim, the
Prussian ambassador in Paris, reported to Berlin that, in the
"Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," Heine had published "base and
scandalous" _Lobgesänge auf König Ludwig_ [Odes to King Louis of
Bavaria], while, in the same publication, Marx had openly advocated a
revolution in Germany. Thereupon the Prussian minister of police
arranged that Marx, Heine, and Bernays (the last-named had published,
also in the "Jahrbücher," the concluding minute of the Viennese
Ministerial Conference of 1834) were, in the event of their return to
Germany, to be promptly arrested on a charge of high treason and
lese-majesty.

In Paris there lived a man named Börnstein, at one time an actor, and
now picking up a livelihood as a theatrical agent and advertisement
tout. With the aid of funds supplied by Meyerbeer, kapellmeister to the
king of Prussia, and with the collaboration of Bornstedt, a provocative
agent in the service of the king of Prussia, he had founded a German
newspaper called "Vorwärts." In its first incarnation, as a patriotic
journal, this had no success. Changing its tone, it became
ultra-revolutionary, and the editor asked Marx and Heine to contribute
to its columns. Heine, who was in Hamburg upon a short visit to his
mother, wrote to Marx: "People ascribe to me a more important
participation in 'Vorwärts' than I can really boast of. To say truth,
the paper shows itself to be a master in the art of incitation, and in
the publication of compromising matter. I wonder what's afoot. Perhaps a
web of perfidy is being spun in Paris!"

Marx sent a few articles to "Vorwärts." Heine contributed, among other
things, the gruesome strophes of the _Weberlied_ [Weavers' Song].
Bernays, who was editor, being a young hothead, saw to it that when this
stimulating diet came to table there should be no lack of pepper and
salt. Thus the spy-directors in the Prussian government were given the
pretext of which they were in search, and were at length able to
complain to the French government on the ground that journalistic
attacks on Prussia emanating from Paris were "increasing in impudence
and coarseness." Guizot hesitated to take action, for he had no wish to
burn his fingers, and he knew that the suppression of the offending
periodical and the expulsion of Marx and Heine from Paris would be a
public scandal and would arouse heated expostulations. In the interplay
of intrigue and negotiation, Arnold Ruge (who had in the meanwhile been
completely estranged from Marx) played a remarkable part. He was "the
Prussian" against whom the first of Marx's unmistakably communist
articles, a contribution to "Vorwärts," was directed. In the end Guizot
was persuaded, by no less a man than Alexander von Humboldt, to take
measures against the offenders. Bernays was sentenced to two months'
imprisonment and had to pay a fine of three hundred francs. On January
11, 1845, it was decreed that Marx, Ruge, Bakunin, Börnstein, and
Bernays were to be expelled. Börnstein and Ruge, being able to pull
strings, secured the cancelling of the expulsion order as far as they
were concerned. The order did not cover Heine, for the authorities
feared that undesirable comment would be aroused if they were to proceed
to extremities against him. Marx removed to Brussels.

Paris had been hospitable to him for a season only. Though he must have
quitted it with regret, after a year's sojourn, he could console himself
with the knowledge that while there he had gained riper insight, had
gathered experience, and had equipped himself for the fray. From his
visit to Paris dates his career as a socialist.

### _Die heilige Familie_

When Marx and Engels met in Paris, one of the chief topics of
conversation was the question how the criticism of the Hegelian
philosophy could be most consistently and fruitfully given a political
trend.

It occurred to them that an excellent plan would be to make an unsparing
onslaught upon the extravagances of speculative idealism, especially in
the form that doctrine had assumed in the hands of the brothers Bauer.

The friendship between Marx and Bruno Bauer had been broken off since
Marx, writing in the "Rheinische Zeitung," had issued an unambiguous
challenge to the "Berliner Freien." The personal dispute between the two
men had eventuated in increasingly marked differences of opinion. Bruno
Bauer was annoyed that Marx should have developed independently, without
his patronage and friendly assistance. He looked askance at the
activities of Marx in 1842, and at the political legacy of the
"'Rheinische Zeitung' of blessed memory." Asked to collaborate in the
"Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," he had ignored the invitation. On the
other hand, in conjunction with his brother Edgar, he had founded the
"Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung," an organ which was to "expose all the
halfheartedness and inflated phraseology of the liberalism and
radicalism of the year 1842." He announced that the "pretentious,
malicious, petty, envious" political criticism of the "Rheinische
Zeitung" was to be replaced by "free human criticism." The new journal
was designed, not to join in the movement towards socialism (which, he
said, was only a helpless gesture of philosophical incompetence); it was
to inaugurate a return to pure philosophical theory, to the "idea of
infinite self-consciousness."

Marx and Engels were not slow to accept the gage of battle. They decided
to deliver thrust upon thrust, so promptly that their adversary would be
unseated before he had time to recover. They were sturdy fighters,
equipped with all the weapons of the intellect, full of power, courage,
and lust for battle; and, now that they had joined hands for the fray,
almost overbold. Their philosophical training had been identical, and
they had shared an enthusiasm for Feuerbach; they had both of them
passed on from philosophical radicalism into the field of practical
politics, taking this step independently of one another, but both of
them with the same logical consistency and the same inevitability. Now
they were united by the same interest in the problem of socialism and
communism, and by the same sense of responsibility towards the questions
of the day. At the present juncture, they considered, the most important
thing was to make a clean sweep of vestiges from earlier phases of
development, to put an end to everything which barred advance or
rendered it difficult to see the goal.

Taking as his text an article by Ruge about the rising of the Silesian
weavers in 1844, Marx, writing in "Vorwärts," had had a controversy with
Ruge, and therein had taken a notable step forward. Renouncing State
socialism, and declaring the State to be "an institution of society," he
had come to hold that the State was subordinate to society. In view of
his rejection of utopian socialism, the socialism of those who hoped to
attain their aims without revolution, he arrived at the definition of
revolution as a social phenomenon, in so far as it effected the breakup
of the old society, and as a political phenomenon, in so far as it
overthrew the old State authority. A logical inference from this was
that politics must be made subordinate to socialism, that politics could
only be a means, an instrument, for the realization of socialism. Thus
the path taken from philosophical radicalism to politics led
consistently to an end that lay beyond politics. Marx's frank
recognition of socialism in his article came as the appropriate climax
of his previous recognition of politics.

In view of his own rapid development, it was inevitable that Marx's
critical zeal should be whetted by the arrogantly reactionary attitude
of Bauer, who was still content with the old wisdom of the professorial
chairs. Engels, who was never backward when the call to arms sounded,
was delighted. While still in Paris, he sat down to write what he had to
say, providing matter for twenty or thirty printed pages. The remainder
was written by Marx, the remainder of a volume of three hundred and
fifty pages. It may be that the book was deliberately spun out to this
length because volumes containing more than three hundred pages were
immune from censorship; it may be, however, that there was no deliberate
policy in the matter, and that Marx, enjoying the opportunity of letting
himself go, had given no thought to limitations of space.

Engels was alarmed at first sight of the ponderous tome, published by
Rütten and Löning, in Frankfort-on-the-Main. He was still more startled
to find that, although he had contributed so small a share of the
contents, his name was given precedence of Marx's on the title-page.
Most of all, however, he was aghast at the title. Marx had wanted to
call the book _Kritik der kritischen Kritik_ [Criticism of Critical
Criticism], but the publisher had recommended, as "more incisive and
more epigrammatic," the title _Die heilige Familie_ [The Holy Family].
_Kritik der kritischen Kritik_ had remained as subtitle, with the
addition of the words _gegen Bruno Bauer und Konsorten_ [against Bruno
Bauer and his consorts]. Engels wrote to Marx: "The new title will
certainly involve me in a family rumpus with my pious parents, who are
already much out of humour with me; though of course you could not be
expected to know this. ... But certainly the book is too big. The
sovereign contempt with which we profess to regard the
'Literatur-Zeitung' is in sharp contrast with the three hundred and
fifty pages we devote to the criticism of that periodical. Furthermore,
most of the criticism of speculation and of abstract matters will be
incomprehensible to the general public, and will not prove of interest
to many. In other respects, however, the book is brilliantly written,
and makes one burst one's sides with laughing."

Engels was right. The book was too big, too heavy; it was neither
popular nor topical. No one had time or patience to read it until he
should reach the passages which would make him burst his sides with
laughing--and these, in truth, were only amusing to the connoisseur.
Worst of all, the "Literatur-Zeitung" had gone the way of all flesh long
before the book appeared. Even as gravedigger, _The Holy Family_ came
too late.

The significance of _The Holy Family_, therefore, does not depend so
much upon the critical matter the book contains, upon criticism which is
often intricate and wearisome, as upon the elaboration of profound
thoughts, fundamental concepts, basic formulas, which were subsequently
to be built into a splendid intellectual edifice destined to endure for
centuries.

In especial, the vigorous aphorisms concerning the proletariat,
concerning idea and mass, concerning the role of the active individual
in the fulfilment of history, are as precious as finely cut and highly
polished jewels.

Consider the following extracts regarding the proletariat.

"Proletariat and wealth are opposites. As such, they form a whole. They
are two configurations of the world of private property. We are
concerned with the definite position which the two assume in the
contrast. It does not suffice to describe them as two aspects of one
whole."

"Private property as private property, as wealth, is compelled to
maintain its own existence, and therewith the existence of its opposite,
the proletariat. It is the positive side of the contrast, private
property satisfied with itself. The proletariat, on the other hand, is
compelled as proletariat to abolish itself, and therewith to abolish
private property, the opposite that has determined its own existence,
that has made it into a proletariat. It is the negative side of the
contrast, its discontent with itself, private property dissolved and
dissolving itself. The possessing class and the class of the proletariat
represent an identical human self-alienation. But the former class feels
itself comfortable and assured in this self-alienation, recognizes the
alienation as its own power, and possesses in it the semblance of a
human existence; the latter feels itself annihilated in the alienation,
regards in it its own impotence, and perceives in it the reality of an
unhuman existence."

"Beyond question, private property, in its economic movement, advances
towards its own dissolution, but only through a development of an
independent and unconscious character, which it undergoes without the
exercise of its own will, and impelled by the nature of things; only
inasmuch as it generates the proletariat as proletariat, creates poverty
that is conscious of its own mental and physical poverty, creates
dehumanization that is conscious of itself and therefore abolishes
itself. The proletariat fulfils the judgment which private property has
brought upon itself by the creation of the proletariat, just as it
fulfils the judgment which wage labour has brought upon itself by
creating the wealth of others and its own poverty. When the proletariat
is victorious, it has not thereby in any way become the absolute aspect
of society, for it is only victorious inasmuch as it abolishes itself
and its opposite. Then both the proletariat and its conditioning
opposite, private property, disappear."

"When socialist writers ascribe this role in universal history to the
proletariat, they are far from doing so because they regard proletarians
as gods. It is very much the other way. Because, in the fully developed
proletariat, the withdrawal of all humanity, and even of the semblance
of humanity, has been practically completed; because, in the living
conditions of the proletariat, all the living conditions of contemporary
society are comprised in their unhuman climax; because, in the
proletariat, the human being has lost himself, but has gained something
more than the theoretical awareness of this loss, for he has gained this
in addition, that it has become an imperious necessity for him to revolt
against unhumanity--for all these reasons, the proletariat can and must
liberate itself. Yet it cannot liberate itself without abolishing its
own living conditions, without abolishing all the unhuman living
conditions of contemporary society, the conditions that comprise the
situation of the proletariat."

"We are not concerned, therefore, with what this or that proletarian, or
even the proletariat as a whole, may regard as an aim. What we are
concerned with is, what the proletariat actually is; and what the
proletariat will, in accordance with the nature of its own being, be
historically compelled to do. Its goal and its historical action are
obvious, are irrevocably indicated, in the vital situation of the
proletariat, and also in the whole organization of contemporary
bourgeois society."

Now consider what is said about the questions, idea and mass:

"Hegel's interpretation of history is nothing other than the speculative
expression of the Christo-Germanic dogma of the opposition between
spirit and matter, between God and the world. This opposition finds
expression, according to Hegel, within history, within the human world
itself, in such a way that a small number of select individuals stand
contrasted as active spirit with the rest of mankind as a spiritless
mass, as matter."

"Hegel's interpretation of history presupposes an abstract or absolute
spirit, which evolves in such a way that mankind is only a mass which
bears it up unconsciously or consciously. Within empirical, exoteric
history, he therefore assumes that there is in progress a speculative,
esoteric history. The history of mankind is transformed into the history
of the abstract spirit of mankind, which, because it is abstract, is
something beyond real human beings."

"Hegel is thus guilty of a twofold halfheartedness: first of all,
because he declares philosophy to be the existence of absolute spirit
and is at the same time careful to guard against declaring the real
philosophical individual to be absolute spirit; in the second place,
because he makes the absolute spirit, as absolute spirit, only the
semblance of history. For, inasmuch as the absolute spirit comes into
the philosopher's consciousness as creative world spirit post festum,
his fabrication of history exists only in the consciousness, the
opinion, the idea of the philosopher only in the speculative
imagination."

"Speculative philosophy, and the Hegelian philosophy in especial, must
translate all questions out of the form of the healthy human
understanding into the form of the speculative reason, and must
transform all real questions into speculative questions, before it can
answer them. After speculation had twisted my question in my mouth, and
had, like the catechism, thrust its own question into my mouth, it was
naturally able, like the catechism, to supply its own answers to all my
questions." "Just as, according to earlier theologians, plants exist in
order to be eaten by animals, and animals in order to be eaten by human
beings, so history exists as fodder in the theoretical field, to serve
as means for demonstration. Man is there that there may be history, and
history is there that there may be demonstration of truth. In this
critical and trivialized form recurs the speculative wisdom, that man is
there, and that history is there, that truth may become self-conscious."

"The 'idea' has always made itself ridiculous in so far as it has been
detached from 'interest.' On the other hand it is easy to understand
that every widespread 'interest,' every 'interest' that is historically
valid, diffuses itself, when it first appears on the world stage, into
the 'idea,' and thus greatly transcends its concrete limits and
coalesces with the general human interest. Illusion constitutes what
Fourier termed the 'tone' of every historical epoch."

"Speaking generally, mass is an indefinite object, which therefore
cannot perform a definite action, and cannot enter into a definite
relation. Mass, as object of critical criticism, has nothing in common
with real masses, which, for their part, form their massive oppositions
among themselves. Their mass is 'made' by itself, as if an investigator,
instead of talking of definite classes, should contrast class with
itself."

"As soon as man has been recognized as the essence, as the foundation,
of all human activities and conditions, criticism can only discover new
categories, and transform man himself, as it has just done, into a
category once more, and into the principle of a whole series of
categories, thus discovering the last way of retreat open to intimidated
and persecuted theological unhumanity. History does nothing; 'has no
overwhelming wealth'; 'fights no battles.' Man, the real, living man,
does all things, owns, and fights. 'History' does not use man as an
instrument to fulfil its own purposes, as if it were a person apart.
History is nothing else than the activity of man pursuing his own aims."

"No great perspicacity is needed--setting out from the teachings of
materialism regarding the primitive goodness and the equal intellectual
endowments of men; regarding the omnipotence of experience, habit,
education, environing conditions over man; regarding the great
importance of industry, the right to enjoyment, etc., etc. to deduce the
necessary connexion of materialism with communism and socialism. If man
derives all his knowledge, and his perceptions, etc., from the world of
the senses and from experience in the world of the senses, it is our
business to order the empirical world in such a way that man shall have
truly human experiences in it, shall experience himself to be a human
being. If self-interest rightly understood is the basic principle of
morality, it behoves us to make sure that the private interest of the
individual shall coincide with the general human interest. If man is
unfree in the materialist sense (this meaning that he is free, not
through the negative power of avoiding this or that, but through the
positive power of fulfilling his own true individuality), it behoves us,
not to punish individual offences, but to destroy the antisocial foci of
crime, and to give every one social space for the manifestation of his
life activities. If man is formed by circumstances, we must make the
circumstances human. If man is social by nature, he can only develop his
true nature in society, and we must measure the power of his nature, not
by the power of the isolated individual, but by the power of society."

With the publication of _The Holy Family_, Marx and Engels broke away
entirely and on general principles from utopism and from the
philanthropic tendencies of the utopists, which had long since become
the mere ornamental trappings of bourgeois charity. What the utopists
had never grasped, namely that socialism must be the outcome of a
historical evolution, and that this evolution must be brought to pass by
a self-conscious and independent movement on the part of the working
class, secured lucid and cogent expression for the first time.

The young tree of historical materialism, though not yet fully cleared
from encumbering tendrils of speculative philosophy, was already growing
vigorously. Its foliage was spreading so lustily, that it could not fail
ere long to occupy the leading place in the garden of the intellect.

### Brussels

The expulsion from Paris and the removal to Brussels involved Marx in
financial difficulties, from which, however, he was speedily extricated
by the prompt and generous help of his new friend and companion-at-arms
Friedrich Engels. From the first day of their friendship, Engels,
self-sacrificing and loyal, was Marx's chief pillar of support alike in
mental and in material affairs.

Writing from Barmen under date February 22, 1845, Engels says: "After
inquiring all over the place, I have at length learned your address from
Cologne, and immediately take up my pen to write to you. As soon as the
news of your expulsion arrived, I thought it expedient to open a
subscription without delay, so that the extra expense in which you are
involved could be shared by us all in communist fashion. The whip-round
met with a ready response. Still, I am not sure whether the sum we have
collected will suffice to give you a fresh start in Brussels, so please
take it as a matter of course that it will be the greatest pleasure in
the world to place at your disposal the fee I hope shortly to receive
for my English literary venture. I can get along without the money just
now, for my governor will have to keep me in funds. We cannot allow the
dogs to enjoy having involved you in pecuniary embarrassment by their
infamous behaviour."

Not long afterwards, Engels went to Brussels. Since meeting Marx in
Paris, he had been busily at work. He had brought back from England
materials concerning the development of capitalist production in that
country, concerning the forms and methods of exploitation, concerning
the conditions under which the British proletariat lived, concerning the
miseries caused by the ruthless employment of children, etc. From these
he had compiled a noteworthy book, _Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in
England_ [The Condition of the Working Class in England]. Published at
Leipzig in the summer of 1845, it attracted wide-spread attention. It
was designed as the first installment of an extensive work upon the
social history of England. He had also planned the issue of a socialist
monthly, in producing which Moses Hess, with whom he was again in close
touch, was to help him. On January 20, 1845, he wrote to Marx: "The
latest news is that on April 1st Hess and I are going to publish the
first number of a new monthly, 'Gesellschaftsspiegel,' which will deal
with the social wretchedness of the day and with the bourgeois regime."
In actual fact, publication was postponed until July 1st, when the
magazine appeared as an "organ to represent the non-possessing classes,
and to throw light on the social conditions of the present day." It had
a short life; but, just as Hess was the first communist, so this monthly
was the first consistent attempt to establish a communist press, the
first attempt to run a periodical in which attention should be
concentrated upon the criticism of economic conditions. Engels, indeed,
had little more to do with the matter, for he was soon fully occupied in
other plans, such as the issue of a German library of the works of
foreign socialist authors, the writing of a critique of Friedrich List,
etc. Furthermore, he had set the whole Wuppertal buzzing by holding
numerous meetings for the propaganda of communism. "Wonders have come to
pass here in Elberfeld," he wrote to Marx. "Yesterday, in the largest
hall and the leading hotel of the town, we held our third communist
meeting. At the first the attendance had been been 40, at the second it
was 130, and at the third it was at least 200. The whole of Elberfeld
and Barmen, from the financial aristocracy down to the shopkeepers, was
represented every one except the proletariat. Hess made a speech; some
of Shelley's poetry and prose was read; also the article about the
extant communist colonies in Püttmann's 'Deutsches Bürgerbuch.'
Afterwards discussion went on till one in the morning. The movement has
caught on. Every one is talking about communism, and adherents flock to
join us from day to day." Still, the movement was speedily suppressed.
Engels was now seriously at variance with his family, and was glad to
seize the opportunity of getting away to Brussels.

He settled down in the Belgian capital for the next few months, living
next door to Marx, and remaining in constant companionship with him. In
the summer, the two men paid a visit to England, where they spent six
weeks. Engels had some private affairs to attend to in Manchester, to
arrange for the transport of his books, and to resume his collaboration
on the staff of various periodicals. His main object, however, was that
Marx should become personally acquainted with England, with British
conditions, with English literature, and with the notable personalities
of the British labour movement. This visit was of considerable value to
Marx, who hunted up literature concerning the history of political
economy and social theories, and got into touch with the leading
Chartists.

Having returned to Brussels, Marx and Engels promptly set to work once
more. In the preface to _The Holy Family_ they had announced: "This
polemical work is a prelude to the independent writings in which we
(each of us, of course, on his own account) shall expound our positive
outlook, and therewith our positive attitude towards the more recent
philosophical and social doctrines." They now set themselves to fulfil
this undertaking, their aim being to settle accounts with the whole body
of post-Hegelian philosophy. At the same time they wished to explain
their present position as contrasted with their own "earlier
philosophical attitude."

Directly he came to Brussels, Engels became aware that Marx had
outstripped and abandoned the "realist humanism" which he had still
advocated in the preface to _The Holy Family_. Marx, a man of fiery
spirit, hastened to slough one philosophical skin after another, so that
Engels, though of a more elastic and sympathetic disposition than Marx,
often found it hard to keep pace with his companion.

It had become clear to Marx that there was "no possibility of
understanding historical reality without a knowledge of industry." For
him, philosophy was no longer the crown and sum of all human knowledge,
and it had therefore become superfluous. In especial he had been led to
this radicalism of insight and judgment by his criticism of Feuerbach.
By the time he had finished writing _The Holy Family_, he had broken
away altogether from Feuerbach.

In the last resort, Feuerbach could not come to terms with the sensible
world. Though he "detested" the realm of abstractions, he could not find
his way out of it. His sensible world was an abstract entity, a
phenomenon that had existed from all eternity, unchanging. He never
understood that this sensible world is the outcome of an interminable
evolution, is the product of innumerable generations, each of which
stands on the shoulders of its predecessor. For him, likewise, man was
an abstract conception. "He clings desperately to nature and man," wrote
Engels, "but for him nature and man are words, and nothing more. He
cannot tell us anything definite either about real nature or about the
real man." The abstract man was the uttermost thing philosophy could
reach after turning away from the idea. It had, indeed, replaced the
idea by man, but at bottom had done nothing more than substitute one
abstraction for another. This was in accordance with the very nature of
philosophy; but when reaching abstract man, philosophy had got no nearer
to the world of reality. Philosophy, then, must be abandoned, if the
real man were to be reached. Now for Marx this real man was man active,
man at work, man engaged in the process of production, man leading a
social life, pushed forward and pulled onward by interests, acting in
history, and thus fulfilling evolution.

The discovery of man, of real, living man, of man making history, was
the pioneer stride taken by Marx beyond Hegel, Bauer, and Feuerbach.

In one of Marx's notebooks dating from this period, among extracts and
annotations in an almost illegible handwriting, have been found the
famous _Theses on Feuerbach_--a formidable boundary stone, as it were,
to indicate the enormous magnitude of the new discovery, and to mark the
advance in the development of Marx's investigations. Engels has
described them as the "splendid germ of a new outlook on the universe."

Here are the theses.

"1. The main defect of all earlier materialism (Feuerbach's included) is
that the object, reality, the sensible, is conceived only under the form
of the object or of contemplation, not as human sensory activity, not as
practice, not subjectively. Hence, in opposition to materialism, the
active side is developed abstractly from idealism, which naturally knows
nothing of actual sensory activity as such. Feuerbach is in search of
sensible objects, really distinguished from the objects of thought; but
he does not grasp human activity itself as objective activity.
Consequently, in the _Essence of Christianity_, he regards only
theoretical behaviour as truly human, whereas practice is only conceived
and fixed in its contaminated Jewish phenomenal form. Hence he does not
understand the importance of revolutionary activity, of
practical-critical activity.

"2. The question whether human thought has circumstantial truth, is not
a theoretical but a practical question. In practice, a man must prove
the truth of his thought, that is to say its reality and power, its
mundaneness. The dispute concerning the reality or unreality of thought
isolated from practice, is a purely scholastic problem.

"3. The materialist doctrine of the transformation of circumstances and
education forgets that circumstances must be altered by men and that the
educator must himself be educated. It therefore has to divide society
into two parts, one of which is elevated above it.

"The coincidence of the changing of circumstances, and human activity or
self-alteration, can only be grasped and rationally understood as
revolutionary practice.

"4. Feuerbach sets out from the fact of religious self-alienation, and
the duplication of the world into a religious world and a mundane one.
His work consists in reducing the religious world to its mundane
foundation. If the mundane foundation lifts itself above itself and
establishes itself in an independent realm in the clouds, that is only
to be explained as an outcome of the dismemberment and
self-contradictoriness of this mundane foundation. The mundane
foundation must, therefore, be understood as practically revolutionized
both in itself and in its contradiction. Thus as soon as the earthly
family has been revealed as the mystery of the holy family, the former
must itself be annihilated both theoretically and practically.

"5. Feuerbach, not content with abstract thinking, wants contemplation;
but he does not conceive the sensible as practical sensory-human
activity.

"6. Feuerbach resolves the essence of religion into the human essence.
But the human essence is not an abstraction in reality, it is the
totality of social relations.

"Feuerbach, who does not enter into the criticism of this real essence,
is therefore compelled:

"(a) To ignore the historical process, to establish the religious
sentiment per se, and to postulate an abstract isolated human
individual.

"(b) The essence, therefore, can only be grasped as a 'species,' as an
inward, dumb generality naturally uniting numerous individuals.

"7. Feuerbach, therefore, does not see that the 'religious sentiment' is
itself a social product, and that the abstract individual he analyses
belongs to a determinate social form.

"8. All social life is essentially practical. All the mysteries which
drive theory into the realm of mysticism, find their rational solution
in human practice and in the understanding of this practice.

"9. The highest to which contemplative materialism attains (the
materialism which does not grasp the sensible as practical activity), is
the contemplation of isolated individuals and of bourgeois society.

"10. The standpoint of the old materialism is bourgeois society; the
standpoint of the new materialism is human society or social humanity.

"11. Philosophers have done nothing more than interpret the world in
various ways; our business is to change it."

These _Theses on Feuerbach_ were penned only as a prelude for the great
settlement of accounts between Marx and Engels, on the one hand, and
Feuerbach, Bauer, Stirner, and all the post-Hegelian philosophers, on
the other.

## Chapter 03: Clarification, Part 2

### _German Ideology_

As the outcome of nearly a year's work (the year extending from
September 1845 to August 1846), Marx and Engels wrote two thick volumes
which were to be published under the title _Die deutsche Ideologie_. A
friend and admirer of Marx, the sometime Lieutenant Weydemeyer, working
in Westphalia as a geometrician, hoped that his brother-in-law Lüning,
the publisher of the "Westfälisches Dampfboot" in Bielefeld, would issue
the new book. The manuscript was sent to him, but the book never
appeared, the reason being, as the authors learned in due course, that
"changed circumstances made it impossible to print it." Nor could any
other publisher be found. "We decided, therefore," wrote Marx at a later
date, "to leave our manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice--and
did so all the more willingly since we had attained our chief purpose,
self-understanding."

Self-understanding all along the line--this was the essential
characteristic of the book. It was "to expose the sheep which regarded
themselves and were regarded as wolves"; it was to show "how the
rodomontade of the expounders of philosophy served merely to reflect the
pitiful character of actual conditions in Germany" it was to make known
to all the world "the process of putrefaction which had set in in the
absolute German spirit."

Such were the aims of its authors. But it did more than this. It freed
Marx and Engels from the last vestiges of philosophical lumber with
which, unwittingly, their thought was still burdened; led them beyond
the criticism of philosophy, of politics, and of economics, to the
criticism of the interpretation of history; and thus revealed to them a
fact of overwhelming importance, that the motive force of history is not
the idea, not criticism, but the revolution, man--revolutionary man.

The discovery of the real, active human being, of man engaged in the
process of making history, as announced in the _Theses on Feuerbach_, is
here followed up by the discovery of revolutionary man. Step by step,
Marx the investigator had made his way to this result.

"The first presupposition of all human history is, of course, the
existence of living human individuals. The first facts to investigate,
therefore, are the bodily organization of these individuals and the
resultant relation between these individuals and the rest of nature."

"All history-writing must set out from these natural foundations and
their modification in the course of history by the action of human
beings."

"We may distinguish human beings from animals by consciousness, by
religion, by anything you please. They them selves begin to distinguish
themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their own means
of subsistence, a step which is necessitated by their bodily
organization. Inasmuch as human beings produce their own means of
subsistence, they indirectly produce their own material life."

"The necessaries of life are, above all, food, drink, shelter, clothing,
and a few others. Hence the first historical act is the production of
the means for the satisfaction of these needs, the production of
material life itself, and this one historical fact is a fundamental
determinant of all history."

"As individuals express their lives, so they are. Thus what they are,
coincides with what they produce; and not only with what they produce,
but with how they produce. Consequently, what individuals are, depends
upon the material conditions of production."

"Determinate individuals, productively active in a determinate way,
therefore enter into determinate social and political relations."

"Social classification and the State are continually proceeding out of
the life process of determinate individuals, not, however, of these
individuals as they may appear to themselves or others, but as they
really are; that is to say as they work, as they are engaged in material
production, as they are active under determinate material limitations,
presuppositions, and conditions which are independent of their will."

"The production of ideas, representations, consciousness, is, primarily,
directly interwoven into the material activity and the material
intercourse of human beings, is the language of actual life.
Representation, thought, the intellectual intercourse of human beings,
arise as the direct outcome of their material behaviour. The same thing
is true of mental production, as displayed in the language of the
politics, the laws, the morality, the religion, the metaphysics, etc.,
of a people. Human beings are the producers of their representations,
ideas, etc.; but the actual working human beings are determined by a
specific evolution of their productive powers and of the appropriate
method of intercourse in its furthest ramifications."

"Consciousness can never be anything other than conscious being, and the
being of man is man's true vital process."

"In sharp contrast with German philosophy, which came down from heaven
to earth, here an ascent is made from earth to heaven. This means that
we do not set out from what men say, fancy, represent to themselves, nor
yet from man as said to be, thought to be, fancied to be, represented to
be, in order thence and by that path to reach man in the flesh; we set
out from real, active human beings, and from their actual vital
processes we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes and
echoes of this vital process. Even the phantasmagorias in the human
brain are necessary supplements of man's material vital process, of a
process that is empirically demonstrable and is linked with material
presuppositions. Morality, religion, metaphysics, and ideology in
general, with their appropriate forms of consciousness, thus forfeit the
semblance of independence. They have no history, no evolution, of their
own. Human beings, developing material production and material
intercourse, and thus altering the real world that environs them, alter
therewith their own thought and the products of their thought.
Consciousness does not determine life, but life determines
consciousness."

"This observation is not devoid of presuppositions. It sets out from
real presuppositions, and never for a moment abandons the ground of the
real. Its presuppositions are human beings, not in any fanciful
circumscription and fixation, but in their actual, empirical,
perceptible developmental process under specific conditions. As soon as
this active vital process has been demonstrated, history ceases to be a
collection of dead facts."

"Once reality has been demonstrated, philosophy as an independent
discipline loses the medium of its existence."

"Not criticism, but revolution, is the motive force of history."

"This conception of history shows that history does not end by resolving
itself into 'self-consciousness' as 'the spirit of spirit'; but that in
history at every stage there exists a material outcome, a sum of
productive forces, a historically created relation to nature and a
historically created relation of individuals one to another, which are
handed down to each successive generation by its predecessor; that there
are in each stage of history a mass of productive forces, capitals, and
circumstances, which are indeed modified by the new generation, but on
the other hand prescribe to the new generation its own vital conditions,
and give to it a definite development, a specific character--so that
circumstances make men quite as much as men make circumstances."

"Finally we obtain the following results from the fully developed
conception of history. 1. In the development of the forces of production
a stage is reached at which productive forces and means of intercourse
are evolved which, under the extant conditions, only do harm; which are
no longer forces of production, but forces of destruction (machinery and
money). In association with this we find that a class is evolved which
has to bear all the burdens of society without enjoying its advantages,
which is forced out of society into the most marked contrast to all
other classes; a class which forms the majority of all the members of
society, and one from which the consciousness of the necessity for a
thorough going revolution, the communist consciousness, proceeds--a
consciousness which, of course, can only arise in the other classes
thanks to the comprehension of the position of this particular class. 2.
The conditions within which determinate forces of production can be
applied, are the conditions of the dominion of a specific class of
society, of a class whose social power (arising out of ownership)
secures practical-idealist expression in the extant form of State, with
the consequence that every revolutionary struggle is directed against a
class which has up to that time been dominant. 3. In all revolutions
that have hitherto taken place, the kind of activity has remained
inviolate, so that there has never been anything more than a changed
distribution of this activity, with a new distribution of labour to
other persons; whereas the communist revolution is directed against the
kind of activity which has hitherto been exercised, and does away with
labour, and makes an end of class rule when it does away with classes,
the reason being that this revolution is brought about by the class
which no longer counts in society as a class, is not recognized as a
class, but is the expression of the dissolution of all classes,
nationalities, etc., within extant society. 4. For the widespread
generation of this communist consciousness, and for the carrying out of
the communist revolution, an extensive change in human beings is needed,
which can only occur in the course of a practical movement, in the
course of a revolution; so that the revolution is not only necessary
because the ruling class cannot be overthrown in any other way, but is
also necessary because only in a revolution can the uprising class free
itself from the old yoke and become capable of founding a new society."

"For us, communism is not a condition of affairs which 'ought' to be
established, not an 'ideal' towards which reality has to direct itself.
When we speak of communism, we mean the actual movement which makes an
end of the present condition of affairs. The determinants of this
movement arise out of the extant presupposition."

The foregoing remarkable passages from the fragment of the work which
has been rescued, and which has been recently published for the first
time at Frankfort-on-the-Main in the opening volume of the "Marx-Engels
Archiv," give no more than an imperfect picture of the mental energy
with which the before-mentioned process of self-understanding was
carried through.

They contain an elementary formulation of the materialist interpretation
of history, which was subsequently to be worked out as a complete
method. Here and there, the actual wording of the extracts is identical
with that of the later elaborated formulation.

### "True" Socialism

The great settlement of accounts with a world of adversaries would have
been incomplete, and the victorious champions in this battle of the
intellects would have remained unsatisfied, had not Marx and Engels, in
the second volume of their _German Ideology_, made a ruthless onslaught
upon "German or true socialism," as voiced "by its various prophets."

Among the "true socialists," perhaps the most notable was Karl Grün, a
Westphalian. He had been one of Marx's fellow students, and Moses Hess
had made him acquainted with Engels. His socialist career had started
from the radical "small-beer liberalism." Then he had coquetted with
Fourierism for a time, until at length, having got into touch with Hess,
he deviated towards early socialism. All possible varieties of socialism
were jumbled together in his head. Out of borrowed and undigested
thoughts from Proudhon, Feuerbach, Hess, and Marx, he had brewed the
most amazing elixir of happiness, whose formulas were aesthetically
tinted and were couched in a feuilleton style. From Paris, writing
hastily and irresponsibly, he sent his lucubrations to the German press,
and especially to the "Triersche Zeitung." He had wrongfully accused
Marx of not protesting with sufficient vigour against expulsion from
France, and Marx, who was always too ready to take offence, had
therefore conceived an animus against Grün which formed the undertone of
a fierce criticism of the latter's attitude towards the problems of
socialism.

Grün had influence among the socialist handicraftsmen and apprentices in
Paris, the "Straubinger" (travelling journeymen) as Engels
contemptuously termed them. Since it was hoped to win them over to
communism, Grün must be discredited. To lay him low in the literary
lists would not suffice. Engels must go to Paris, and there, by personal
intervention, undermine Grün's position. In October 1846, Engels wrote
to Marx from Paris: "I think I shall get my way here with the
Straubinger. The fellows are terribly ignorant, however, and their
condition in life has not prepared them in any way. ... Grün has done a
tremendous lot of harm. He has turned all that was definite in their
minds into mere day-dreams, humanist aspirations, and the like. Under
the pretext of attacking Weitlingism and other systematized forms of
communism, he has filled their heads full of belletristic and
petty-bourgeois phraseology, and has declared that anything else than
his teaching is enslavement to system. Even the joiners, who have never
been Weitlingians (except for a few), have a superstitious horror of
'bread-and-butter communism,' and prefer the most preposterous
day-dreaming, peaceful plans for inaugurating universal happiness, and
so on, to what they call 'bread-and-butter communism.' The most hopeless
confusion prevails." The net upshot of the visit was that Engels, though
he did indeed put an end to Grün's influence, only increased the
confusion, so that the "Straubinger" ceased to be possible recruits for
an international communist league such as Marx and Engels already hoped
to found.

Intellectually, Karl Grün was closely allied with Moses Hess, who was
also living in Paris at this time. Engels, therefore, in his letters
from Paris, was not sparing in savage attacks on the "communist rabbi,"
as Ruge had called Hess. Marx, too, since May 1846, had put Hess upon
the proscription list. Weitling, in a letter to Hess, had informed the
latter regarding Marx's plans and views. "There must be a winnowing in
the communist party. ... Handicraftsmen's communism, philosophical
communism, is to be fought; sentiment is to be despised: these are
merely day-dreams. Communism can only be realized after the bourgeoisie
has got command of the ship." In the struggle between Marx and Weitling,
Hess had taken Weitling's side, and this was enough to infuriate Marx,
and to make him look for a means of crushing Hess. Nevertheless, Moses
Hess, despite many deviations and peculiarities had in the course of his
socialist development come so near to Marx's standpoint, that, as late
as July 28, 1846, Hess wrote to Marx: "I am in full agreement with your
views concerning communist authorship. However necessary it may have
been at the outset that communist endeavours should be linked to German
ideology, it is no less necessary now that they should be based upon
historical and economic premises, for otherwise we shall never be able
to settle accounts either with the 'socialists' or with the adversaries
of all shades of opinion. I am now devoting myself exclusively to
economic literature." Although Marx regarded this declaration as a
"capitulation," in Paris Engels had, as he himself admitted, treated
Hess with "coldness and mockery." Still, in August 1847, when the
Workers' Educational Society (an organization dominated by Marx and
Engels) was founded in Brussels, Hess, who had now settled in that city,
not only became a member of the organization, but was actually elected
president, and, further, collaborated with Marx and Engels as a regular
contributor to the "Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung."

Among the other representatives of "true" socialism, three demand
special mention. Hermann Kriege, a student who had been a disciple of
Feuerbach, had at first aroused great hopes in Engels, but, having
emigrated to New York, founded there a periodical, the "Volkstribun," in
which he advocated a confused form of communism based on brotherly love.
Hermann Püttmann had at one time been on the staff of the "Kölnische
Zeitung," and had then for two years in succession, published the
"Deutsches Bürgerbuch" and the "Rheinische Jahrbücher," which served to
voice the hazy views of a number of freethinking socialist enthusiasts.
Otto Lüning of Bielefeld was the publisher of the "Westfälisches
Dampfboot," a journal which carried on propaganda on behalf of socialist
ideas, and did not shrink from the thought of revolution.

Like the philosophers, the "true" socialists were critically
disembowelled by Marx and Engels according to all the rules of art. It
was continually being made plain, said the critics, that this true
socialism was nothing more than a botched German translation of the
ideas of French socialism, was communism that had been emasculated into
German ideology. In the heads of such eclectic philanthropists, the old
illusion was still firmly fixed that a cleavage in the conceptual world
must inevitably precede a cleavage in the real world of history, the
former bringing the latter to pass. "They endeavoured to hide how
pitiful a part the Germans have played in actual history, by putting the
illusions to which the Germans have always been peculiarly prone on the
same footing with reality. As the Germans have never had a talent for
anything but looking on and looking after, they believed it to be their
mission to sit in judgment on all the world, and they cherished the
illusion that the whole of history was attaining its ultimate aim in
Germany."

Since Marx and Engels were ruthlessly endeavouring to reach
self-understanding, self-laceration could not be avoided. This
self-laceration conjured up an army of adversaries, and involved them
for five years or more in the most venomous personal quarrels. A further
result was that the proletarian united front, which was already in
course of formation, was, prematurely and without any sufficient
objective reason, broken for decades to come. The intolerant way in
which the purging of the communist ranks was effected and in which the
cleavage in the communist camp was brought about, was not the outcome of
unavoidable necessity, not dependent upon the progress of economic
evolution. Its primary cause was Marx's craving for exclusive personal
predominance, which he rationalized into a fanatical confidence in the
conquering power of his own idea.

Beyond question, however, this idea, distilled to absolute purity by a
pitiless process of clarification, and running on ahead of the evolution
of historical reality, pointed the way (like the star of Bethlehem)
which would lead infallibly to liberation. Just as it was the main
service of Moses Hess to deliver socialism from its entanglement with
opposition bourgeois radicalism, so was it the unparalleled service of
Marx and Engels to draw a clear distinction--however remorselessly and
however fanatically, and however much at the cost of unity--between
ethico-philosophical socialism and economic socialism.

### Dialectic

A close scrutiny of Marx's intellectual labours down to this time shows
that for years past, considered as a whole, they had been an
uninterrupted onslaught on Hegel, sometimes direct and sometimes
indirect.

This young man--endowed with a leonine strength and equipped with a
lion's claws, a giant fighting desperately to maintain and increase his
own sense of self-esteem, discountenanced, shunned, and persecuted by
society--dared to measure his forces against those of Hegel, that
monumental figure, universally admired, overtopping all, venerated by
the whole intellectual world.

Marx's writings for years past, against Bruno Bauer, Feuerbach, Stirner,
the Young Hegelians, and the "true" socialists, had, in the last
analysis, been shafts aimed at the Hegelian principle of the absolute,
at the Hegelian priority of the idea, at Hegel's metaphysical trend, at
the aloofness from the world characteristic of Hegel's way of looking at
things, at Hegel's "abstract man." In a word, whatever the ostensible
target, Marx's missiles had really been thrown at Hegel's head. It was
under the stimulus of this profound antagonism that Marx had been
converted to materialism side by side with Feuerbach, had attacked
Hegel's philosophy of right, had advanced from philosophy to politics,
had put man in place of the idea, had substituted the active man for the
abstract man, had replaced criticism by the revolution, and had declared
that the revolutionary proletariat would achieve the fulfilment of
historical evolution.

Throughout: Marx in conflict with Hegel, titan wrestling with titan.

But a work of such fundamental significance as Hegel's system, a
philosophy which had had so overwhelming an influence upon the mental
outlook and the development of an entire nation, could not (as Engels
phrased it) be thrust aside by ignoring it, nor yet overcome by running
atilt against it.

It must be 'superseded' after its own kind, must be dealt with in such a
way that, whilst its form was annihilated by criticism, the new content
with which it had enriched thought would be preserved."

This new content of the Hegelian system was the dialectical method.

When we contemplate things and phenomena, we may proceed by regarding
them one by one, detached from their environment, in abstract isolation.
At times this may be indispensable and useful. But, as a general method,
it leads to unsatisfactory results. The most important characteristics
elude us. In the world there is nothing isolated, there is nothing at
rest, there is nothing to be found apart from all other things, there is
no self-existent phenomenon. Everything is in a flux, dynamically
mobile, interconnected by inseparable ties with the whole world of
phenomena. By the law of becoming, which is realized in the totality of
life, all being is resolved into eternal movement. This movement is
change, is the passage from what has existed to a new condition. Hence
it is logically indispensable to contemplate every thing, every
phenomenon, in all its manifestations and all its interconnexions. The
method which fulfils this demand is the dialectical method, and by that
method the principle of evolution is scientifically justified.

Hegel had gone back to the method of dialectical thought which was in
use already among the ancients, and was advocated, above all, by
Heraclitus. Taking over from Fichte the three stages of thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis, he had replaced the principle of the old
logic "Everything is identical with itself, nothing contradicts itself,"
by the new principle "Nothing is identical with itself and everything
contradicts itself." In accordance with this principle, he conceived
every notion as a necessary product of the interaction of two antecedent
notions, which, their oppositions having been fused into a new unity,
had both been subsumed in the higher notion. To notions, concepts, or
ideas, he ascribed a validity which was not eternal or absolute, but
merely transient and historical. "According to Hegel," says Engels, "the
truth to be recognized by philosophy was no longer a collection of
ready-made dogmatic propositions which, once discovered, had merely to
be learned by heart. Truth lay in the very process of cognition, in the
long historical evolution of science, rising from lower to ever higher
stages of knowledge, but never reaching (by the discovery of a so-called
absolute truth) the point beyond which no advance would be possible, the
point at which all we should have to do would be to fold our arms and go
on admiring the absolute truth that had been won. ... Every stage is
necessary, that is to say justified for the time and under the
conditions out of which it arises; but it becomes invalid and forfeits
its justification under new and higher conditions which gradually
develop within its own womb; it has to give place to a higher stage,
which in its turn will decay and perish. ... Thus this dialectical
philosophy does away with any thought of permanent, absolute truth, and
of absolutely final conditions for man-kind dependent on such a truth.
To the dialectical philosophy, nothing is final, absolute, or sacred;
everything is transient, subject to an uninterrupted process of becoming
and disappearing, of an unending ascent from the lower to the
higher-dialectic itself being no more than a reflexion of that process,
a reflexion within the thinking brain." Hegel gave several definitions
of the term dialectic as he understood it. In his _Encyclopoedia_ he
says that true dialectic is the inner and progressive transition of one
explanation into another, in course of which it becomes manifest that
the explanations of the understanding are one-sided and narrowly
limited, this meaning that each of them contains its own negation. All
this acquires its peculiar character in that it does away with itself.
In his _Logic_ he describes the dialectical developmental process
brought about by the play of the internal oppositions. He says that the
forward movement begins with abstract and simple concepts or categories,
and passes into the next concepts, which continually become richer and
more concrete. At every stage of the enlarged particular concept, the
whole mass of its earlier content resurges; and, in the course of the
dialectical development, none of this earlier content is lost, for,
rather, all succeeding new acquisitions are borne onward with the rest,
so that the whole is an enriched condensation. The climax is reached in
the absolute idea. In Hegel's _Science of Logic_ we read: "The
immediate, moving in this negative direction, has been submerged in the
other, but the other, essentially, is not an empty negative, not
nothing, as is assumed to be the ordinary result of dialectic; it is the
other of the first, the negative of the immediate; thus it is determined
as the mediate, contains the determination of the first in itself. Thus
the first is preserved and maintained in the process of alteration."

Hegel was an idealist. He regarded the idea as the living soul of the
world, and in accordance with this it was natural that for him dialectic
should play its primary part in the realm of ideas. Only in that the
dialectically won concept "alienated itself," did it undergo
transformation into nature, "where it experiences new development,
unconscious of itself, clothed as natural necessity, and at long last
returns to self-consciousness in man. Thenceforward, in the course of
history, this self-consciousness works itself up again from the raw,
until at length, in the Hegelian philosophy, the absolute idea comes to
itself fully once again. Thus, for Hegel, the dialectical development
which occurs in nature and history (that is to say the causal
interconnexion of the progressive movement from lower to higher, the
progressive movement which is continuous despite zigzags and momentary
reverses), is nothing but an enfeebled copy of the spontaneous movement
of the idea, that movement which has been going on from all eternity, no
one knows where, but in any case independent of the thinking human
brain." (Engels.)

On first coming into contact with Hegelianism, Marx had recognized
conceptual dialectic to be a speculative mystification, without,
however, questioning or rejecting the dialectical method per se. When,
subsequently, he was led to materialism by Feuerbach, he was able to
free dialectic from its idealist trappings, and to translate the
mirror-writing of abstraction into a readable, concrete formula. Then it
was seen that reality is not a mere reflexion of ideas; but, conversely,
that ideas are copies of reality, copies formed by a materialistic
process. In this way the Hegelian conceptual dialectic, which had been
standing on its head, was turned back on to its feet, and exhibited
itself as a factual dialectic.

When, still later, Marx broke away from Feuerbach, he did so (as we
know) because the materialism of the objective world of nature had for
him been transformed into a materialism of social conditions which,
dialectically regarded, present themselves as the outcome of processes.
In so far as man acts on nature external to himself, in the course of
this action he modifies his own nature. The production of the idea and
of concepts takes place in close connexion with the material activities
of men and with their material relations. Man's being is the real
process of his life. Cognition, therefore, can be nothing else than the
cognition of this actual being. This being of man, a series of
processes, was disclosed by Marx (when he developed philosophy into
politics) to be the production of material life, to be a succession of
struggles for power, struggles undertaken on behalf of interests. These
interests, economic interests, relate to the domain of production, to
the field of political economy. Now here it was plain that the struggles
which arise in connexion with the production of the material necessaries
of life, are carried on between classes which confront one another as
hostile powers.

Marx was not the original discoverer of this. He found the notion
ready-made in English and French sociological literature, and beyond
question Engels must have directed his attention to some of these
sources. "Since the establishment of large-scale industry," writes
Engels in his essay _Ludwig Feuerbach_, "that is to say at least since
the peace of 1815, it has been no secret in England that the whole
political struggle in that country turns upon the rival claims of two
classes, the aspirations of the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie
respectively to achieve dominion. In France, the same fact became
obvious when the Bourbons returned to power. The historians of the
Restoration period, Thierry, Guizot, Mignet, and Thiers, all presented
this idea to their readers as the key for the understanding of French
history since the Middle Ages. From 1830 onwards, both in England and in
France, it was recognized that the working class, the proletariat, had
become a third competitor in the struggle for power. Conditions had been
so greatly simplified that nothing but wilful blindness could hide from
the observer the struggle among these three great classes, could prevent
the recognition that the conflict of their interests is the motive force
of modern society. This is true, at any rate, as regards the two most
advanced countries."

In this conflict of interests, bourgeoisie and proletariat are related
each to the other as thesis and antithesis. The dialectical process
works itself out as a class struggle, which carries the movement on
beyond the oppositions of the antithetical relation. A new society,
socialist society, appears as a synthesis.

Thus Marx, investigating, drawing inferences, shaping things in his
mind, welding link into link to form a chain, evolved the Feuerbachian
materialism of nature into a materialism of society, transformed the
abstract conceptual dialectic of Hegel into a concrete factual
dialectic, saw the dialectical contradiction incorporated in classes,
and recognized the dialectical process in the class struggle. In this
way he was led to a new dialectic, a new conception or interpretation of
history.

Nay more, he came to regard socialism as a logical upshot of
historico-economic evolution, arising in virtue of an inherent law.

Engels made the same scientific discovery. He reached it as the outcome
of practical experience and direct observation in England. In that
country, the contradictions inherent in the capitalist method of
production, working themselves out in the form of social conflicts, had
been manifest to him in all their nudity. Already in the
"Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher" he had incorporated the gist of his
observations and deductions upon these matters in two articles,
embodying entirely new outlooks.

This discovery sufficed to show that he was the predestined collaborator
of Marx.

### _Misère de la Philosophie_

According to Hegel, human beings are puppets, jerked hither and thither
on the stage of life by the strings to which they are suspended--the
strings of the idea.

Feuerbach describes them as real human beings, gives them flesh and
blood, but they do not know how to set about their business.

In Marx's hands they at length become independent actors, performing
their own drama on their own stage. They experience history, and fulfil
it, in actual practice. They are not in the leading strings of a higher
will, are not subordinated to an idea outside themselves, are not guided
by a consciousness existing apart from themselves and working towards
its own preconceived ends. There is no prompter in the wings. They are
independent beings; they act solely in accordance with the dictates of
their own human interests.

These interests, in Marx's view, are directed towards effecting man's
mastery over nature, towards safeguarding human existence, towards
promoting the expansion of that existence by the development of the
forces of production and of social relations. In a society divided into
classes, the respective classes pursue their rival interests amid the
vicissitudes of the class struggle. The aim of the proletarian class
struggle is the establishment of a socialist society. The way thither is
through revolution.

From year to year, in one book after another, and with increasing
definiteness, Marx had been developing these ideas in all their
convincing inexorability. The results of his process of
self-clarification, at the outset no more than little tongues of flame
in the thorny thicket of philosophical confusion, had gradually become a
circle of lights, and had then taken the form of torches borne onwards
in proletarian hands as a demonstration making its progress through an
intimidated world. But this did not suffice our titan. Now a lighthouse
was to be erected, shedding its beams far and wide over the whole extent
of the globe; a conflagration was to be inaugurated, bringing society
and civilization face to face with an inevitable destiny.

Marx's next book, _Misère de la philosophie_ (1847), penned and
published in Brussels, achieved this end.

_Misère de la philosophie_ [Poverty of Philosophy] was a polemic in
answer to Proudhon's _Système des contradictions économiques, ou
philosophie de la misère_ [System of Economic Contradictions, or
Philosophy of Poverty], which had appeared earlier in the same year. The
talks the two men had had in Paris had not brought Proudhon over to
Marx's way of thinking, or at any rate Proudhon had not followed Marx in
the latter's new thought-trend. In the preface to the _Poverty of
Philosophy_ Marx writes banteringly: "Monsieur Proudhon enjoys the
misfortune of being misunderstood in a peculiar way. In France, he is
excused for being a bad economist because he is regarded as thoroughly
well versed in German philosophy; in Germany, on the other hand, he is
excused for being a bad philosopher because he is regarded as one of the
most outstanding among French economists. Being myself both German and
economist, I feel it incumbent on me to lodge a protest against this
twofold error." In a letter to Marx, Proudhon had referred to his
forthcoming volume and had said: "I await the lash of your criticism."
He was to receive a lashing unexampled in its severity!

Marx scourged Proudhon with a criticism so remorseless, dismembered the
philosopher of poverty with so unsparing a hand, roasted his victim so
unmercifully, that there could no longer be any question of friendship
between the pair. Some, even, who had little concern with the quarrel,
were outraged that controversy should be conducted in such a tone. In
earlier and subsequent disputes with more formidable opponents, with
foemen more worthy of his steel, Marx was more lenient. On this occasion
he excelled himself in cut and thrust, in sovereign contempt, in
self-confident scorn for his adversary. The book was not so much a
criticism as a liquidation. The enemy's ship was positively blown out of
the water.

There was something more, however, than an impressive public execution,
for here a man of genius was engaged in the work of creation. When
making a clearance of the remnants of speculative illusion, when
revealing all the inconsistency of utopian romanticism, when pillorying
the half-heartedness and obliquity and folly of economic quackery, he
was clearing the ground on which science could erect the solid edifice
of a new interpretation of history and a new theory of society.

In the _Misère de la philosophie_, Marx for the first time gives a
concrete and comprehensive account of the materialist interpretation of
history, which hitherto in his writings has been referred to only in
passing, sketchily and allusively. Now he expresses his theory in
unambiguous terms. He declares that economic production, and the social
stratification which is its necessary outcome, form, in each historical
epoch, the foundations of the political and ideological history of this
epoch. The whole course of history down to our own times has been a
history of class struggles. Today, these class struggles have reached a
phase of development at which the exploited and oppressed class of the
proletariat cannot effect its liberation from the bourgeoisie without a
revolutionary transformation of society at large. Such, in broad
outline, is the theory of historical materialism.

At a later date, Marx described the tenor of his book in the following
terms: "I showed therein how little Proudhon had penetrated into the
mystery of scientific dialectic; and how, on the other hand, he shared
the illusions of speculative philosophy, inasmuch as, instead of
regarding economic categories as the theoretical expressions of
historical relations of production corresponding to a definite
evolutionary phase of material production, he wandered off into the
belief that they were pre-existent and everlasting ideas, and returned
by this devious path to the outlook of bourgeois economics.

"I showed, further, that his acquaintance with the 'political economy'
which he was venturing to criticize was defective, worthy of a
schoolboy; and that he set out in company with the utopists in search of
a so-called 'science' which was to provide an a priori formula for the
'solution of the social problem,' instead of creating the science out of
a critical knowledge of the historical movement--a movement which itself
produces the material conditions of emancipation. In especial I showed
how Proudhon continued to hold unclarified, fallacious, and half-hearted
views concerning the basis of the whole, concerning exchange-value,
mistaking the utopian interpretation of the Ricardian theory of value
for the foundation of a new science. As to his general standpoint, I may
sum up my judgment as follows:

"Every economic relation has a good and a bad side; that is the only
matter in which Monsieur Proudhon does not slap his own face. He
considers that the good side is presented by the economists, and that
the bad side is brought into accusatory relief by the socialists. He
borrows from the economists the necessity of the eternal relations; he
borrows from the socialists the illusion that poverty is nothing more
than poverty (instead of recognizing in poverty the revolutionary and
destructive trend which will overthrow the old society). He agrees with
both parties, endeavouring to prop himself by the authority of science.
For him, science is reduced to the dwarfed stature of a scientific
formula; he is always on the hunt for formulas. Monsieur Proudhon,
therefore, plumes himself on having effectively criticized both
political economy and communism--although both are far above his head.
He stands below the economists because, as a philosopher possessed of a
magical formula, he believes himself competent to enter into purely
economic details; and he stands below the socialists because he has
neither sufficient courage nor yet sufficient insight (were it but
purely speculative insight) to lift himself above the bourgeois
horizon."

The first part of the book deals with use-value and exchange-value,
constitutive value and synthetic value, labour time, money, and surplus
labour; the second part discusses the division of labour and machinery,
competition and monopoly, landed property and land-rent, strikes and
working-class combination. The reader is amazed to find how perfectly
Marx is already acquainted with the anatomy of bourgeois society. He has
studied the whole body of the literature bearing on the question. He
quotes Adam Smith and Ricardo, refers to Lauderdale, Sismondi, Storch,
Atkinson, Hodgkin, Thompson, Edmonds, Bray, John Stuart Mill, Sadler, to
Cooper the American, to the French writers Boisguilbert, Quesnay, Say,
and Lemontey. He puts his finger on all Proudhon's weak spots, discloses
every one of the speculative entanglements, and makes merry over his
adversary's utopian confusions.

The following passages are of especial importance as regards the
foundation and the formulation of the materialist interpretation of
history.

"A true philosopher, Monsieur Proudhon stands everything on its head,
and discerns in actual relations nothing more than the incarnation of
those principles, of those categories, which (as Monsieur Proudhon the
philosopher tells us) slumber in the womb of the 'impersonal reason of
humanity.' Monsieur Proudhon, the economist, knows well enough that
human beings make cloth, linen, silk, under specific productive
relations. But what he has failed to grasp is that these specific social
relations are just as much products of human activity as are cloth,
linen, etc. The social relations are intimately interconnected with the
forces of production. With the acquisition of new productive forces, men
modify their method of production; and as they modify the method of
production, as they change the way in which they make their livelihood,
they simultaneously transform all the relations of social life. The
handmill produces a society with feudal lords, the powermill produces a
society with industrial capitalists. But these same human beings, who
create social relations in accordance with the material relations of
production, also create principles, ideas, categories, in accordance
with social relations. Thus these ideas, these categories, are no more
eternal than the relations they express. They are historical, transitory
products."

"Let us assume, with Monsieur Proudhon, that real history, in its
temporal succession, is the historical succession in which ideas,
categories, principles, have manifested themselves. Each principle has
had its own century, in which it has revealed itself. For instance, the
principle of authority has had the eleventh century, just as the
principle of individualism has had the eighteenth. Logically, therefore,
the century belongs to the principle, not the principle to the century.
In other words, the principle makes history, history does not make the
principle. If we then ask, in the hope of saving principles as well as
history, why this principle has revealed itself in the eleventh century,
and that one in the eighteenth century, and neither the one nor the
other in some other century, we are necessarily compelled to enter into
details, and to inquire what the men of the eleventh and the eighteenth
century were like, what were their respective needs, their forces of
production, their method of production, the raw materials out of which
they produced, and what, finally, were the relations between man and
man, the relations proceeding out of all these conditions of existence.
Well now, to study all these questions, does not that mean to study the
actual mundane history of human beings in each century; to describe
these human beings as at one and the same time the authors of and the
actors in their own drama? But as soon as we come to regard human beings
as the actors in and the authors of their own history, we have, after a
detour, found our way back to the real starting-point, for we have
dropped the eternal principles whence we set out."

"Providence, a providential aim, this is the high-sounding phrase
wherewith, nowadays, the course of history is to be explained. In
reality, the word or the phrase explains nothing, being at most a
rhetorical form, one of many ways in which the facts can be paraphrased.
It is a fact that landed property in Scotland has acquired enhanced
value thanks to the development of industry, because the development of
industry has opened new markets for wool. For the production of wool on
the large scale, ploughlands have had to be put under grass. To effect
this transformation, estates must be centralized, and small holdings
must be abolished. Thousands of smallholders must be driven from their
homes, must be replaced by a few shepherds who guard millions of sheep.
Thus the outcome of land ownership in Scotland is, through successive
transformations, that men are driven off the land by sheep. If you then
declare that it has been the providential aim of land ownership in
Scotland to have men driven off the land by sheep, you will have written
history as it appears to those who believe in providence."

"Monsieur Proudhon knows no more of the Hegelian dialectic than its
manner of speech. His own dialectical method consists in a dogmatic
distinction between good and evil. Well, let us take Monsieur Proudhon
himself as category; let us study his good and his bad sides, his merits
and his defects. If, as compared with Hegel, he has the merit of
propounding problems which he proposes to solve for the benefit of
mankind, he has, on the other hand, the defect of utter sterility as
soon as he is concerned to call a new category into life by the activity
of dialectical procreation. What characterizes the dialectical movement
is the coexistence of two opposed aspects, the conflict between them,
and their issue in a new category. The exclusive attempt to eliminate
the bad side, cuts the dialectical movement in twain."

"Economic conditions begin by transforming the masses of the population
into [manual wage] workers. The regime of capital has created for this
mass a common situation, joint interests. Thus this mass is already a
class confronting capital, though not yet aware of its own position as a
class. ... The interests it defends, become class interests. Now, a
struggle of class against class is a political struggle."

"The existence of an oppressed class is the vital condition of every
society based upon class oppositions. Consequently, the liberation of
the oppressed class necessarily involves the creation of a new society.
If the oppressed class is to be able to liberate itself, it must have
reached a stage at which the already acquired forces of production and
the extant social institutions can no longer continue to exist side by
side. Of all the instruments of production, the greatest productive
force is the revolutionary class itself. The organization of the
revolutionary elements as a class presupposes the existence of all the
forces of production which can develop within the womb of the old
society."

"Just as a necessary condition for the liberation of the third estate,
of the bourgeois estate, was the abolition of all estates and of all
orders, so the necessary condition for the liberation of the working
class is the abolition of all classes. In the course of its development,
the working class will replace the old bourgeois society by an
association which will exclude classes and their oppositions; and there
will no longer be any kind of political authority, properly speaking,
seeing that political authority is the official expression of the class
conflicts within bourgeois society. Pending this development, the
struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie is a struggle of class
against class, a struggle which, when it attains its highest expression,
is a complete revolution. Need we wonder that a society founded upon
class oppositions should culminate in crass contradiction, in the
collision of man with man, as ultimate outcome? It is an error to say
that the social movement excludes the political movement. There is no
political movement which is not a social movement at the same time. Not
until things are so ordered that there are no classes and no class
oppositions, will social evolutions cease to be political revolutions."

The foregoing paragraphs read like a rough draft of the _Communist
Manifesto_. There can be no question that the _Misère de la philosophie_
was a preliminary sketch (and though preliminary, a ripe one) of that
classical document which, six months later, in the sultry atmosphere of
the days just before the revolution of 1848, was to fall as a gift from
destiny into the lap of the unsuspecting proletariat.

### Before March

If (as Marx considers) thoughts and ideas are reflexions of the
realities of life, reflexions of practical experiences, then the
thoughts and theories of Marx himself must have had a sub-stratum in the
economic and political conditions of his day. His theories must be
demonstrable as the materials of the world that environed Marx, when
they had been transformed within the human head.

If we analyse the social situation, the economic life, and the political
relations of the eighteen-forties, what picture do we get?

There were abundant indications that a revolution was imminent in
continental Europe. In France, the bourgeoisie had risen to power in
1830, but only the topmost stratum of the bourgeoisie, the financial
aristocracy. The members of this stratum had understood very well
how--with the aid of State loans, contracts for supplies to the
government, corruption, speculation, shady financial manoeuvres,
etc.--to turn their dominant position to account as a means of
enrichment. "The July monarchy," says Marx, "was nothing but a
joint-stock company for the exploitation of the national wealth of
France, the dividends being shared out among ministers of State, the
chambers, 240,000 electors, and their hangers-on. Louis Philippe was the
director of the company."

As time went on, however, industrial capital, favoured by the long
series of discoveries in the fields of natural science and technique and
by the extensive development of machinery, attained such proportions,
that it began to bulk more imposingly than financial capital, and was
able to aspire towards the control of the government. It began to regard
itself as the leading element of the national economy and as the main
pillar of the State, rose in revolt against the banking magnates and the
lords of the stock exchange who would fain have kept it in tutelage
while neglecting its interests, and demanded its share in legislative
authority. Simultaneously with the voicing of these claims, there was
heard, like a threatening echo, a murmur from the depths of the
proletariat. Among the workers, innumerable groups, secret societies,
and sects, led by a motley crowd of reformers, enthusiasts, apostles of
universal happiness, and would-be shapers of the future, were in search
of a way out of unutterable wretchedness towards a better, a more human
existence.

Marx's stay in Paris, his exhaustive study of socialist literature, his
intercourse with notable representatives of utopian schools and systems,
had led him into the centre of this fermenting and struggling world. It
was, we must remember, not only a world of ideas and theories, but also,
and above all, a world in which hecatombs of men were perishing of
hunger and unregulated toil, in which sweat and tears poured down the
faces of overworked women, in which the poverty of exploited children
cried to heaven.

In Germany, too, the bourgeoisie, thanks to the enormous advance in the
forces of production, had taken on a new and powerful impetus during the
thirties and forties. Marx has given us a vigorous description of the
situation of the various classes of the population at that time: "The
bourgeoisie was becoming aware of its own strength, and was determined
to break the chains wherewith feudal and bureaucratic despotism had
fettered its commercial enterprise, its industrial capacity, its united
activities as a class. Some of the landed gentry had already devoted
themselves to the production of commodities for the market; this section
had identical interests with the bourgeoisie, and made common cause with
it. The petty bourgeoisie was discontented, grumbled at the burden of
taxation, complained of the hindrances that were imposed upon its
business activities, but had no definite programme of reforms that might
safeguard its position in the State and in society. The peasantry was
weighed down, partly by the burdens of the feudal system, and partly by
the extortions of usurers and lawyers. The urban workers were partners
in the general discontent, were inspired with an equal hatred for the
government and for the great industrial capitalists, and were being
infected with socialist and communist ideas. In a word, the opposition
consisted of a heterogeneous mass, driven onward by the most diversified
interests, but led, more or less, by the bourgeoisie. On the other hand,
in Prussia, there was a government lacking the support of public
opinion, one from which part even of the nobility had become
disaffected, relying for its maintenance upon an army and a bureaucracy
which from day to day were increasingly influenced by the ideas of the
bourgeois opposition. Furthermore, it was a government whose treasury
was empty, and one which could not raise a penny towards balancing the
ever-increasing deficit without capitulating to the bourgeois
opposition."

Thus revolution was in the air, in Germany no less than in France. The
bourgeoisie was beginning to pay attention to the social problem and to
the question of the revolution. In the periodical press, there was an
increasing stream of articles upon labour, pauperism, the reform of
society, the harmfulness of competition and monopolies, free trade and
protection, socialism, and the like. After the weavers' rising in the
Eulengebirge, even the "Kölnische Zeitung" (a semi-official organ),
followed the example of the liberal journals, and opened a collection
for the benefit of the widows and children of the fallen rebels. Jung
wrote to Marx: "Day after day, pauperism, socialism, and so on, a rag
here, a rag there--at length the German philistine comes to believe what
is thus buzzed in his ears without alarming him too much. In the end, he
would actually share out, if he were told every day for a few years it
was necessary." Communist clubs and cliques were formed on all hands,
and these held meetings and engaged in discussions without asking
permission of the police. Writing to Marx from Barmen as early as 1844,
Engels said: "You may turn whithersoever you please, you will stumble
over communists." In an article for Owen's "New Moral World," under date
December 14, 1844, he announced that within the brief space of a year a
powerful socialist party had come into existence in Germany, a
middle-class affair for the nonce, but hoping soon to get into touch
with the working class. The frozen crust of reaction was beginning to
break up. March 1848, was near at hand.

Of course, this revolution could not, in the circumstances, be anything
more than a bourgeois revolution, designed to liberate the forces of the
capitalist economy, and to establish a form of State that would be
appropriate to the needs and interests of the bourgeoisie. If the German
bourgeoisie were not to lag behind its foreign competitors in the
development of its productive forces and in the expansion of its field
of economic activity, if it were not to forfeit its laboriously acquired
access to the world market, it must win control over the State
apparatus, and thus ensure its position in the world. For the German
bourgeoisie, victory or defeat of the revolution signified advance or
withdrawal in the immediate necessities of life and development.

Thanks to the study of history, and thanks to the insight into the
determinism of the historical process which he had secured by means of
the materialist interpretation of history, Marx had come to realize that
the success of the bourgeois revolution would, while fulfilling the
demands of the bourgeoisie, leave the hopes and claims of the masses
unsatisfied. The nature of the epoch in which he was living was fully
revealed to him he understood it, and he looked beyond it. His gaze
ranged across the age that was to follow. Thinking in decades, reckoning
in generations, he contemplated the bourgeois revolution in historical
perspective as the threshold of the subsequent revolution, the
proletarian revolution. Here and now, the social revolution would only
be procreated, not yet born. Whereas the bourgeois looked to the
imminent revolution to end his struggles and gratify his wishes, Marx
knew that the revolutionary process then beginning would not close until
the bourgeois system of society had been annihilated.

Nevertheless, Marx recognized that, as a matter of historical necessity,
the bourgeois revolution must first be helped onward to victory. Only
upon the trail broken by the bourgeoisie, could the proletariat advance
along the course marked out for it by history. What had happened to the
proletariat in England, France, and America, gave plain demonstration
that the winning of political power by the bourgeoisie did not merely
put new political weapons into the hands of the workers, but, permitting
the workers to constitute themselves into a political party without any
breach of the law, enabled them to occupy a far more favourable position
on the political fighting front.

Marx, therefore, did everything in his power to assist the coming of the
bourgeois revolution. In Brussels, he got into touch with the radicals
of the town, took part in the foundation of the Democratic League,
became its vice-president, and, as delegate of the league, spoke at the
meeting held in London during 1847 in support of the Poles. He also
contributed to the "Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung," a journal of
revolutionary trend, run by Bornstedt, sometime editor of the Paris
"Vorwärts." After a time, Marx and his adherents were able to get the
periodical entirely under their influence and to dictate its position
upon topical questions, such as those relating to protection and free
trade. In the columns of the "Brüsseler," he and Engels carried on a
vigorous campaign against Karl Heinzen, a revolutionary phrasemonger
who, having fled from Germany to escape a charge of lese-majesty, was
advocating a loudmouthed communism of his own manufacture. Another
campaign was directed against Hermann Wagener, assistant judge in one of
the ecclesiastical courts, who was endeavouring in the "Rheinischer
Beobachter" to win adherents for a hybrid doctrine halfway between State
socialism and Christian socialism. One example will suffice to show how
Marx dealt with this adversary: "The social principles of Christianity
have now had eighteen hundred years for their development, and do not
need any further development at the hands of Prussian consistorial
councillors. The social principles of Christianity find justifications
for the slavery of classical days, extol mediaeval serfdom, and are
ready in case of need to defend the oppression of the
proletariat--somewhat shamefacedly perhaps. The social principles of
Christianity preach the need for a dominant and an oppressed class,
expressing the pious hope that the former will deal kindly with the
latter. The social principles of Christianity declare that all infamies
will be spiritually compensated in heaven, the assertion being made a
justification for the continuance of these infamies on earth. According
to the social principles of Christianity, all the misdeeds wrought by
the oppressors on the oppressed, are either a just punishment for
original sin and other sins, or else are trials which the Lord in his
wisdom sends to afflict the redeemed. The social principles of
Christianity preach cowardice, self-contempt, abasement, subjection,
humility, in a word, all the qualities of the mob; whereas for the
proletariat, which does not wish to allow itself to be treated as a mob,
courage, self-esteem, pride, and independence, are far more necessary
than bread. The social principles of Christianity are obsequious, but
the proletariat is revolutionary." Therewith Wagener was put to silence
for the time--to crop up again in due course as editor of the
"Kreuzzeitung," a pious periodical. Here, Bruno Bauer was his right-hand
man.

The most weighty and the most distressing of the conflicts Marx waged in
Brussels was the one with Wilhelm Weitling, the only distinguished
utopian socialist in Germany, a man of character and ability. A working
tailor from Magdeburg, he had as an apprentice in Paris absorbed the
ideas of Saint-Simon and Fourier. Subsequently, in Switzerland,
prosecuted as an ardent propagandist, he had endured a long term of
imprisonment. Then his book, _Die Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit_,
had attracted widespread attention. Marx had been enthusiastic about it,
welcoming it as "a brilliant literary debut," and predicting a happy
future for the proletariat after so excellent a start. But when Weitling
turned up in Brussels, and joined the Workers' Educational Society
there, it became apparent that his development had proceeded no further,
and that he had become infected with inordinate vanity, with an undue
sense of superiority. He was continually talking about utopias and
conspiracies, and imagined himself a prey to the persecution of envious
rivals. One day, when Marx insisted upon the rejection of fanciful and
overenthusiastic schemes for universal happiness (passing by the name of
communism), Welding advocated the cause of the utopists, the dispute
leading to an open breach between him and Marx. Since the latter had an
unhappy talent for introducing personal animus into theoretical
disputes, the relations between the two men were poisoned henceforward,
and they became irreconcilable enemies.

Unconcerned whether he made friends or enemies, Marx, amid all the
ferment and confusion of a troublous time, devoted himself relentlessly
to clarifying the theory of the class struggle. With inexorable
steadfastness, he continued to make this theory the centre of his
thought process. He was the first to conceive of socialism as the
outcome of an automatic evolution, was the first for whom the severance
from utopism was a matter of principle. Moreover, he was the first to
regard the proletarian masses as the fulfillers of the evolution to
socialism. He was the first to look upon capitalism as an inevitable
phase of development, as an economic and political fact which could not
be argued out of the world or evaded by tactical manoevres. He,
likewise, was the first who fully identified himself in his whole
outlook with the social position of the proletariat, which he declared
to be a daily and hourly class struggle. He attacked with the fierceness
of an angry lion everything which threatened to obscure this clear line
of advance, or tended to confuse the unambiguous consistency of the
tactic of the class struggle.

The utopists, too, had their gaze fixed upon a socialist future, and
fought on behalf of a social ideal. But their aim was to upbuild their
social edifice as the top story of the feudalist building, either
circumventing capitalism, or else attempting to come to an understanding
with capitalism. What they announced as a doctrine of salvation, came
from them as a gift from above, bestowed by a patron, and with a
philanthropic gesture. They were animated by ethical impulses, or by
sentimentalism; were moved by compassion, overwhelmed by pity, spurred
on by hatred. It was inevitable that their socialism should remain a
cloud castle, because they failed to understand the most elementary, the
most essential feature of all society--reality. Also, because they
failed to discern the inner causality of the historical
process-dialectic. Also, to conclude, because they believed that it was
possible to dispense with the living motive force of the movement
leading to socialism--the class-conscious fighting proletariat.

Marx drew a sharp line between himself and these utopists. In daily
combats, which were continually raising up against him new troops of
foes, he went on demonstrating that his socialism was the only genuine,
the only sound variety.

### The Workers' Educational Society

Through the activities of Marx and Engels, in the course of two or three
years Brussels had become a centre of communist propaganda.

From the Belgian capital there issued to every quarter of the world
strong and persistent currents of incitement, calls to arms,
clarification, and influence. Here were centred countless threads of
communication with all revolutionary foci; with representatives of the
communist idea; with kindred movements in France, England, Germany,
Poland, and Switzerland--though as yet these movements may have been
based on other principles.

By means of an extensive correspondence with all persons who held modern
ideas and were in any way worth considering from the standpoint of
communism, new meshes were perpetually being woven in the network of
relations. Engels, in repeated journeys to Paris, supplemented the
information received from friends in that city, enrolled and trained new
collaborators, helped to clarify the Babel-like confusion of utopism.
The teachings of Saint-Simon and Fourier were obsolete, and lived on
only as a tradition; but Cabet, Weitling, and Proudhon had taken the
place of the two great utopists, and had as supporters a great number
both of intellectuals and of manual workers. There were also
confusionists like Karl Grün, conspirators like Mazzini, Christian
socialists, and all kinds of sentimental reformers, each of them with a
following of his own.

In this medley, Brussels had become a quiescent pole and a Mecca for a
number of serious-minded persons who were interested in communism,
wished to discuss important questions with Marx or Engels, needed their
advice, desired enlightenment, or offered collaboration. From London had
come, besides Wilhelm Weitling, Wilhelm Wolff, the Silesian, who soon
became one of Marx's most trusted adherents. From Switzerland came
Sebastian Seiler; from Westphalia, Joseph Weydemeyer; from the
Wuppertal, Kriege, on his way to America. Engels brought back with him
from Paris the talented young compositor Stephan Born. A number of
adherents were also found in Brussels: above all, Gigot, an employee in
the public library; and Heilberg, who published a small working-class
newspaper.

The general centre of this movement was formed by the Workers'
Educational Society, which had been founded in connexion with the
Democratic League. The meetings of the society were held on Wednesdays
and Saturdays, when questions of the day were discussed, lectures were
given, weekly reports were read, and so on. Writing of them to Herwegh,
Marx said: "We debate matters in a thoroughly parliamentary fashion,
hold conversations, have songs, declamation, theatricals, etc. ... If
you would only come over, you would find that even as regards direct
propaganda there is more to be done in little Belgium than in big
France." One of the revolutionists who were assembled in Brussels had
little sympathy with the doings of the society--Bakunin. He and Marx had
already got into touch with one another in Paris. A Russian of Bakunin's
circle had then described Marx in the following words: "Marx is of a
type composed of energy, a strong will, and inviolable conviction; of a
very remarkable type, too, in externals. He has a thick crop of black
hair, hairy hands, an overcoat buttoned awry; but he looks like one
endowed with the right and the power of demanding respect, however he
may look and whatever he may do. His movements are awkward, yet bold and
self-confident. His manners conflict sharply with the ordinary
conventions of social life. He is proud, somewhat contemptuous, and his
harsh voice, with a metallic ring, is admirably suited to his
revolutionary opinions about persons and things."

Bakunin and Marx differed glaringly in their respective revolutionary
trends, and this soon led to disputes. "He called me a sentimental
idealist," said Bakunin later, "and he was right; I called him gloomy,
unreliable, and vain, and I was right too." We can readily understand
that this man who replied to a philosophical judgment by a judgment of
character, should have held aloof from the Workers' Educational Society
on personal rather than circumstantial grounds. Writing from Brussels,
Bakunin said: "Marx is carrying on the same sort of futile activities as
of old, corrupting the workers by making them argumentative. The same
crazy theories and the same discontented self-satisfaction."

Marx delivered some lectures at the Workers' Educational Society. An
epitome of these was subsequently published in the form of newspaper
articles, and eventually secured wide publicity as a propaganda booklet.
Under the title _Lohnarbeit und Kapital_ [Wage Labour and Capital] it
constituted the first of a series of fundamental writings in which Marx
incorporated his criticism of political economy and gave the results of
that criticism. It is especially noteworthy because it shows how Marx,
feeling his way, learning, growing by slow degrees, at first finds
incomplete solutions and gives lopsided demonstrations, but ultimately,
after the lapse of a considerable time and after exhaustive studies,
attains to finished results. In _Wage Labour and Capital_, for instance,
it is especially the notion of the commodity labour power which
discloses to us the slow growth of Marx's economic ideas.

As Engels tells us in the preface, classical political economy adopted
from industrial practice the current conception of the factory owner as
one who buys and pays for the labour of his workers. This conception was
perfectly adequate for business practice, for the factory owner's
book-keeping, and for his calculation of prices. But when thus naively
transferred to political economy, it gave rise to extraordinary errors
and generated confusion.

Economists discovered that the prices of all commodities, and among them
the price of the commodity they termed "labour," are continually
changing; that these prices rise and fall owing to the influence of
manifold circumstances, which often have no connexion with the
production of the commodity, so that prices seem as a rule to be
determined by pure chance. But as soon as economics became a science,
one of its first tasks was to search for the law hidden behind the
apparently casual changes in the price of commodities, the law which
must control what seemed to be chance movements. Economists wanted to
discover a fixed centre amid the vacillations of price; they set forth
from the prices of commodities in search of the regulative law of the
value of commodities which was to explain all perturbations of price.

The classical economists then discovered that the value of a commodity
is determined by the labour contained in it, the labour necessary for
its production. The explanation contented them. But as soon as they came
to apply this determination of value to the commodity labour itself,
they found themselves involved in one contradiction after another. How
is the value of "labour" determined? By the amount of necessary labour
contained in it. But how much labour is contained in the labour of a
worker for a day, a week, a month, a year? If labour is the measure of
all values, then we can only express the "value of labour" in labour.
Yet we know absolutely nothing about the value of an hour's labour, when
we know no more than this, that it is equal to an hour's labour. We have
not got a hair's-breadth nearer to our goal, but are still gyrating in a
circle.

The classical economists then tried another turning. They said: "The
value of a commodity is equal to the cost of producing it." But what is
the cost of producing labour? To answer this question, the economists
had to strain their logic a little. Instead of studying the cost of
producing labour itself, which eluded inquiry, they investigated the
cost of producing the worker. This was discoverable. It corresponded to
the sum of the means of subsistence (or the money price of these)
necessary, on the average, to keep the worker fit for work and to
maintain him and his family.

Now an interesting fact came to light. The value of the labour which was
paid to the worker as wages, was always considerably less than the value
of the labour which the employer annexed as the product of labour.
Either labour must have two values, a small value for the worker and a
large value for the capitalist; or else the formula must be inadequate,
or based upon false premises.

The classical economists could not solve the riddle. The last offshoot
of classical economy, the school of Ricardo, came to grief mainly
because of the insolubility of this contradiction. Classical political
economy had wandered into a blind alley. The man who discovered how to
get out of this blind alley was Karl Marx, and his first step towards
the solution of the riddle was made in his lectures on _Wage Labour and
Capital_.

This was an enormously important step on the way towards clarification.
The man who had found trustworthy clues leading out of the chaos of
philosophy, had formulated an intelligible social theory and expounded a
new interpretation of history, was now continuing his labours as pioneer
in the domain of political economy. In _Wage Labour and Capital_, just
as in _Poverty of Philosophy_ (the two books were written in the same
year) Marx gave his first remarkable discoveries to the world.

### _Communist Manifesto_

To the last period of Marx's stay in Brussels belongs his relationship
with the central committee of the Federation of the Just in London, a
body which was already in touch with Engels.

In January, 1847, a member of this central committee, the watchmaker
Moll, came to Brussels empowered to ask Marx and Engels to join the
federation, which wanted, said Moll, to adopt their theoretical outlooks
as its foundation. The federation was organizing a congress, at which
those who held other views were either to be won over or to be cleared
out. At this congress, too, the process of clarification was to be
completed, and the distillate was to be formulated for propaganda
purposes as a manifesto. Marx had no objection, for he had thought well
of the Federation of the Just in his Paris days, and had seen no reason
since to change his opinion.

The congress took place in London, in the summer of 1847. Marx, however,
was unable to attend. In his place, Wilhelm Wolff went to London as
representative of the Brussels comrades, and Engels travelled with him,
as delegate from the Paris comrades. At the congress, new rules and
regulations were drafted, and a new name was given to the organization,
but no final decisions were reached, for no decisions could be valid
until they had been submitted to the various local groups (communes)
represented at the congress. A second congress was summoned for December
of the same year.

At the end of November, Marx met Engels in Ostend and the two went
together to London, primarily as commissioned by the Democratic League
of Brussels to participate in the meeting which the Fraternal Democrats
were to hold on November 29th in anniversary commemoration of the Polish
revolution. At this meeting, Marx made a speech and handed in an
address. Immediately after the meeting, in the same room (the
headquarters of the Communist Workers' Educational Society in Great
Windmill Street), was opened the second congress of the Federation of
the Just, now known as the Communist League. This congress lasted about
ten days, and definitively repudiated the old doctrine of utopism. It
disavowed conspiratorial tactics, inaugurated a new method of
organization, and announced a new programme. Among the items of this
programme were: the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the dominion of the
proletariat, the abolition of a class society, and the introduction of
an economic and social order without private property and without
classes--all in accordance with Marx's views. At the close, Marx and
Engels were commissioned to draft a manifesto embodying the communist
principles of the newly constructed revolutionary platform.

When he and Marx returned to Brussels, Engels set to work promptly, and
wrote a draft in the form of a catechism, comprising five-and-twenty
points, phrased in popular language, as basic constituents of the
programme. Marx waited a while, and then decided upon a different method
of presentation. Though he was guided to some extent by existing
manifestos, which formed part of the stock in trade of every political
group, every club, and every sect in those days, he compiled an imposing
manifesto bearing the imprint of his outstanding genius, one thoroughly
original in content and in its general train of thought. It was at one
and the same time a historical demonstration, a critical analysis, a
programme, and a prophecy. It was a masterpiece.

With a vividness and liveliness such as Marx had never achieved before
and was never to achieve again, the manifesto describes the historical
evolution of class society down to the rise of modern capitalism, down
to the appearance of the bourgeoisie and the modern industrial
proletariat. This was done at a time when capitalism was still
struggling with all kinds of hindrances to its development; when the
bourgeoisie was first beginning to establish itself as the ruling class;
and when the proletariat, with faltering steps, was only just appearing
on the political stage. Marx's amazing talent for lifting himself above
the narrow confines of his actual surroundings, and, as if from the
zenith, looking down upon the course of evolution into a distant future,
so that the law of the movement and its trend, the ensemble and the
details, were equally plain to him--this marvellous faculty is here
brilliantly displayed. He foresees all the struggles and defeats, all
the stages and vacillations, all the dangers and victories, of this
evolution. He watches the mechanism of the advance, numbers the steps of
social ascent, feels the pulse of the bourgeoisie, hears the tread of
the advancing proletariat, sees the victorious banner of the social
revolution. Everything decades before the materialization of the facts,
generations before their onset; everything, though seen almost as if in
a vision, described with minute particularity and accurate
conformability to the real. Eighty years have passed, now, since the
_Communist Manifesto_ was written, and it is as apposite, as true to
life, as contemporary, as topical, as if it had been penned yesterday by
a man intimately acquainted with our own day.

The _Communist Manifesto_ sets out from the fact that we live in a class
society which is a historical product. At the present time, bourgeoisie
and proletariat confront one another as hostile classes. They condition
one another's existence, but their historical relation each to the other
is a class struggle. From this Marx deduces the fundamental idea of the
manifesto, that the liberation of the proletariat from poverty,
enslavement, exploitation, and debasement, can be effected in no other
way than by the overthrow of capitalism, the abolition of a class
society and a class State, and the establishment of a communist order
upon the foundation of communal ownership and a classless society. The
significance and the aim of the proletarian revolution are to be found
in the fulfilment of these tasks. That revolution will not be the
outcome of an arbitrary resolve, for the bringing of it to pass is the
historical mission of the working class.

It is essential to have the fundamental lines of this classical
demonstration of scientific socialism in Marx's own words.

"The history of all human society, past and present, has been the
history of class struggles."

"Modern bourgeois society, rising out of the ruins of feudal society,
did not make an end of class antagonisms. It merely set up new classes
in place of the old; new conditions of oppression; new embodiments of
struggle."

"Our own age, the bourgeois age, is distinguished by this--that it has
simplified class antagonisms. More and more, society is splitting into
two great hostile camps, into two great and directly contraposed
classes: bourgeoisie and proletariat."

"From the serfs of the Middle Ages, sprang the burgesses of the first
towns; and from these burgesses, sprang the first elements of the
bourgeoisie.

"The discovery of America and the circumnavigation of Africa opened up
new fields to the rising bourgeoisie. The East Indian and the Chinese
markets, the colonization of America, trade with the colonies, the
multiplication of the means of exchange and of commodities in general,
gave an unprecedented impetus to commerce, navigation, and manufacturing
industry; thus fostering the growth of the revolutionary element in
decaying feudal society.

"Hitherto industrial production had been carried on by the guilds that
had grown up in feudal society; but this method could not cope with the
increasing demand of the new markets.

"The expansion of the markets continued, for demand was perpetually
increasing. Even manufacture was no longer able to cope with it. Then
steam and machinery revolutionized industrial production. Manufacture
was replaced by modern large-scale industry; the place of the industrial
middle class was taken by the industrial millionaires, the chiefs of
fully equipped industrial armies, the modern bourgeois.

"Large-scale industry established the world market, for which the
discovery of America had paved the way. The result of the development of
the world market was an immeasurable growth of commerce, navigation, and
land communication. These changes reacted in their turn upon industry;
and in proportion as industry, commerce, navigation, and railways
expanded, so did the bourgeoisie develop, increasing its capitalized
resources, and forcing into the background all the classes that lingered
on as relics from the Middle Ages."

"Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a
corresponding political advance. ... The modern State authority is
nothing more than a committee for the administration of the consolidated
affairs of the bourgeois class as a whole."

"The bourgeoisie cannot exist without incessantly revolutionizing the
instruments of production; and, consequently, the relations of
production; and, therefore, the totality of social relations. ... That
which characterizes the bourgeois epoch in contradistinction with all
others is a continuous transformation of production, a perpetual
disturbance of social conditions, everlasting insecurity and movement.

"Urged onward by the need for an ever-expanding market, the bourgeoisie
invades every quarter of the globe. It occupies every corner; forms
settlements and sets up means of communication here, there, and
everywhere."

"By rapidly improving the means of production and by enormously
facilitating communication, the bourgeoisie drags all the nations, even
the most barbarian, into the orbit of civilization. Cheap wares form the
heavy artillery with which it batters down Chinese walls, and compels
the most obstinate of barbarians to master their hatred of the
foreigner. It forces all the nations, under pain of extinction, to adopt
the capitalist method of production; it constrains them to accept what
is called civilization, to become bourgeois themselves. In short, it
creates a world after its own image."

"More and ever more, the bourgeoisie puts an end to the
fractionalization of the means of production, of property, and of
population. It has agglomerated population, centralized the means of
production, and concentrated ownership into the hands of the few.
Political centralization has necessarily ensued. Independent or loosely
federated provinces, with disparate interests, laws, governments, and
customs tariffs, have been consolidated into a single nation, with one
government, one code of laws, one national class interest, one fiscal
frontier."

"But the time came, at a certain stage in the development of these means
of production and communication, when the conditions under which the
production and the exchange of goods were carried on in feudal society,
when the feudal organization of agriculture and manufacture, when (in a
word) feudal property relations, were no longer adequate for the
productive forces as now developed. They hindered production instead of
helping it. They had become fetters on production; they had to be
broken; they were broken.

"Their place was taken by free competition, in conjunction with a social
and political system appropriate to free competition--the economic and
political dominance of the bourgeois class."

"A similar movement is going on under our very eyes. Bourgeois
conditions of production and communication; bourgeois property
relations; modern bourgeois society, which has conjured up such mighty
means of production and communication these are like a magician who is
no longer able to control the spirits his spells have summoned from the
nether world. For decades, the history of industry and commerce has been
nothing but the history of the rebellion of the modern forces of
production against the contemporary conditions of production, against
the property relations which are essential to the life and the supremacy
of the bourgeoisie. Enough to mention the commercial crises which, in
their periodic recurrence, become more and more menacing to the
existence of bourgeois society."

"The weapons with which the bourgeoisie overthrew feudalism are now
being turned against the bourgeoisie itself."

"But the bourgeoisie has not only forged the weapons that will slay it;
it has also engendered the men who will use these weapons--the modern
workers, the proletarians.

"In proportion as the bourgeoisie, that is to say capital, has
developed, in the same proportion has the proletariat developed the
modern working class. ... These workers, who are forced to sell
themselves piecemeal, are a commodity like any other article of
commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes of
competition and to all the fluctuations of the market."

"Those who have hitherto belonged to the lower middle class--small
manufacturers, small traders, minor recipients of unearned income,
handicraftsmen, and peasants--slip down, one and all, into the
proletariat. They suffer this fate, partly because their petty capital
is insufficient for the needs of large-scale industry and perishes in
competition with the superior means of the great capitalists; and partly
because their specialized skill is rendered valueless owing to the
invention of new methods of production. Thus the proletariat is
recruited from all classes of the population."

"The proletariat passes through various stages of evolution, but its
struggle against the bourgeoisie dates from its birth.

"To begin with, the workers fight individually; then the workers in a
single factory make common cause; then the workers at one trade combine
throughout a whole locality against the particular bourgeois who
exploits them. Their attacks are levelled, not only against bourgeois
conditions of production, but also against the actual instruments of
production; they destroy the imported wares which compete with the
products of their own labour, they break up machinery, they set
factories ablaze, they strive to regain the lost position of the
mediaeval worker.

"At this stage the workers form a disunited mass, scattered throughout
the country, and severed into fragments by mutual competition. Such
aggregation as occurs among them is not, so far, the outcome of their
own inclination to unite, but is a consequence of the union of the
bourgeoisie, which, for its own political purposes, must set the whole
proletariat in motion, and can still do so at times. At this stage,
therefore, the proletarians do not fight their own enemies, but attack
the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of the absolute monarchy, the
landowners, the nonindustrial bourgeois, and the petty bourgeois. The
whole historical movement is thus concentrated into the hands of the
bourgeoisie; and every victory so gained is a bourgeois victory.

"As industry develops, the proletariat does not merely increase in
numbers: it is compacted into larger masses; its strength grows; it is
more aware of that strength. Within the proletariat, interests and
conditions of life become ever more equalized; for machinery obliterates
more and more the distinctions between the various crafts, and forces
wages down almost everywhere to the same low level. As a result of
increasing competition among the bourgeois themselves and of the
consequent commercial crises, the workers' wages fluctuate more and
more. The steadily accelerating improvement in machinery makes their
livelihood increasingly precarious; more and more the collisions between
individual workers and individual bourgeois tend to assume the character
of collisions between the respective classes. Thereupon the workers
begin to form coalitions against the bourgeois, closing their ranks in
order to maintain the rate of wages. They found durable associations
which will be able to give them support whenever the struggle grows
acute. Here and there this struggle takes the form of riots.

"From time to time the workers are victorious, though their victory is
fleeting. The real fruit of their battles is not the immediate success,
but their own continually increasing unification. Unity is furthered by
the improvement in the means of communication which is effected by
large-scale industry and brings the workers of different localities into
closer contact. Nothing more is needed to centralize the manifold local
contests, which are all of the same type, into a national contest, a
class struggle. Every class struggle is a political struggle."

"This organization of the proletarians to form a class and therewith to
form a political party is perpetually being disintegrated by competition
among the workers themselves. Yet it is incessantly reformed, becoming
stronger, firmer, mightier. Profiting by dissensions among the
bourgeoisie, it compels legislative recognition of some of the
specifically working-class interests."

"Finally, when the class war is about to be fought to a finish,
disintegration of the ruling class and the old order of society becomes
so active, so acute, that a small part of the ruling class breaks away
to make common cause with the revolutionary class. ... Just as in former
days part of the nobility went over to the bourgeoisie, so now part of
the bourgeoisie goes over to the proletariat. Especially does this
happen in the case of some of the bourgeois ideologists, who have
achieved a theoretical understanding of the historical movement as a
whole."

"For the proletariat, nothing is left of the social conditions that
prevailed in the old society. The proletarian has no property; his
relationship to wife and children is utterly different from the family
relationships of bourgeois life; modern industrial labour, the modern
enslavement by capital ... have despoiled him of his national
characteristics. Law, morality, and religion have become for him so many
bourgeois prejudices, behind which bourgeois interests lurk in ambush.

"All classes that have hitherto won to power, have tried to safeguard
their newly acquired position by subjecting society-at-large to the
conditions by which they themselves gained their possessions. But the
only way in which proletarians can get control of the productive forces
of society is by making an end of their own previous method of
acquisition, and there with of all the extant methods of acquisition.
Proletarians have nothing of their own to safeguard; it is their
business to destroy all pre-existent private proprietary securities and
private proprietary safeguards.

"All earlier movements have been movements of minorities or movements in
the interests of minorities. The proletarian movement is an independent
movement of the overwhelming majority in the interest of that majority.
The proletariat, the lowest stratum of extant society, cannot raise
itself, cannot stand erect upon its feet, without disrupting the whole
superstructure comprising the strata which make up that society."

"The communists everywhere support every revolutionary movement against
extant social and political conditions.

"In all these movements, the communists bring the property question to
the fore, regarding it as fundamental, no matter what phase of
development it may happen to be in.

"Communists scorn to hide their views and aims. They openly declare that
their purposes can only be achieved by the forcible overthrow of the
whole extant social order. Let the ruling classes tremble at the
prospect of a communist revolution. Proletarians have nothing to lose
but their chains. They have a world to win.

"Proletarians of all lands, unite!"

In these terse and mighty paragraphs from the first, second, and fourth
sections, the revolutionary soul of the _Communist Manifesto_ is
speaking to us.

If we ignore the third section, which, in its criticism of non-Marxian
theories and movements, could naturally apply only to these down to the
year 1847, the _Communist Manifesto_ contains everything the proletariat
needs in the matter of elementary information, of serious scientific
preparation for the practical demands of the class struggle.

The concrete course of evolution--the development of the capitalist
method of production, of the bourgeoisie, of the proletariat, of the
modern class struggle, and of the socialist movement--has fully
confirmed the accuracy of this abstract and anticipatory sketch of all
the phases of that evolution.

Eighty years of active life have shown that the _Communist Manifesto_ is
no mere paper charter embodying a theoretical erudition out of touch
with the world, but that it gives expression to the inexorable law of
evolution, and that in it the very heart of history is pulsating.

## Chapter 04: The Trial, Part 1

### The Gallic Cock

Marx's _Introduction to a Critique of the Hegelian Philosophy of Right_,
published in the "Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher" in the year 1843,
closed with the prophetic words: "When all the internal conditions have
been fulfilled, the day of the German uprising will be heralded by the
crowing of the Gallic cock."

Towards the end of the forties, the "internal conditions" had, in the
case of France, been so far fulfilled that the Gallic cock could, by its
crowing, give the signal for a revolution.

From 1845 onwards, the economic difficulties in which the French workers
and petty bourgeois were involved, had been continually increasing. The
potato disease and a failure of other crops had led to scarcity and to a
rise in the prices of the necessaries of life, 'and the consequent
hardships seemed to be intensified by the shameless way in which the
upper ten thousand were celebrating orgies of extravagance. The general
unrest was increased by a great industrial and commercial crisis,
beginning in England, and soon extending to the Continent. "Foreshadowed
in the autumn of 1845 by the widespread failure of railway speculators,
postponed during the year 1846 by a number of incidental factors (such
as the imminence of the repeal of the Corn Laws), it was finally
inaugurated in 1847 by the bankruptcy of a number of important
mercantile houses in London, by the insolvency of the agricultural
banks, and by the closing down of factories in the English industrial
regions. ... In Paris, an additional outcome of the industrial crisis
was that a number of manufacturers and wholesale traders, being unable
in existing circumstances to do any more business in foreign markets,
were forced back into the home market. They set up great establishments
of their own, and the competition of these ruined large numbers of
grocers and other shopkeepers. Hence there were many business failures
among this section of the Parisian bourgeoisie, and that accounts for
its revolutionary attitude in February." (Marx.)

At this juncture, therefore, the bourgeoisie was keenly interested in
effecting the overthrow of the financial aristocracy; but it dreaded the
masses, whose support was needed to down the financiers. It knew how
much underground work had been going on throughout the days of the
bourgeois monarchy, for it had itself furthered many of these
subterranean machinations. It was inclined to overestimate the strength
and the political maturity of the working class, and was afraid lest, in
the event of a revolutionary change of government, the reins might slip
out of its hands. It therefore endeavoured, in the first instance, to
bring about a change of government without calling in the aid of the
masses.

It opened an electoral campaign in the hope of securing a parliamentary
majority. Since July 1847, it had held all over France a number of noisy
festivals of reform, public dinners where, between courses, the chances
of a "dry revolution" were discussed. The proletariat had no interest in
this typically bourgeois way of carrying on a political struggle. On the
other hand, the government that was run by the financial aristocracy,
whose aim it necessarily was to counteract the endeavours of the
opposition, had a poor hand to play. Guizot and the majority in the
Chambers adopted an uncompromising attitude, and bluntly refused to
lower the property qualification, to increase the number of
parliamentary seats, and to inaugurate other reforms that were demanded.
This stubbornness fanned the flames of discontent. Louis Philippe tried
to arrest the spread of the conflagration by forming a liberal ministry,
but the endeavour came too late. In a trice, the fire of revolution had
burst through the roof, and the Gallic cock was crowing its signal to an
attentive world.

When the revolution broke out, Marx and Engels were taken by surprise.
From a distance, they had been unable to recognize the speed and the
intensity of recent developments, or to allow for the factors which
proved decisive at the last moment. Even in Paris, where Engels had been
on a visit in January 1848, the attitude of the workers in general and
that of the Communist League in particular was calculated to encourage
scepticism as to the possibilities of an upheaval. On January 14th,
Engels wrote to Marx: "The League is in a bad way here. Never have I
seen such general drowsiness, never have these fellows been so
hopelessly divided by petty jealousies. Weitlingery and Proudhonistery
are the final expression of these blockheads' vital relations, and there
is nothing to be made of them. Some are typical Straubinger, elderly
journeymen; but others are budding petty bourgeois. A class which lives,
immigrant Irish fashion, by undercutting the French in the matter of
wages, is utterly hopeless. I shall make one more effort, but if that
fails I shall abandon this kind of propaganda." Among the better known
leaders, only Flocon, a petty-bourgeois democrat, favoured the communist
cause; but even he was afraid that the open unfurling of the communist
banner would do more harm than good as far as the spread of
revolutionary ideas was concerned. When Engels returned to Brussels on
January 31st, he was greatly discouraged.

Three weeks later, the revolution began. There were street risings in
Paris; the workers took the initiative, manned the barricades, held
their own against a murderous fire for two days, overthrew the Guizot
ministry, burned the throne in front of the July Column in the Place de
la Bastille, and drove Louis Philippe and his ministers out of the
country. On February 24th, a provisional government was appointed; and,
under the pressure of the masses, though reluctantly, a republic was
proclaimed. Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc, Flocon, and Albert (a working
man), were among the members of the provisional government, which on
March 1st summoned Marx to Paris in a letter signed by Flocon.

At the first news of the outbreak of the revolution, the central
committee of the Communist League in London had hastened to transfer its
powers to the Brussels group. But, as Engels tells us, the news of this
decision only reached Brussels after a state of siege had been declared
in that city, and when the soldiers were taking extreme measures to
suppress meetings and check the activities of political organizations.
Above all it was difficult for foreigners to assemble. Furthermore, for
days Marx, Engels, and the rest of them, had been eager to set out for
Paris. It was decided therefore to dissolve the central committee, and
to entrust full powers to Marx, who was instructed to get a new
committee together as soon as he reached Paris. Hardly had this
resolution been passed, in Marx's own dwelling, when the police made a
raid, arrested him and his wife, kept them in the lock-up for the night,
and deported them next day. They went at once to Paris.

In Paris, the revolution had roused to activity the whole general staff
of socialist sectarians and miracle workers. Louis Blanc was
endeavouring to secure the adoption of the red flag as national emblem,
and the establishment of national work-shops. Proudhon, while condemning
any idea of State-socialist experiments, was demanding "the organization
of credit and speculation." Bakunin was continually advocating further
risings, so that Caussidière, the barricade prefect, exclaimed in
despair: "What a man! The first day, he is wonderful; the second day, he
ought to be shot!" Others who, though their heads were stuffed full of
theories and programmes, had no schemes for practical application,
clamoured for the help of the State in the realization of the
revolutionary idea. Yet others (as Leroux wrote to Cabet) were inquiring
how it might be possible to found a republic that would be free from
socialist taint. Meanwhile, in the first delirium of success, trees of
liberty were being jubilantly set up in the boulevards, while everybody
was singing the _Marseillaise_, joining in processions, and letting off
fireworks.

The foreign workers in Paris, thrown out of employment and hard put to
it for a subsistence, gave ready ear to Herwegh's foolish proposal that
they should form themselves into legions to fight on behalf of liberty
in their respective countries. The government adopted the scheme, even
as it had accepted the plan of establishing national workshops. Just as,
in the latter case, the authorities hoped that the failure of the
workshops would discredit Louis Blanc with the masses; so, in the matter
of the legions, they hoped that, by supplying funds to the legionaries,
they would free Paris of a number of inconvenient foreigners at
comparatively little cost. Herwegh's inflammable temperament made him
lay especial stress on the formation of a German legion. Once again (as
after the publication of his _Gedichte eines Lebendigen_) he had become
the hero of the hour, old and young flocked to him, took up arms, and
clamoured for marching orders. Among the youngest of his volunteers was
Wilhelm Liebknecht, now twenty-two years old. A member of the German
Workers' Society of Zurich, he had hastened to Paris to take part in the
fighting.

Marx reached Paris on March 4th. As luck would have it, Engels was out
of funds, and could not join his friend until March 25th. On March 6th,
Marx already appeared in the political arena. At a huge meeting, he fell
foul of Herwegh's opera-bouffe scheme, subjecting it to a cold and
biting critical analysis. To lead a legion to Germany would mean, he
said, an invitation to the Prussian reactionaries to crush the
revolution. The legions would not have an earthly chance against the
armed forces of Prussia, Austria, and Russia. Heroism would be of no
avail. If the legions did any service, it would only be to the French
bourgeoisie, which would be freed from the nightmare caused by the
presence of revolutionary elements from all over the world. In fact, the
idea of founding the legions was the outcome of bourgeois inspiration;
and Herwegh, in this matter, was only a catspaw of the bourgeoisie.
Carried away by his zeal and by the impetus of his own arguments, Marx
ignored the shouts of those who taunted him with cowardice and expressed
their indignation at the lapse into demagogy to which he was always
inclined at such moments. Nevertheless, the meeting could not withstand
his obstinate insistence, and the prompt victory of the revolution in
Vienna and Berlin made any thought of a revolutionary invasion of
Germany and Austria out of date. None the less, Herwegh led a troop of
workers to Germany. The little force was cut to pieces in the course of
the Baden rising, thus showing the accuracy of Marx's forecast.

In fulfilment of his commission, Marx set to work without delay at the
formation of a new central committee for the Communist League. It
consisted of Marx, Engels, Wolff, and the members of the London central
committee, who had also made their way to Paris. Thereupon, a manifesto
drafted by Marx was issued, comprising the "Demands of the Communist
Party in Germany," in seventeen points: a declaration that Germany was a
one and undivided republic; payment of parliamentary deputies; a general
arming of the population; nationalization of the royal and seignorial
estates, the railways, the canals, the steamships, the mines, etc.; the
taking over of mortgages by the State; a restriction of the right of
inheritance; the introduction of steeply graduated taxation of incomes
and the abolition of taxes levied upon the necessaries of life; the
establishment of national workshops; free education; etc. The focus of
political activity was a newly founded communist club, whose chief aim
it was, aided by Flocon, to send a number of German revolutionists
across the frontier, that they might foster the German revolution, lead
it, and gain political control of it. Wolff went to Breslau, Schapper to
Nassau, and Stephan Born to Berlin.

The upshot of this manoeuvre was, of course, to deprive the Parisian
movement of its most capable and trustworthy members. The few that were
left behind could not possibly cope with the multiplicity of tasks
waiting to be performed, of problems that pressed for solution. With the
best will in the world, those who remained could not do more than lay
down general directives and formulate outlooks. As Engels puts it, from
the moment when the causes which had made a secret society necessary
ceased to be operative, the secret society ceased to have any
significance.

While in France evolution was pursuing its inevitable course, while the
revolution was working out its essential nature as a mere
restratification within the bourgeoisie, Marx and Engels had their gaze
directed towards Rhineland, the seat of large-scale industry and the
great bourgeoisie, the place where, as indicated in the _Communist
Manifesto_, the revolution must assume its ripest form and bear its best
fruit.

In the beginning of April, the two left Paris, and hastened to Germany.

### The "Neue Rheinische Zeitung"

The flames of the revolution, sweeping across South Germany and Austria,
had also reached Prussia.

In Baden, Wurtemberg, and Bavaria, the revolution had singed the faces
of countless bigwigs; in Vienna, the crumbling edifice of the Holy
Alliance had gone up in smoke; in Berlin, a revolutionary storm had
raged in March.

To begin with, Frederick William IV had imagined that the revolution
would come to a respectful halt before reaching Prussia, and he had
therefore seen no need for bestirring himself in the way of granting
concessions and inaugurating civil liberties. He had summoned the United
Diet in order that this body might vote him the money he needed--money
which Rothschild refused to supply without the sanction of the estates.
This, he thought, would be sufficient tribute to the spirit of the age.

The liberal and democratic bourgeois opposition had used brave words to
begin with; but had beat a retreat on perceiving that in Paris, as the
outcome of the February revolution, manual workers and socialists were
sharing in the powers of government. Evolution, however, had continued
its march, leaving the bourgeois opposition behind. Taking action in
default of the bourgeoisie, workers and petty bourgeois had set free the
forces of a new age.

The bourgeoisie contemplated this new development with alarm. Its gaze
was anxiously fixed upon the threatening gestures with which the French
proletariat, in the name of the revolution, was voicing its social
demands. Especially alarming, especially damping to bourgeois
revolutionary enthusiasm, was the fact that in France the very form of
government which the bourgeoisie wished to set up in Germany had now
been overthrown, and had been overthrown by men who appeared to be the
enemies of property, order, religion, and all bourgeois political and
social ideals. The bourgeoisie, terrified at the possibilities of the
future, sought refuge in the arms of the nobility and the monarchy. The
compromise that ensued, decided the fate of the German revolution.

It decided also the fate of the German republic. In the enthusiasm of
the first successes in March, when bold illusions were rife, the radical
leaders of the bourgeoisie had regarded as self-evident the
establishment of a republic. This was to be the outcome of the
revolution. The assertion roused an approving echo in the widest
circles.

But when the fumes of intoxication had evaporated, when the
revolutionary honeymoon was waning, there was a change of scene. The
philistines demanded "the close of the revolution"; the authorities
declared that tranquillity was the first of civil duties; the
bourgeoisie raised a clamour against "foreigners" and "disturbers of the
peace." Revolution had become a crime; republic was tantamount to
"robbery, murder, and a Russian invasion." Jung, writing from Cologne,
had already told Marx about this change of mood; and when in April
Bakunin passed through Cologne, he noticed that the bourgeoisie was
"despairingly rejecting the republic." Dronke wrote from Frankfort that
any one who declared himself a communist was in danger of being stoned.
Marx and Engels, therefore, were under no illusions as to the nature of
the political atmosphere which awaited them in Germany. Nevertheless
they carried out their intention. "In the circumstances of the time,"
wrote Engels later, "we could have no doubt that the decisive struggle
had begun, that it must be fought to an issue during a long
revolutionary period, which would be marked by ups and downs, but could
end in no other way than in the ultimate victory of the proletariat."
Engels went to Barmen, Marx to Cologne. Their design was to revive the
"Rheinische Zeitung," as an organ in which to fly the banner of the
revolution in the sense of the _Communist Manifesto_. This notion
harmonized with other democratic and communist plans for the foundation
of a great daily newspaper. It was far from easy to overcome the
obstacles which resulted from the multiplicity of schemes. Even when
these hindrances had been surmounted, a supply of funds for the
enterprise was hard to obtain. Bourgeois in comfortable circumstances
would not hear a word of any discussion of the revolutionary problem,
and kept their pockets tightly buttoned. Engels, who still cherished
vivid memories of the communist movement in the Wuppertal, and had hoped
great things from these enthusiasts of a few years back, was greatly
disheartened by the actualities he encountered. "The people here," he
wrote to Marx, "shun any discussion of social problems like the plague;
they call it 'agitation.' If a single copy of our seventeen points were
to be circulated here, our chances would be utterly ruined. The
bourgeois mood is really contemptible. ... I can't get a stiver out of
my governor. He actually regards the 'Kölnische Zeitung' as a firebrand,
and he would rather shoot a thousand bullets at us than present us with
a thousand thalers."

In the end, however, it was possible to shark up the requisite number of
shareholders, so that the paper was founded, although upon a very
inadequate financial basis. On June 1, 1848, it began publication in
Cologne as the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung." The red flag of the revolution
was hoisted.

In addition to Marx and Engels, the staff consisted of the brothers
Wilhelm and Ferdinand Wolff, Ernst Dronke, Georg Weerth, Ferdinand
Freiligrath, and Heinrich Bürgers. Marx's special topic was to be German
politics, but he also functioned as editor-in-chief, wielding his powers
with the sovereign confidence and clear-headedness of a highly gifted
dictator. In actual fact, he had no journalistic talent, wrote
laboriously, and took a long time over the composition of his articles,
touching them up again and again. The ease and fluency with which Engels
could at any time commit his thoughts to paper in a form ready for the
press, always aroused Marx's envy and admiration. As a compensation,
however, he had a sure insight, which could not be troubled or diverted
by any stress of feeling; an imperturbable judgment, whatever the
confusions and vicissitudes of the hour; and an inviolable mastery of
the situation. Engels, of more accommodating temperament, one whose
comprehensive understanding and imaginative sympathies made him a born
journalist, being in addition a good linguist, kept the foreign press
under observation, and was especially interested in French and British
affairs. Freiligrath contributed impassioned lays of revolution and
freedom, whose tones resounded throughout Germany. The other members of
the staff fitted so harmoniously into the team that the "Neue Rheinische
Zeitung," from the first number to the last, gave an impression of
perfect unity. Thus in all respects it was a model revolutionary
newspaper.

But in June 1848, when the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" began publication,
the revolution was wholly lost as regards the proletariat, and already
half lost as regards the bourgeoisie. Those who had lacked courage for
the fight which might have saved the revolution, had now anchored their
hopes upon the right to talk, the right to turn phrases-upon parliament.
They were firmly convinced that German unity and German liberties were
to be established in a legal, orderly, and moderate fashion, at
Frankfort, in St. Paul's Church. Any doubts on this head were
unpatriotic; any further talk of revolution and barricades was criminal.

It may well be supposed that the burghers of the good city of Cologne
were aghast when they read the opening number of the "Neue Rheinische
Zeitung." Their lamblike piety was subjected to pitiless mockery; their
prudence was stigmatized as selfish cowardice; their political hope, the
National Assembly, was ridiculed as a "talking shop," and as a "council
of old women." Half the shareholders hastened to withdraw their support;
and there were fierce disputes in the democratic party, whose organ the
"Neue Rheinische Zeitung" was supposed to be.

But the editors were not to be intimidated, and could not be induced to
modify their tone. In issue after issue, they continued their unmerciful
onslaughts on the government, the National Assembly, the reaction, and
the policy of compromise. Then came the June days in Paris. Whereas the
French workers failed to grasp the significance of this blood bath, and
whereas the German workers took practically no notice of it, Marx made
it the occasion for a biting and incisive analysis of the civil war,
which drew nearer and ever nearer in Germany likewise. Unreservedly
espousing the cause of the June fighters, he wrote:

"The Executive Committee, the last official vestige of the February
revolution, has vanished like a mist-wraith. Lamartine's fireballs have
transformed themselves into Cavaignac's war-rockets.

"That fraternity of the two opposing classes (one of which exploits the
other), this fraternity which in February was in-scribed in huge letters
upon all the façades of Paris, upon all the prisons and all the
barracks--its true and unsophisticated and prosaic expression is civil
war, civil war in its most terrible form, the war between capital and
labour. On the evening of June 25th, this fraternity was flaming from
all the windows of Paris when the Paris of the bourgeoisie was
illuminated while the Paris of the proletariat was burning and bleeding
and lamenting.

"Fraternity lasted just so long as the interests of the bourgeoisie
could fraternize with the interests of the proletariat." "The February
revolution was a decorous revolution, a revolution made by general
acclaim, because the oppositions which in it exploded against the
monarchy were undeveloped, and slumbered harmoniously side by side;
because the social struggle which formed its real background had as yet
won only an airy existence, the existence of a phrase or a word. The
June revolution is an indecorous, a detestable revolution, because in it
substance has taken the place of phrase, because the establishment of
the republic disclosed the head of the monster when it removed the
sparkling guise of the crown.

"'Order' was Guizot's watchword. 'Order reigns in Warsaw,' said
Sebastiani, the Guizotin, when the Poles were crushed by the Russians.
'Order!' shouts Cavaignac, the brutal echo of the French National
Assembly and the republican bourgeoisie. 'Order!' rattles his
grape-shot, as it mows down the proletariat.

"Not one of the countless revolutions made by the French bourgeoisie
since 1789 was an attack upon order, for they left untouched the
dominion of class, the slavery of the workers, bourgeois order--while
changing again and again the political form of this dominion and this
slavery. But June laid hands upon bourgeois order. Woe, therefore, to
June!"

This article, appearing on June 29th, aroused intense indignation among
the members of the democratic party. Wrath flamed up against the "Neue
Rheinische Zeitung," and especially against Marx. The "Kreuzzeitung"
demanded that the authorities should take action against this
"Chimborazo impudence," and the Ministry for Justice instructed the
public prosecutor to intervene.

Unaffrighted, the journal continued its campaign. Now the second half of
the shareholders cut off supplies, but the members of the editorial
staff renounced their salaries, that the paper might be able to carry
on. They drew their belts tighter. Marx sacrificed the remainder of his
little property. "Stick to the guns!" was the defiant watchword. The
task of the democratic press, said these stalwarts, was to continue
fighting for the revolution side by side with the proletariat until
victory over the reaction had been achieved.

### In the Democratic Party

While the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung," under the aegis of the democratic
party, was forging the steel of the revolution, those members of the
Communist League who had found their way to Cologne were busily at work.
They felt that their revolutionary past made it necessary for them to
serve the revolutionary present, and to do so in the front rank. Their
activities were mainly devoted to organization and to oral propaganda.

The Communist League was in poor case at the time when the revolution
broke out in Germany. Passing through Cologne on his way from Paris to
Breslau, Wilhelm Wolff reported that in Cologne the league was
"vegetating." From Berlin came tidings that the league was in a bad way,
that the group there had "about twenty members, who hold together, but
without any sort of form." In Breslau there was "no organization." No
less unsatisfactory were the reports from other towns and provinces.
Dronke was delighted when, on May 5th, he was able to say that he had
founded a commune in Coblenz, enrolling four members; that in Frankfort
he had won over "two very efficient persons, with hopes of others"; but
he added that there was no prospect of setting the league afoot in Hanau
and Kassel; and that in Mainz, the condition of the league was
"completely anarchical."

Thus the organization was like a ship which has sprung a leak, and in
which all hands must man the pumps. Schapper and Mall had joined Marx in
Cologne, and, with this city as headquarters, had begun to found
workers' societies throughout Rhineland and Westphalia, hoping to
organize these important provinces successfully. They had a twofold aim:
to establish platforms for revolutionary activity; and to win readers
for the "Rheinische." In the Wuppertal, too, Engels was busied upon
similar work.

These doings could not fail to attract the attention of the authorities.
Although there were eight thousand men stationed in Cologne, the
government did not think the garrison large enough to maintain order.
Trusty reinforcements were drafted into Rhineland from the eastern
provinces. In view of the general lethargy, however, and of the
widespread reluctance to take up arms, there could be no question of a
local uprising on the Rhine. Marx and Engels were strongly opposed to
hotheaded insurrectionism, which could only play into the enemy's hands.
None the less, since there was likelihood of a coup d'état, they did not
hide their views as to what the people ought to do in that case.

The practical counterpart to these theoretical disquisitions was that a
great open-air meeting was held in Cologne, and that at this meeting
Heinrich Bürgers voiced the policy of the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung." A
resolution proposed by Engels and sent to the National Assembly in
Berlin demanded that that body, in the event of an attempt to dissolve
or suppress it, should do its duty by open resistance, even if the
authorities should attempt to stop its sittings by armed force.

A second public meeting, even more largely attended, held in a field
near Wörringen-on-the-Rhine, gave expression to like sentiments. It was
a noteworthy demonstration in another respect, for it was attended by
Ferdinand Lassalle, a young man of twenty-three, as leader of a
delegation from Düsseldorf. In that town, Lassalle was an active member
of the democratic party. He had sent news items and articles to the
"Neue Rheinische Zeitung," and had in this way kept in close touch with
its editorial board. Now he saw Engels in the flesh for the first time.
Marx, who had forfeited his civil standing as a Prussian subject and was
in danger of deportation, was not present, although he had been the
moving spirit. He did not wish to give the authorities a pretext.

Soon, however, there were disturbances, which gave occasion for the
military to intervene. Schapper, Moll, and Hermann Becker (a young
barrister, and in later days mayor of Cologne), were arrested. A state
of siege was declared, and the publication of the "Neue Rheinische
Zeitung" was prohibited. Engels, Wilhelm Wolff, and Dronke, who had been
especially active in the movement, knew that if arrested they would have
to serve long terms of imprisonment, and they therefore kept out of the
way. Wolff went to the Palatinate. Engels hurried to Barmen to destroy
his correspondence there, and then, after a violent scene with his
father, fled with Dronke to Brussels. Here both men were arrested, and
were escorted over the French frontier. After a brief stay in Paris,
Engels went on to Switzerland.

Marx stayed in Cologne, and continued to publish the "Neue Rheinische"
in defiance of the order of suppression, collaborating with Lassalle,
who had taken part in the Cologne congress of the democratic party at
which Marx was likewise one of the delegates. Their aim was to induce
the congress to adopt the revolutionary line advocated by Marx. The
latter's aspect and demeanour on this occasion have been described by
Carl Schurz, then nineteen years of age, present at the congress in the
company of Gottfried Kinkel. "Marx was then a man of thirty, and was
already the recognized chief of a socialist school. He was sturdily
built, with a broad forehead, raven-black hair, a huge beard, and dark,
sparkling eyes, so that he attracted general attention. I had been told
that he was a man of great erudition, and since I knew very little of
his social and economic discoveries and theories, I was eager to hear
the words of wisdom that would, I supposed, fall from the lips of so
celebrated a man. I was greatly disappointed. What Marx said was
(unquestionably) weighty, logical, and clear. But never have I seen any
one whose manner was more insufferably arrogant. He would not give a
moment's consideration to any opinion that differed from his own. He
treated with open contempt every one who contradicted him. Arguments
that were not to his taste were answered, either by mordant sarcasms
upon the speaker's lamentable ignorance, or else by casting suspicion
upon the motives of his adversary. I shall never forget the scornful
tone in which he uttered the word 'bourgeois,' as if he were spewing it
out of his mouth; and he stigmatized as 'bourgeois,' by which he meant
to imply the embodiment of profound moral degradation, every one who
ventured to contradict him. It is not surprising that Marx's proposals
were rejected; that those whose feelings he had wounded by his offensive
manner were inclined to vote in favour of everything which ran counter
to his wishes; and that, far from winning new adherents, he repelled
many who might have been inclined to support him."

The portrait is unflattering, but may well have been fairly accurate,
for it harmonizes with other personal descriptions of Marx. Two years
later, Lieutenant Techow portrayed him in almost identical words.

There is no use blaming a man for his character. All we are entitled to
infer from these descriptions is that Marx, despite his thirty years,
his extensive achievements, and his reputation as a man of learning and
a politician, was still what he had been in youth, one fighting to
secure recognition, one doubtful as to his prestige. His arrogance, his
self-conceit, his dogmatism and disputatiousness and irritability, must
reveal themselves to every one who understands human nature as masks for
a lack of self-confidence, under stress of which he was perpetually
trying to avert the danger of exposure. He could not listen quietly to
an opponent, because he was afraid that his opponent might get the
better of him if allowed to continue. He had to shout down every hostile
opinion because he was haunted by spectral doubts lest this opinion
should gain adherents and leave him unsupported. He tried to discredit
his adversaries because he hoped that personal onslaughts would shake
the validity of opposing arguments. He could not tolerate rivals because
he was perpetually tortured with the dread lest it should become
apparent in one way or another that not he, but his rival, was the
ablest of the able, the most efficient of the efficient, the most
revolutionary of the revolutionists.

This domineering behaviour was animated by the unconscious conviction
that he would be able to overawe the timid among his opponents. When he
made fun of the opinions of others, he was trying to fortify the sense
of his own superiority. When he crowned himself with anticipatory
laurels, he did so in the belief that this would ensure his triumph, and
entitle him to wear the laurel crown.

Only one person would Marx allow to express opinions--Engels. The sole
reason for his tolerance in this quarter was that he could rely on being
able to use Engels' remarkable talents for his own purposes as a
dictator, without Engels expecting any return, or thanks, or grant of
equality. As long as a collaborator was a willing servant, he could work
on the best of terms with Marx. But when this collaborator expressed an
opinion of his own, or claimed the right to assert his own will against
that of Marx, the fat was in the fire. Marx was a typical authoritarian.

These dictatorial ways of his were a perennial distress to every one who
came within the spell of his fascinating personality. No one suffered
more than Marx himself. He could not breathe freely except in situations
where the load of ambition transformed into anxiety had been lifted, and
where the sense of inferiority masquerading as superiority was in
abeyance. When this happened, he was transformed. He became
unpretentious, gentle, tender, cordial, self-sacrificing, and kind.

Such amiability, of course, could not suffice him for the performance of
the colossal tasks to which his life had been devoted. One who was to
work for the whole of mankind, to look forward through the centuries,
and to win a world, must be a man whose flanks were incessantly bloodied
by the spurs of a superhuman stimulus.

### Collapse of the Revolution

Step by step, the counter-revolution had gained ground, and had gathered
its forces. But the reactionaries still hesitated to strike the decisive
blow. At length the happenings in Vienna showed them that they were
strong enough to crush the revolution.

In the end of August, Marx had visited Vienna, to counsel the
revolutionary members of the bourgeoisie, and to recruit the workers on
behalf of a united front against the reaction. His attempts were
unsuccessful, and the second congress of the democrats, held in Berlin,
was of no avail. Vienna was left to its fate. In the October days, the
soldiers got possession of the town, despite a vigorous defence. On
November 9th, Robert Blum had to face a firing squad.

On the evening of this memorable day, the democrats of Cologne held a
great public meeting. While it was in progress, Marx entered the hall,
and read a telegram to those present: "In accordance with the March law,
Robert Blum has been shot in Vienna." A yell of wrath from the assembly
was the answer, a cry which echoed throughout Germany.

But the authorities in Berlin knew that bayonets are stronger than cries
and tears. Leaving sentiment to the petty bourgeois and the workers,
they relied on force. The dress rehearsal in Vienna was followed by the
public performance, the coup d'état. The newly appointed Brandenburg
ministry, which replaced the hesitant Pfuel ministry, suspended the
constitution, dispersed the National Assembly, disarmed the militia, and
declared a state of siege. No one moved a finger to resist. Never had a
revolution a more pitiful end.

At the last moment, indeed, the National Assembly, just before
dispersing under the pressure of Wrangel's grenadier guards, had--as a
protest against expulsion, and in lieu of genuine heroism--decided on a
general refusal to pay taxes.

This was a thrust in the air, but the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" tried to
turn it to account. It issued an appeal to all citizens, urging them to
organize against the authorities. Upon this instigation, the democratic
circle committee issued a proclamation drafted by Marx, Schapper, and
Schneider, advocating the preparation of armed resistance. Any attempt
to levy taxes was "to be countered by every kind of resistance";
further, the Landsturm must be organized everywhere to repel the foe;
impecunious persons were to be "supplied with arms and ammunition at the
cost of the community, or by voluntary contributions"; if the
authorities should refuse to carry out the decision of the National
Assembly, committees of public safety were to be nominated. Of course
this proclamation was not worth the paper on which it was printed. The
cowardice of the members of the National Assembly, their discouraging
example, and their innumerable exhortations on behalf of law and order,
had had the due effect. The masses remained incorrigibly obedient and
respectful at a time when disobedience and disrespect were their only
hope. The upshot was that the counter-revolution was successful all
along the line.

The only concrete result of the activities of the Rhenish revolutionists
was that Lassalle was arrested in Düsseldorf; and that Marx, as
editor-in-chief of the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung," Engels as his
associate, and Korff as publisher of the paper, were prosecuted for
advocating armed resistance to the military and civil authorities. On
February 8, 1849, the case was heard before a Cologne jury. Marx made a
brilliant speech in defence. His first point was a protest against the
attempt to punish him under laws which the government had long since
torn up by its coup d'état. He went on to show how the belief that
society rests upon law, itself rests upon a legal fiction. In reality,
law rests on society, and the Code Napoleon becomes a scrap of paper as
soon as it ceases to correspond to social relations. To conclude, he
passionately advocated the right of the people to revolt when its
elected representatives have failed to carry out their mandates. "If the
National Assembly does not fulfil its mandate, it has ceased to exist.
Then the people enters on the stage in its own person, and sets to work
with its own plenipotentiary powers. If the throne makes a
counter-revolution, the people has the right to answer with a
revolution." This speech, which ranks in revolutionary literature as a
classical example of a speech for the defence, had a powerful effect.
The court, which two days earlier had acquitted Marx of a charge of
libel, acquitted him on the present count likewise. The foreman of the
jury, in the name of his colleagues, thanked the accused for his
interesting and instructive speech.

Three months later, Lassalle's case came up for trial in Düsseldorf.
Here, too, the accused was acquitted. Lassalle had prepared a speech for
the defence, a speech which has also become famous. It had been printed
in advance, and the judicial authorities, having got wind of the matter,
decided to sit in camera. Consequently, Lassalle refrained from
delivering the oration.

Invigorated by his trial, Marx continued his campaign in the "Neue
Rheinische Zeitung." During the six months of its existence, this
journal had done an immense amount of work, contributing in unexampled
fashion to the arousing and clarifying of people's minds. Not content to
denounce the futility of the parliamentary proceedings in Berlin and
Frankfort, to criticize the Camphausen-Hansemann ministry unsparingly,
to make mock of the backwardness and cowardice of the petty bourgeoisie
in political matters, and to expose the reactionaries pitilessly as the
advocates of a "policy of conciliation--the "Rheinische" had advocated a
revolutionary war against Russia, had ardently espoused the cause of
Poland, had supported the war to annex Schleswig-Holstein as a national
one, had protested against the truce of Malmö, had discussed the Vienna
affair, and had voiced its heartfelt sympathy with the Hungarian
revolution. Subsequently it had criticized Bakunin's democratic
panslavism, had published Wilhelm Wolff's articles on the Silesian
milliards, and had begun the publication of Marx's Brussels lectures on
_Wage Labour and Capital_, in order to demonstrate the economic
conditions "which form the material foundation of contemporary class
struggles and national wars."

There was one weak spot in the multifarious and extensive programme of
the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung." The paper gave very inadequate
information regarding the labour movement during the revolution. Not to
say that there was practically no revolutionary activity in the labour
movement at that time. No doubt, even in the large towns, the workers
were still undeveloped politically. They followed in the wake of the
liberal and democratic chatterers of the petty bourgeoisie, or were
hangers-on behind the crowd of half-hearted revolutionary spouters,
speculators, and confusionists--the scum which had risen to the top in
these troublous times. Still, there were plenty of workers prepared to
support the revolution. Writing to Marx from Berlin, Stephan Born said:
"The proletariat is revolutionary through and through. Everywhere I am
organizing its dispersed forces into a concentrated strength. Here I am,
so to say, at the head of the labour movement. ... In June will appear,
under my editorship, the first number of a labour journal, 'Das Volk.' I
know plenty of people, and have good hopes of success." Born did
actually succeed in establishing a "Workers' Brotherhood" of
considerable size. This body inaugurated strikes, founded trade unions
and productive cooperatives, and made a fair amount of noise in the
world, so that its influence extended far beyond Berlin, to Leipzig, to
Dresden, and eastward of the Elbe.

The "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" had restricted its campaign of agitation
to the left-wing bourgeois democracy, in the belief that room for the
development of a purely proletarian revolutionary programme could only
be secured by preliminary political struggles on the part of bourgeois
elements. It was thought that the strength of the workers was not yet
great enough to affect the issue. But the more the hopes based upon
these tactics were frustrated by the cowardice and treachery of the
bourgeoisie, the more was the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" forced into the
working-class camp. A movement in this latter direction became
absolutely essential after the decay of the democratic organization in
Rhineland, and after the complete failure of the democrats to cope with
the revolutionary situation.

On April 15, 1849, Marx, Wilhelm Wolff, Schapper, and Hermann Becker
announced their resignation from the democratic circle committee: "We
consider that the extant organization of the democratic societies
includes so many heterogeneous elements that the adoption of appropriate
tactics is impossible. Our opinion is that there ought to be a closer
union with working-class societies, since these are comprised of
homogeneous elements."

Simultaneously the Cologne Workers' Society seceded from the Union of
Rhenish Democratic Societies. The seceders' plan was to summon all the
workers' societies of the Rhine province to a congress, called for May
6th, and to enter into communication with the "Workers' Brotherhood,"
which had summoned a congress of all the German workers' societies in
Leipzig.

To provide an economic basis for this tactical move, in the middle of
April Marx set out on a tour in the hope of securing funds. The
"Rheinische's" finances were exhausted, Marx's own property had been all
used up, and the shareholders had withdrawn their money. Thus the
position of the newspaper was desperate. Before Marx got back, a mortal
blow had been struck from another quarter, a blow directed against both
the journal and its editor-in-chief.

On May 18th, the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" published the following
announcement: "A little while ago, the local authorities received
instructions from Berlin to declare a state of siege once more in
Cologne. The intention was to use the powers of martial law for the
suppression of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung,' but unexpected
difficulties were encountered. Thereupon His Majesty's government
applied to the local magistrates, in order to achieve the same end by
means of arbitrary arrests. Here there was a check owing to the legal
scruples of the magistrates, just as there had twice been a check before
owing to the good sense of the Rhenish juries. The authorities,
therefore, had, as a last resource, to avail themselves of their police
powers. On May 16th, the following order was served upon our
editor-in-chief, Karl Marx: 'In its recent issues, the "Neue Rheinische
Zeitung" has published more and more definite incitations to contempt of
the existing government, to the forcible overthrow of that government,
and to the establishment of a socialist republic. Consequently, the
hospitality [!] which he has so scandalously abused is withdrawn from
the editor-in-chief, Dr. Karl Marx; and in as much as he has not secured
permission for further residence in these States, he is instructed to
quit them within twenty four hours. Should he fail to comply with this
demand voluntarily, he is to be forcibly deported.'"

Thus it was that the last number of the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" was
published on May 19, 1849. It was printed in red ink, and was headed by
Freiligrath's famous poem "Not an Open Thrust in Open Fight." A sum of
fifteen hundred thalers borrowed from a certain Herr Henze, together
with the money received from subscriptions, from the sale of the
presses, and so on, was devoted to the payment of the newspaper's
liabilities to compositors, machinists, paper merchant, bookkeepers,
correspondents, and other members of the staff. Frau Marx sold what
remained of their possessions, including some old family plate, and with
their three little children she and her husband went abroad to face a
life of poverty.

All was lost!

### Flight into Poverty

For Marx, Cologne had been the first stage in his revolutionary career.

The period of preparation and clarification which introduced him to
political life, had been followed by a period of trial. His theoretical
acquirements, his practical efficiency, his personal courage--all had
been put to the test. The test had been successfully withstood.

He had followed the line of the revolutionary class struggle with
pitiless clarity and unambiguity. He had faced and surmounted obstacles
with skill, energy, and endurance. Undismayed, and at great personal
cost, he had defied all dangers and inconveniences.

He had preferred an honourable defeat to laodicean compromise.

It was part of the man's spiritual makeup that (willy-nilly, and
unconsciously for the most part) his behaviour should have increased
every difficulty, complicated every conflict, annihilated every
possibility of peaceful understanding.

That was why he was now compelled to strain his forces to the uttermost,
to make illimitable sacrifices for the cause, to attempt the incredible.

Only thus could he acquire the titanic intellectual stature and develop
the unprecedented qualities needed for the work which he perceived to be
his historic mission.

Beyond question, as a man and a champion, he had made good in Cologne.

Whether and to what extent the ideas embodied in the _Communist
Manifesto_ would prove practical politics, would be made manifest to
inquirers of a later day. The settlement of this account, the drafting
of this political inventory, was not a matter of immediate concern. What
was of immediate concern was direct revolutionary action.

But when, immediately after his expulsion from Rhineland, Marx went with
Engels to Frankfort, it became obvious that the National Assembly in
Frankfort was not the place for such action. In this council of German
pusillanimity he found overwhelming confirmation of what he had once
written in the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung": "There is no lack of good
will, certainly; what is lacking is courage!"

There was still a faint hope that in South Germany, where the struggle
for a constitution had developed into a general insurrection, the cause
of the revolution might still be saved. Marx and Engels hastened
thither; but when they came to Mannheim and Karlsruhe, they found that
the revolution there had got into the hands of a few philistines run
mad, had taken the form of lynch law, and had already come to naught. In
Karlsruhe, the petty bourgeois had chased the grand duke away and had
seized power. Then, terrified at their own courage, they perpetrated one
imbecility after another, and were only too pleased in the end when
Lorenz Brentano, the pinch-beck dictator, reestablished law and order,
and inculcated a renewed respect for authority. In the Palatinate there
had been a mellower kind of revolution. There, wine had played a more
important part than gunpowder, and the intoxication of liberty had found
expression in bibulous exploits which were excused as manifestations of
enthusiasm for the revolution.

Marx saw that there was nothing to be done here. His next thought was,
Paris. In Kaiserslautern, he happened upon the deputy d'Ester of
Cologne, a prominent member of the democratic central committee. D'Ester
supplied him with a mandate to represent the democratic party in
conversations with the social democratic Left of the French National
Assembly in Paris. On his way thither, through Frankfort, he fell into
the hands of the Hessian soldiery, who regarded him as one of the local
insurrectionists. After two days' arrest, however, he was set at
liberty, and went hotfoot to Paris.

Engels had returned to Kaiserslautern, where he watched the vinous
revolution for a while. When the Prussian forces arrived, he became
adjutant to Lieutenant Willich, who was leading a troop of Palatine
volunteers. But in the Palatinate the insurrection was speedily
suppressed, just as it had been in Baden. Some of the rebels found their
way into the casemates of the fortress of Rastatt, while others were
lucky enough to escape across the Swiss frontier. Engels was one of
those who reached neutral territory. In Berne, he met Stephan Born; and
in Geneva he had his first encounter with Wilhelm Liebknecht. From Vevey
he wrote to Marx. The latter had reached Paris safely. When he arrived
there, with his family, he was penniless, and he found to his dismay
that the French capital was in the full swing of reaction. The
Legislative Assembly, which had met on May 28, 1849, was under the
control of a monarchical majority. The bourgeois republicans had lost
heavily at the polls, retaining no more than 50 seats out of 750. The
left opposition, the social democrats, and the radical petty bourgeois,
had 200 seats. They were known as the Mountain, and were regarded as the
inheritors of the revolutionary tradition. It was with them that Marx
was to get into touch.

Ledru-Rollin was the parliamentary leader of this fraction. His
followers comprised the stratum of shopkeepers, petty traders,
victuallers, and small masters, who had collapsed so ignominiously after
the February revolution. The large capitalists had speedily mopped up
their scanty possessions, their poor savings, and large numbers of them
had gone bankrupt. This had opened their eyes to the significance of the
June days, and they had gone over to the opposition. Wishing to regain
popularity, they had, under Ledru-Rollin's leadership, made overtures to
the workers, joined in banquets of reconciliation, drafted a united
programme, set up electoral committees and appointed candidates--in a
word, they had entered into a formal alliance. As Marx put the matter,
"the revolutionary point of the socialist demands of the proletariat was
blunted, and these demands were given a democratic gloss. Conversely, in
the case of the democratic demands of the petty bourgeoisie, the purely
political form was effaced, and they were made to seem as socialistic as
possible." The political amalgam thus constituted was given the name of
"social democracy"; and its peculiar characteristics were manifested in
parliament, inasmuch as these social democrats demanded democratic and
republican institutions, not in order to abolish the two extremes of
capital and wage labour, but in order to combine them into a harmony.
Their aim was to remodel society democratically, to effect a social
reform within the confines of the petty-bourgeois system. An attack made
by Ledru-Rollin on Louis Bonaparte because the latter had infringed the
liberties of an other nation by his military invasion of Italy, gave
occasion for widespread demonstrations, which were suppressed by the
army.

A fierce persecution of all liberal elements followed. Ledru-Rollin,
Louis Blanc, and others, fled to London. Nor was Marx allowed to stay in
Paris; and, being absolutely without funds, he had to leave his family
behind. In his wife's diary, occurs the entry: "We spent a month in
Paris, and then our visit was cut short. One morning a police sergeant
whose acquaintance we had already made came to inform us that Karl 'et
sa dame' must quit Paris within twenty-four hours. The authorities were
kind enough to say that we might, if we pleased, take up our residence
at Vannes in Morbihan. Of course we had no taste for exile in such a
place, and I got together my few poor possessions in order to seek a
safer port in London. Karl had hastened thither before us." There was
need for haste in the matter of finding a new home, seeing that the
writer was expecting the birth of her fourth child within a few weeks.

### The "Neue Rheinische Revue"

At that time, England was the chief haven of refuge for political
exiles. Its hospitality was extended to revolutionists from all
lands--from France, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Poland, and
Russia. Here refugees could find safe harbourage. Thus England earned
the honourable title of "Mother of the Exiles," at this period when the
forces of reaction were triumphant throughout the continent of Europe.

The Marx family was poverty-stricken on arrival in London, where they
settled in a furnished room in Camberwell. Marx still had a small
fragment of landed property in Treves, and the sale of this supplied a
pittance on which they were able to live for the first few months. But
it was essential to find some permanent means of livelihood.

It seemed to Marx self-evident that his future occupation would be, pen
in hand, to serve the cause of the revolution. His first thought,
therefore, was to found a periodical which should aim at concentrating
all the forces of the revolution, should undertake a critical study of
the mistakes made during the recent revolutionary period, and should
help to excogitate a more successful plan of campaign for the future. He
regarded it as absolutely certain that within a few months the social
revolution would resume its course. As of old, the spark would come from
France, and would set the world aflame.

In a letter to Engels, Marx sketched his plan. He proposed to edit from
London a politico-economic monthly, the "Neue Rheinische Revue," each
number of which was to contain about eighty pages. Funds for this
undertaking were to be obtained by founding a joint-stock company. The
"Revue" would be printed in Hamburg, and from that city its distribution
was to take place. The purpose being "to exert a continuous and
permanent influence on public opinion," the periodical was to be issued
more frequently as time went on. Indeed, "as soon as circumstances make
it possible for me to return to Germany," the monthly "Revue" was to
become a daily newspaper.

Engels, who was eager to revive the fires of the revolution, made no
objection. He was still in Switzerland, but determined to rejoin Marx in
London. To avoid the catchpolls in France and Belgium, he went by
sailing ship from Genoa to London, where he arrived in August.

The "Neue Rheinische Revue," however, was ill-starred, just as the
"Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher," Marx's first venture of the kind, had
been. There was a serious lack both of funds and of copy. It is doubtful
whether many shares were subscribed, and certainly Marx and Engels had
to supply almost the whole of the literary materials. The first issue
had been planned for January 1, 1850, but the manuscripts for this
number did not reach Hamburg until February.

Marx had penned a dear sighted and exhaustive study of the French
February revolution, and this was published in three issues of the
"Revue," under the title _Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich_ [Class Struggles
in France]. Engels wrote a long account of the constitutional campaign
in Germany and the risings in Baden and the Palatinate. This also ran
for three numbers. In addition, Engels contributed an extensive essay on
the _Peasant War in Germany_, which occupied almost the whole of a
double number. From him, too, came a short essay on the Ten Hours Bill
in England.

In all, there were four single numbers of the "Revue," and finally a
double number in November. During a period which had ceased to be
revolutionary, there was no scope for a revolutionary periodical, and no
chance of a long life. People did not wish to listen to the voice of a
critic or a counsellor. They had had enough of revolution, had gone back
to work, were on the look out for chances of making money, desired order
and tranquillity. The bourgeois, ashamed of their passing revolutionary
enthusiasm, were busied in their counting-houses, banks, and factories,
devoting themselves to the lucrative occupation of upbuilding
capitalism. The petty bourgeois thanked God that they had escaped with
nothing worse than a drubbing. The workers, grumbling, exhausted, but
resigned on the whole, put their necks back under the yoke of victorious
capital. Thus it was that the articles in the "Revue," admirable though
they were as literary exercises, aroused no echoes. They were theories
with no possibility of practical application; revolutionary thought in a
world devoid of revolutionary reality.

Marx had come to the conclusion "that the commercial crisis of 1847 had
been the real mother of the February and March revolution." It was
inevitable, therefore, that, when the crisis came to an end in the
middle of 1848, the forces of the revolution should decline. But Marx
was too near to the events to see this clearly, and in the beginning of
1850 he was still counting upon the likelihood of a speedy revival of
the revolution. As late as April 1851, even the Prussian government
opined that "during the next four weeks a red revolution will break out
in France, and will spread to Germany." But Marx was taken aback when
the news of great discoveries of gold in California reached Europe. In
the second issue of the "Revue" he alluded to the enormous importance of
this discovery, and to the beginning of a period of flourishing trade.
By the summer of 1850, had come the crushing conviction that the
prospect of a revolution in Europe had been indefinitely postponed. In
the closing number of the "Revue" he wrote: "There can be no talk of a
real revolution in such a time as this, when general prosperity
prevails, when the productive forces of bourgeois society are
flourishing as luxuriantly as is possible within the framework of
bourgeois conditions. Such a revolution can only take place in periods
when these two factors, the modern forces of production and the
bourgeois forms of production, are in antagonism each to the other."

Californian gold had saved European capital. This was a fact which made
all manifestos inoperative, all proclamations vain, all revolutionary
hopes futile.

It was a rock, moreover, upon which the ship of the "Neue Rheinische
Revue" was wrecked. There was nothing left but to wind up the affair.

### Split in the Communist League

Not all revolutionists, however, shared the conviction that the
revolution had been indefinitely postponed. At any rate, many
revolutionists failed to recognize this at the date when Marx had begun
to advocate the liquidation of the revolution. Those who were still
hopeful, could not understand Marx; they became suspicious of him; they
regarded him as a renegade, and openly opposed him.

It was certainly difficult for persons who lacked Marx's and Engels'
theoretical insight to understand so sudden a change in outlooks and
tactics. For, until very recently, Marx had made no secret of his
opinion that the revolution was dose at hand.

In the end of 1849 and the beginning of 1850, the Communist League had
been reconstructed, with London as centre. One of the original members
of the central committee, Moll, had fallen in the skirmish on the Murg;
but Schapper and Bauer were still in the land of the living. Willich,
who had led the Badenese volunteers with Engels as his adjutant, was a
new member of the central committee. In March 1850, this committee
issued to the League an address penned by Marx, describing the political
situation, and specifying what ought to be the behaviour of the working
class in the expected revolution.

"The revolution is imminent. It may be brought about by an independent
rising of the French proletariat, or by an attack on the part of the
Holy Alliance directed against the revolutionary Babel."

"The relationship of the revolutionary labour party to the
petty-bourgeois democracy is as follows: it joins forces with the
petty-bourgeois democracy against the fraction whose over-throw it aims
at effecting; but it opposes both the one and the other in matters it
wishes to establish on its own account."

"Whereas the democratic petty bourgeois wish to bring the revolution to
an end as speedily as possible while satisfying their own claims, it is
our interest and our aim to make the revolution permanent, until all the
more or less possessing classes have been deprived of power, until the
proletariat has achieved the conquest of the powers of State, and until
the association of the proletarians, not in one country alone, but in
all the leading countries of the world, has advanced so far that
competition between the proletarians of these various countries has
ceased to exist, and until at least the most important productive forces
have been concentrated in the hands of proletarians. It cannot be our
concern to palliate class oppositions, for we wish to abolish classes;
it cannot be our concern to improve extant society, for we wish to found
a new one."

"From the first moment of victory, those whom we shall have to regard
with suspicion will not be the members of the conquered reactionary
party, but those who belong to the party with which we have been allied,
those who will try to exploit our joint victory on their own account
alone."

With this address, based on the belief that a revolution was imminent,
Bauer was sent to Cologne, and secured there an abundance of adherents.
Out of former members of the League and former members of the Workers'
Brotherhood founded by Stephan Born, there was constituted a new
organization which began "to play a leading part" in the workers'
societies, peasants' societies, and gymnastic societies. When emissaries
from Switzerland (dispatched at this time by a "central bureau of the
German emigrants" organized by Struve, Sigel, Schurz, and others)
attempted to recruit German workers, they found it necessary to report
that "all the utilizable forces are already in the hands of the League."

But the summer of 1850 came and went, and there had been no revolution.
The economic conditions of the day had favoured a luxuriant development
of the German bourgeoisie, which had been able to take advantage of the
financial difficulties of the government in order to secure political
advancement. The petty bourgeoisie had retired from the political stage.
The stormy waves of the revolution had by now become mere ripples,
plashing gently on the sands of Prussia.

That was why, in the course of the summer of 1850, Marx abandoned his
hopes of a second revolution. But he could find few to follow him in
this change of mood. The international refugees in London, the main
supporters of the Communist League, were impatiently expecting the
revival of the revolution. They were impoverished, they were homesick,
they were tired of passivity, they longed for battle and vengeance.
Since nothing but a revolution could help them, they believed in a
revolution. Their wishes and hopes coloured their picture of the
political situation; their affects falsified the logic of history. Thus
their revolutionary appetites were whetted, and, sharp-set, they were
ready to sit down at the revolutionary board long after everything had
been eaten. "The forcible defeat of a revolution," wrote Marx
subsequently, with reference to this period, "leaves in the minds of
those who have been participators, and especially of those who have been
uprooted from home and cast into exile, a condition of shock thanks to
which even efficient personalities become, so to say, mentally incapable
for a shorter or longer time. They cannot adapt themselves to the course
of history; they are unwilling to see that the form of the movement has
changed. That is why they wish to engage in conspiratorial activities,
to play at revolution-mongering, in a way which is compromising both to
themselves and to the cause they have espoused."

We can readily understand that such men as Louis Blanc, Ledru-Rollin,
Mazzini, Kossuth, Ruge, Willich, etc.--whose whole revolutionary past
had been devoted to inaugurating revolutionary outbreaks and
conspiracies, or who, being communists on emotional rather than rational
grounds, were inaccessible to argument were prone to regard Marx's
change of front as the expression of heresy, poltroonery, or treason.
This mingling of romanticism and morality, of sentimentalism and
blindness towards historical reality, poisoned the discussions in the
Communist League, with the result that argument degenerated into
personal abuse, and Willich actually challenged Marx to a duel. The
unhappy outcome of all this was that on September 1, 1850, the Communist
League split up. On Marx's side were Engels, Bauer, Eccarius, Pfänder,
and Conrad Schramm. In the opposing party were Willich, Schapper (Marx's
old companion-in-arms), Lehmann, and Fränkel. The proposal for
separation came from Marx, and was supported by him in the following
terms: "The minority has a dogmatic outlook instead of a critical one,
an idealist outlook instead of a materialist one. It makes mere will the
motive force of the revolution, instead of actual relations. Whereas we
say to the workers: 'You will have to go through fifteen or twenty or
fifty years of civil wars and international wars, not only in order to
change extant conditions, but also in order to change yourselves and to
render yourselves fit for political dominion'; you, on the other hand,
say to the workers: 'We must attain to power at once, or else we may
just as well go to sleep.' Whereas we draw the German workers' attention
to the undeveloped condition of the German proletariat, you grossly
flatter the national sentiment and the class prejudices of the German
handicraftsmen, which is of course far more popular. Just as the
democrats have sanctified the word 'people,' so you sanctify the word
'proletariat.' Like the democrats, you subordinate revolutionary
development to revolutionary phrasemaking."

The Communist Workers' Educational Society in London was almost united
in support of the minority. Marx and his followers therefore withdrew
from it. But Great Windmill Street, where it had its headquarters,
continued for a long time to play a considerable part in the discussions
of Marx and Engels, and in the letters they exchanged; for Marx watched
all the doings of the society with close attention and interest, kept
himself informed as to what was going on, and passed on the news to
Engels, who had quitted London, being once more at work as book-keeper
in his father's Manchester factory. But what Marx had to say about his
sometime associates was full of bitterness. He was especially mortified
that the revolutionary champions from abroad, like Louis Blanc,
Ledru-Rollin, Mazzini, etc., and the Chartist leaders, like Harney,
Ernest Jones, and Feargus O'Connor, should be in the opposing camp as
representatives of the revolution. Although he had voluntarily withdrawn
from the society, he conducted himself as if he had been expelled from
it.

The confined circumstances in which these impoverished refugees had to
live, and the heated political atmosphere which surrounded them, made
their circle (as Engels said) "a school of tittle-tattle and back-biting
... an institute in which every one who does not break away from it
perforce becomes a fool, a donkey, and a common rascal." Marx,
therefore, came to lead a more and more isolated life. Writing to
Engels, he declared that this was congenial to him. "I like the public,
authentic isolation in which we two, you and I, now find ourselves.. It
harmonizes very well with our position and our principles. The system of
mutual concessions, of half-measures tolerated from complaisance, and
the need for shouldering before the public one's share (as a member of
the party) of responsibility for all the absurdities of these
donkeys--are things over and done with." Engels rejoined: "We have at
length once more--the first time for so long--the chance of showing that
we do not want popularity, do not require the support of any party in
any country; and that our position is totally independent of such
rubbish. Henceforward we are responsible to ourselves alone; and when
the moment comes in which these gentry have need of us, we shall be able
to dictate our own conditions. Till then, at any rate, we can have
tranquillity. No doubt, also, a measure of loneliness..."

Thus the result of the disputes in the Communist League was, as far as
Marx was concerned, that he cut himself off completely from communal
work, reduced his sphere of activity to the smallest possible radius,
and became completely isolated. His only contacts were with Engels, who
was settled in Manchester, and a small number of devoted friends, or
rather pupils and disciples. He was king in his own country, but a king
with scarcely any subjects. This retreat into isolation might have ended
tragically, had it not also been a retreat to labour.

His first task was to save the Communist League for the Continent. With
this end in view, the central committee was transferred to Cologne.
Heinrich Bürgers, Hermann Becker, Ferdinand Freiligrath, and the
physician Roland Daniels, took over the leadership. Marx had sent
instructions that "citizen L. of Düsseldorf" was also to be on the
committee; but Roeser, a cigar-maker by trade, wrote to say that the
instructions had been disregarded, "because we have had this same
citizen [Lassalle] under close observation here, and have discovered
that he continues to cherish aristocratic principles, and is less
concerned than he ought to be for the general welfare of the workers."

In Cologne, the central committee did good work for six months. Then the
police took action, and made a large number of arrests. An important
criminal trial followed.

The trial of the communists in Cologne represents the concluding
chapter, not only of the history of the Communist League, but also of
the practical revolutionary phase in the life of Karl Marx.

### The Trial of the Communists in Cologne

After the suppression of the rising in Baden, Prince William of Prussia,
the "cartridge prince," recalled from England by the reaction, had
"reorganized" the Badenese army. He had become the brain and the arm of
the reaction, for the king, still terrified by his memories of the
dreadful days of the revolution, did not venture, as yet, to come into
the open as champion of the counterrevolution. Prince William did
everything he could to "reorganize," not only the army, but also the
constitution, the administration, the law courts, public opinion, as
they were before the March days. He intervened in affairs of State by
writing a memorial upon the revision of the constitution which the king
had been forced to grant; and in like manner he arbitrarily interfered
with the course of justice when the law courts failed to, deal with
revolutionists as harshly as he wished.

Among the insurgents taken prisoner by the Prussians in the skirmish on
the Murg, was the poet Gottfried Kinkel, who had sought as musketeer
under the command of Willich, and had been wounded in the head by a
shot, though not severely. Tried by a court martial composed of Prussian
officers, he was condemned to lifelong imprisonment in a fortress.
Prince William considered the sentence too lenient, and demanded that
Kinkel should be sentenced to death. In this matter, however, he was
opposed, not only by the ministry, but also by public opinion, for the
general view was that the sentence of lifelong imprisonment was
excessive. In the end, however, the judgment of the court martial was
confirmed, except that the king, following the advice of the ministry,
changed the imprisonment in a fortress into ordinary imprisonment.

This was not, as it seemed, an intensification of the punishment, but an
alleviation. There were two kinds of imprisonment in a fortress:
"Festungshaft" (detention in a fortress), the usual punishment for
gentlemen offenders; and "Festungsbaustrafe" (punishment in a fortress
by work on the fortifications, etc.), one of the most detestable
barbarities in the military code. It was the latter to which Kinkel had
been condemned. The public, however, did not understand the difference
between the two, and regarded the king's commutation of the sentence as
a reactionary measure. There was a lively agitation, in which the
bourgeoisie took part, expressing loud indignation. The general anger
was increased when Kinkel, in prison, was put to forced labour and was
refused the privileges usually accorded to political offenders. The
movement on his behalf became a popular one, a sort of Kinkel cult. Amid
the rumpus, people overlooked the fate of the numberless victims of the
March rising who had not the advantage of being poets and members of the
cultured classes; they forgot, too, that before the courts Kinkel had
cut a poor figure.

In the "Revue," Marx and Engels had taken a strong line against him. Too
strong, perhaps, for Kinkel had not betrayed the cause of freedom, but,
being of an emotional temperament, had merely let his tongue run away
with him. Besides, there could be no question but that he had fought on
behalf of liberty, and was now, in prison, bearing the brunt of the
counterrevolution. For these reasons, the article in the "Revue" aroused
fierce wrath in the bourgeois camp, and considerable discontent even in
revolutionary circles. The end of the Kinkel affair was that the
prisoner, aided in especial by his friend Carl Schurz, escaped from
Spandau prison, fled to London, and got in touch there with the section
of the Communist League controlled by Willich and Schapper.

As far as Marx and his friends were concerned, the Kinkel affair had a
further consequence. The king, angered by the prisoner's escape,
determined to take vengeance on the bourgeoisie by relentless
persecution of the liberal opposition. To begin with, however, the
object of attack was to remain concealed, and public attention was to be
diverted by sharp measures against the communists. On November 11, 1850,
the king wrote to his minister, von Manteuffel, as follows: "Dear
Manteuffel: I have just read the report on Kinkel's escape. This has put
into my head an idea which I will not class among the brightest. Namely,
whether Stieber would not be the best person to disentangle the web of
the conspiracy on behalf of liberty, and to provide the Prussian public
with the long and rightly desired spectacle of discovered and (above
all) punished conspiracy. Push on, therefore, with Stieber's
appointment, and let him try his hand. I think the idea is fruitful, and
I lay great stress upon its prompt realization. ... Frederick William."

This same Stieber was a discredited tool of the police, a man whom
Hinkeldey, chief superintendent of the Berlin police, had now, much
against his will, to make chief of the political police. Thus was
Stieber enabled to try his hand at a campaign on behalf of the throne,
the altar, the maintenance of law and order.

In Haupt, a German refugee in London and a member of the Communist
League, he found a traitor to give him his first inside knowledge. Then,
among his numerous spies and agents, he discovered two who could do him
yeoman's service by their cunning and unscrupulousness. One of these was
a sometime cigar-maker in Dresden, Krause by name, who had served
various terms of imprisonment, and was now living in London under the
alias of Charles de Fleury, reputed to be a city merchant, and actually
a spy on the communist movement. The other, Hirsch, who had been a
commercial clerk in Hamburg, and was likewise a recidivist, worked under
Fleury in London as provocative agent. To get the requisite materials
for their chief, they had to break open desks, commit burglaries, steal
papers, make false declarations, construct pseudo-conspiracies, forge
documents, commit perjury, undertake bribery and corruption, induce
people to bear false witness--in a word, practise all the arts proper to
the trade of police spies.

Yet it was not until a year had elapsed since Frederick William had
written the letter just quoted, not until November _1851_, that it
became possible to arrest the tailor Nothjung in Leipzig. In the raid on
his house, the only things of importance discovered were: a copy of the
_Communist Manifesto_, which could be bought at any bookseller's; the
rules and regulations of the Communist League; two publications of the
League; and a few private addresses. This list of addresses enabled the
police to follow up Nothjung's arrest by arresting in Cologne: Bürgers
the journalist, Roeser the cigar-maker, Dr. Hermann Becker; three
medical practitioners, Dr. Roland Daniels, Dr. Abraham Jacoby, and Dr.
Klein; a chemist named Otto, a clerk named Erhard, the tailor Lessner,
and another workingman named Reiff. Ferdinand Freiligrath had removed to
London, and thus escaped arrest. By these arrests, Stieber had laid the
foundation for the "long and rightly desired spectacle" which, in
accordance with the king's wish, was now to be staged. All that was
needed was to furbish up evidence of the conspiracy that was to be
discovered and punished.

There was absolutely nothing of a serious character with which to charge
the accused. They were members of a secret organization, but this was
not prohibited by Rhenish law. Furthermore, the aim of the secret
organization was to carry on a perfectly legal political movement, the
Marxist trend being distinguished in this matter from the trend of
Willich and Schapper, who were inclined to conspiratorial machinations.
"Since the collapse of the revolution of 1848," writes Marx, "the German
labour movement had continued to exist only in the form of theoretical
propaganda, restricted to a narrow circle, and propaganda as to whose
practical innocuousness the Prussian government was under no illusions
for a moment. ... Some of the secret societies did directly aim at
overthrowing the extant State power. This was justified in France, where
the proletariat had been conquered by the bourgeoisie, and where an
attack upon the existing government coincided with an attack on the
bourgeoisie. Another section of the secret societies aimed at forming
the proletariat into a party, without concerning themselves about the
extant governments. This was necessary in such countries as Germany,
where the bourgeoisie and the proletariat were jointly subordinate to
their semifeudal governments, so that a victorious onslaught upon the
existing governments would not break the power of the bourgeoisie or of
the so-called middle classes, but would necessarily help these to power.
No doubt here, likewise, the members of the proletarian party would
participate anew in a revolution against the status quo; but it was not
their business to prepare the way for this revolution."

But the police paid no heed to such distinctions. They needed a
conspiracy, a sensational prosecution, a State trial; and they turned
their knowledge of the split in the Communist League, their personal
acquaintance with members of this body, and the documents they had
seized, to account in order to create an appropriate atmosphere for the
drama they wished to stage. If they could not find what they wanted,
they were prepared to invent it. Still, luck was against them. Despite
all their domiciliary visits, interceptions of letters, widespread
inquiries, and imprisonment of the accused for months pending trial,
they could not discover materials for the sensational affair they hoped
to manufacture. Month after month, they had to postpone bringing the
case into court. Their search for evidence to connect the accused with a
conspiracy, a plan for assassination, or a scheme of insurrection, had
been fruitless.

At length, in October 1852, Stieber thought he had collected enough to
begin the trial. But the course of the affair was unprosperous. Every he
of the prosecution was disclosed, every falsification of the minions of
the law was revealed, every move of Stieber and his spies was
successfully countered. Marx and his friends in London were doing their
utmost in the hope of transforming the trial from a blow directed
against the communist movement into a tremendous defeat of the police,
the judicial authorities, and the government. Although the police, the
postal service, and the press had joined forces against his work of
enlightenment, he was able to attain his end. Frau Marx wrote in a
private letter: "My husband has to work all day and far on into the
night, for the proofs of falsification have to be elaborated here in
London. Every document has to be written six or eight times over, and
then sent to Germany by various routes, by way of Frankfort, Paris,
etc., for all letters directed to my husband, and all letters sent hence
to Cologne, are opened and intercepted. The whole thing has now become a
struggle between the police on the one hand, and my husband on the
other, seeing that everything, even the conduct of the defence, is
thrown upon his shoulders. ... We have a regular office established
here. Two or three of us write; others run messages; others scrape
pennies together, so that the writers can keep themselves alive, and can
furnish proofs of the scandalous behaviour of the official world."

When Stieber, as desperate as a trapped fox, saw that his cause was
practically lost, he played his last trump, producing as evidence of the
conspiratorial activities of the accused the minute book of the
Communist League. But it speedily became apparent that this exhibit was
a forgery. It was recorded in the minutes that the meetings of the "Marx
Party" in London had always occurred on Thursdays, whereas since January
1852 they had been held on Wednesdays; it re ported the meetings as
having been held at the old headquarters, whereas, since the same date,
they had been transferred to new headquarters; it showed that the
minutes were signed by H. Liebknecht, whereas Liebknecht (who, by the
way, did not sign the minutes at all) was called Wilhelm. Marx showed
that the provocative agent Hirsch had for six or eight months, week
after week, been concocting this minute book in the room and under the
eyes of his chief Fleury in London. "In the room above Fleury was living
the Prussian police lieutenant Greif, who kept watch on Fleury and
inspired his activities. Greif spent part of every day at the Prussian
embassy, where he himself was supervised and supplied with inspiration.
Thus the Prussian embassy was the original hothouse in which the forged
minute book ripened."

The case for the prosecution collapsed. When Stieber, amid a flood of
subterfuges, falsehoods, and perjuries, had admitted that the alleged
minute book was a mere notebook, the public prosecutor ceased to claim
that the document had evidential value. Nevertheless, it was essential
that the accused should be found guilty, not only because such were the
king's wishes, but also because (as, during the prosecution, Hinkeldey
wrote to the embassy in London) "the whole existence of the political
police hangs upon the issue of this trial." In the end, the guilt of the
accused was considered to be proved because they had secretly diffused
the principles of the _Communist Manifesto_, principles that endangered
the State. For this crime--which was not a crime at all, seeing that
every one who wished could acquaint himself with the contents of a
document which had been openly printed and sold--the accused received
savage sentences. Nothjung, Bürgers, and Roeser were condemned to six
years' imprisonment in a fortress; Reiff, Otto, and Becker, to five
years; Lessner, to three years. The others, all of whom had been in
prison for eighteen months pending trial, were acquitted. The result of
this sentence was "to dispel for ever the superstitious faith in trial
by jury, a faith which still flourished in Rhenish Prussia. People
realized that trial by jury is trial by a court of the privileged
classes, a court established in order to bridge over the gaps in the law
by the breadth of the bourgeois conscience."

Marx elaborated the materials relating to the trial into a booklet,
which was published in Switzerland. The whole edition was seized on the
German frontier. Then the work was reissued in the United States, where
it attracted considerable attention, and caused much distress to some of
the refugees, who had removed across the Atlantic since the arrests had
taken place. Especially does this remark apply to Willich. He had for a
considerable time been in close personal touch with Fleury, and had
received money from that spy. On reaching America, Willich had entered
the United States service. In order to cover up the dubious part he had
played in the affair, he published diatribes against Marx in American
journals, and Marx answered these in a little essay entitled _Der Ritter
vom edelmütigen Bewusstsein_ [The Knight of the Magnanimous Spirit]. One
of the results of the trial of the communists in Cologne, a trial which
had intensified the mutual enmities of the refugees, was the final
break-up of the Communist League.

Marx withdrew from public propaganda, and buried himself in scientific
study.

## Chapter 05: The Trial, Part 2

### _Klassenkämpfe In Frankreich_

Marx had been put to the test as revolutionary champion. He had
withstood the test. Maybe in his zeal, in the heat of battle, he had
erred on the side of passion rather than on that of moderation, had been
too impetuous rather than unduly cautious. But he had never blenched in
the decisive hour; had never lost sight of the goal or been wanting in
impetus; had never for a moment been lacking in readiness to leap into
the breach. As a man, he had been tried, and had not been found wanting.

But what of the cause he had been fighting for? Could that resist the
test of criticism?

Marx now devoted himself to answering this question--not once, but again
and again. He set to work with the relentlessness, the thoroughness, the
incisiveness, that were his leading characteristics.

With the scalpel of an anatomist, he dissected history, and demonstrated
the result.

His first critical examination, his first attempt "to explain a section
of history, by means of the materialist method of interpretation, as an
expression of the extant economic situation," took the form of an
analysis of the February revolution in the year 1848. It was entitled
_Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich_ [Class Struggles in France].

Here are some of the results of his inquiry.

"In the reign of Louis Philippe, what ruled in France was not the
bourgeoisie as a whole, but a section thereof, the so-called financial
aristocracy, consisting of bankers, stock-exchange magnates, railway
kings, mine owners, ironmasters, and some of the great landed
proprietors. They occupied the throne; they dictated the laws that were
passed by the Chambers; they appointed the office holders, ranging from
the ministers of State down to the minor employees in the Tobacco
Office."

"The industrial bourgeoisie was part of the official opposition, and
only represented in the Chambers as a minority. Its oppositional
attitude became intensified in proportion as the power of the financial
aristocracy grew, and in proportion as (after the risings of 1832, 1834,
and 1839 had been drowned in blood) it believed its own dominion over
the workers to be assured."

"The petty bourgeoisie in all its gradations, and the peasant class,
were completely excluded from political power. Finally, in the official
opposition or altogether outside the 'pays légal' [the king, his
ministers, the deputies, and the 200,000 electors], were the ideological
representatives and spokesmen of the aforesaid classes, their
professors, lawyers, doctors, etc., in a word, their so-called men of
talent."

"It was to the direct interest of the ruling and legislating section of
the bourgeoisie (ruling and legislating through the Chambers) that the
State should run into debt. The deficit was for these gentry the
material substratum of their speculative activities and the main source
of their enrichment. Every year there was a new deficit, and every four
or five years there was a new loan. Each new loan gave the financial
aristocracy fresh opportunities for diddling a State artificially kept
insolvent, and therefore compelled to deal with the bankers on very
unfavourable terms."

"The sections of the French bourgeoisie that were excluded from power
raised a clamour about corruption. ... Then came worldwide economic
happenings to hasten the outbreak of general discontent, to ripen
disaffection into revolt. These were: the potato disease, a failure of
other crops, and a general commercial and industrial crisis."

"The provisional government, climbing to power from the February
barricades, necessarily represented in its composition the various
parties which had shared in the victory."

"The February republic had first of all to complete the dominion of the
bourgeoisie, by allowing all the other possessing classes to enter the
charmed circle of political power, and to take their places in it side
by side with the financial aristocracy."

"The proletariat, which had imposed a republic on the provisional
government (and, through the provisional government, on the whole of
France), at once came to the front as an independent political party,
but thereby summoned the whole of bourgeois France into the lists
against it. What it had conquered was a field on which it could fight
for its revolutionary emancipation, but by no means that emancipation
itself." "By the establishment of universal [manhood] suffrage, the
nominal owners who form the great majority of the French, the peasants
that is to say, had been made the arbiters of the destiny of France."

"By accepting the bills of exchange which the old bourgeois society had
drawn on the State, the provisional government had ruined itself. It had
become the harassed debtor of bourgeois society, instead of confronting
that society as a menacing creditor, as one to whom the revolutionary
indebtedness of several years had become payable."

"The emancipation of the workers, even as a mere phrase, was now an
intolerable danger to the new republic, for it was a perpetual protest
against the establishment of credit, which rests upon the undisturbed
and unqualified recognition of the extant economic class relations. The
workers, therefore, must be reduced to impotence."

"Only in the name of the republic could the fight against the
proletariat be undertaken."

"In the National Assembly, all France sat in judgment on the Parisian
proletariat. Promptly abandoning the socialist illusions of the February
revolution, the Assembly proclaimed the bourgeois republic, pure and
simple. Forthwith it excluded Louis Blanc and Albert, the proletarian
representatives, from the executive committees it now proceeded to
appoint; it rejected the proposal to establish a labour office as a
special department of the government; and it greeted with vociferous
applause Trélat's statement, 'the only matter with which we are
concerned is to bring labour back to its old conditions.'"

"The workers had no other option than between starvation and rebellion.
Their answer took the form of the insurrection of June 22nd, the first
pitched battle between the two classes into which modern society is
severed. It was a struggle for the maintenance or the destruction of the
bourgeois order. The veil hiding the true visage of the republic had
been torn."

"Fraternity had lasted just so long as the interest of the bourgeoisie
had been able to fraternize with the interest of the proletariat."

"Cavaignac did not signify the dictatorship of the sword over bourgeois
society; he signified the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie exercised by
means of the sword."

"The constitution did not sanction a social revolution, it sanctioned
the momentary victory of the old society over the revolution."

"December 10, 1848, was the day of the peasants' insurrection. The
French peasants' February began on December 10th. The symbol which
expressed their entry into the revolutionary movement--clumsily astute,
knavishly simple, clownishly sublime, a calculated superstition, an
emotional burlesque, a brilliantly stupid anachronism, a practical joke
on the part of universal history, an undecipherable hieroglyph for
civilized understandings--this symbol bore unmistakably the physiognomy
of the class which represents barbarism within the confines of
civilization. The republic had announced itself to the peasants by
sending a tax collector; the peasants announced themselves to the
republic by sending the emperor. Napoleon was the only man who had fully
represented the interests and the fancies of the peasant class newly
created in 1789."

"With the formation of the Legislative National Assembly, was completed
the manifestation of the constitutional republic, that is to say of the
republican form of State in which the dominion of the bourgeoisie is
embodied."

"With the official restoration of the financial aristocracy, it was
inevitable that the French people would ere long be face to face once
more with a February 24th."

"So rapidly had circumstances been ripened by the course of the
revolution, that the reformers of all shades of opinion, including those
who represented the most modest demands of the middle classes, had to
group themselves round the banner of the extreme revolutionary party,
round the red flag."

"The proletariat is grouping itself more and more round revolutionary
socialism, round communism. This socialism is the declaration that the
revolution is permanent, that the class dictatorship of the proletariat
is a necessary transition to the abolition of class distinctions in
general, to the abolition of all the productive relations on which class
distinctions depend, to the abolition of all the social relations which
express these productive relations, to the revolutionizing of all the
ideas which proceed from these social relations."

"The proletariat did not allow itself to be provoked into riots, for it
was engaged in making a revolution. ... Despite all endeavours, the
socialist candidates were victorious. Even the army voted for the June
insurgents against their own war minister Lahitte. The Party of Order
was as if thunderstruck. ... The election of March 10, 1850! It was the
reversal of June 1848. Those who had massacred and transported the June
insurgents returned to the National Assembly, but with bowed heads, in
the train of the transportees, and with the latter's principles on their
lips. It was the reversal of June 13, 1849. The Mountain, which had been
proscribed by the National Assembly, returned to the National Assembly,
but as the advance trumpeter of the revolution, no longer as its
commander. It was the reversal of December 10th. Napoleon had been
discomfited with the discomfiture of his minister Lahitte."

"March 10th was a revolution. Behind the votes lay paving stones."

"A new revolution is only possible as the sequel to a new crisis. But
the one is as certain as the other."

Those who, when they refer to _Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich_, speak of
Marx's brilliant style, of the force of his descriptions, of his mastery
of satire, of the splendid way in which he exhibits the movements of
universal history, and of the boldness with which he discovers the
hidden interconnexions of events, are in the right of it. But this
praise, since it is restricted to formal merits, overlooks the material
importance of the book.

What gives _Klassenkämpfe_ special significance, as Engels pointed out,
is the fact that here for the first time is clear expression given to
the formula which was subsequently to become the general formula of the
class struggle as pursued by all parties, of all socialistic trends, and
in all countries. This formula is the appropriation of the means of
production by the proletariat, the abolition of the wage system and of
capital and of their mutual relations. Therewith, to quote Engels, was
formulated the demand by which "modern working-class socialism is
sharply distinguished, not only from all the various shades of
feudalist, bourgeois, petty-bourgeois, etc., socialism, but also from
vague utopian ideas as to a community of goods and from the elementary
but spontaneously developed forms of working-class communism. When,
subsequently, Marx extended the formula to include appropriation of the
means of exchange as well, this extension, which is an obvious corollary
to the _Communist Manifesto_, signified nothing more than an expansion
of the main proposition."

In matters of detail, the book is not free from errors. When he wrote
it, Marx was still unduly influenced by impressions derived from earlier
revolutions; was still, as Engels puts it, "under the spell of prior
historical experiences."

The fundamental tint of the revolutions from 1789 to 1830 shows through
in all Marx's deductions. He is here and there because, despite the
depth of his insight, his grasp of economic causes is still defective.
Owing to a lack of sufficient statistical information, trustworthy
reports, exhaustive politico-economic study, he arrives at the erroneous
conclusion that the social revolution, as the last decisive struggle
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in Europe, will necessarily
follow hard upon the revolutionary upheaval of 1848.

Writing in 1895, Engels said that history had shown this assumption to
be an illusion. "It has made clear to us that in those days the
condition of economic development on the Continent was far from being
ripe for the abolition of capitalist production; it has proved this by
the economic revolution which since 1848 has affected the whole
Continent, has involved large-scale industry in France, Austria,
Hungary, and Poland; has recently begun seriously to influence Russia;
and has made of Germany an industrial country of the first rank. All
this has occurred upon a capitalist foundation far wider than that which
existed in the year 1848. Now, it is this industrial revolution which
has everywhere for the first time clarified class relations; has done
away with a number of intermediate conditions which had persisted as
vestiges of the manufacturing period, and in eastern Europe even as
vestiges of the guild system; has created a true bourgeoisie and a true
urban proletariat; and has pushed these two classes into the foreground
of social evolution. Thanks to this, however, the struggle between these
two great classes, which in 1848 existed outside England in Paris alone
and a few great industrial centres, has now been diffused throughout
Europe, and has attained an intensity which was still quite unthinkable
in 1848."

These defects notwithstanding, _Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich_ is a fine
piece of critical and analytical history penned in the light of
historical materialism. It is a brilliant draft for the completer study
of the same period, for Marx's masterpiece, _Der achtzehnte Brumaire des
Louis Bonaparte_.

### _Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte_

The coup d'état of Louis Napoleon was a logical sequel to the February
revolution. The imperial crown was nothing more than a piece of
theatrical "property," a symbol added under stress of a dynastic
megalomaniac urge. Marx, who had already drawn attention to the part
played by the bizarre in French history, thanks to which "in France, the
simplest man acquires the most complicated significance," now went on to
show "that the class war in France created circumstances and relations
that enabled a grotesque mediocrity to strut about in a hero's garb."

The coup d'état had already set a number of pens to work, justifying it,
condemning it, or explaining it. Marx refers to some of them.

"Among books which, almost simultaneously with mine, discussed Louis
Bonaparte's coup d'état, only two are worth mentioning, Victor Hugo's
_Napoléon le petit_; and Proudhon's _Coup d'état_."

He goes on to say:

"Victor Hugo confines himself to a scathing and brilliantly worded
polemic against the man personally responsible for the coup d'état. For
him, the incident resembles a thunderclap in a clear sky. He can see
nothing but the arbitrary act of an isolated individual. Hugo fails to
realize that he makes this individual seem great instead of small by
ascribing to him a capacity for personal initiative without parallel in
history. Proudhon, on the other hand, tries to show that the coup d'état
was the outcome of an antecedent historical development. But in his case
an exposition of the coup d'état becomes transformed into a historical
apology for the hero who effected it."

In contrast with these writers, Marx, with the aid of the materialist
interpretation of history, gives his readers an insight into the nature
of the various interests which led to the coup d'état, exposing their
operation so clearly that not even the slightest detail can retain its
ideological mask. Louis Bonaparte and his policy are unsparingly
dissected.

This book, full of profound thought and keen vision, and written in a
brilliant style, was composed at a time when Marx was in danger of
succumbing to the hardships of a refugee's life. The family of six or
seven persons was packed into two small rooms, not knowing from day to
day whether they would get food on the next. Clothing and shoes had been
pawned. "Marx had to keep the house, for lack of a coat to go out in,
and had no meat for dinner, as the butcher had refused further credit."
He was ill, and could see no hope of better days. Engels was only a
clerk in his father's Manchester house; and the other refugees were all
as poor as church mice.

At this juncture, Marx had a letter from his old friend Weydemeyer.
During the revolution of 1848, Weydemeyer had published a revolutionary
periodical in Germany. Then, subject to police persecutions and weary of
a hunted life, he had emigrated to America. Now he wrote that he was
about to issue a new periodical, and would like Marx to send him paid
contributions. Week by week, down to the middle of February 1852, Marx
dispatched articles dealing with the history of the coup d'état.

Then, instead of the eagerly expected fees, came news that the whole
plan of the periodical had come to grief. These unhappy tidings arrived
at a moment when Marx's little daughter Francisca had just died, and
when Frau Marx, impecunious as usual, was forced to borrow from her
neighbours the sum needed for funeral expenses.

Soon, however, more cheerful intelligence came from New York. Weydemeyer
wrote that he would be able to issue the periodical after all, though as
a monthly instead of a weekly. A comrade, a tailor by trade, who had
saved forty dollars, was prepared to devote the whole sum to the
venture. To this nameless Maecenas we owe it that Marx's _Eighteenth
Brumaire_ was able to appear in the second issue of "_Die
Revolution_"--a periodical whose existence was brief. But several
hundred extra copies of the second number were printed, found their way
to Germany, and were circulated there.

In the _Eighteenth Brumaire_, Marx revised the opinion put forward in
the _Class Struggles_ that a social revolution was to be expected in
connexion with the movement of 1848. Since writing the earlier work, he
had been engaged in profounder economic studies (carried on in London),
had seen further into the mechanism of the processes of history, and had
come to conclusions whose elaboration threw light on the victory of the
usurper Louis Bonaparte. The "adventurer from foreign parts" had risen
to the front, step by step, climbing on the shoulders of "the
tatterdemalion proletariat, that vague, dissolute, down-at-heels and
out-at-elbows rabble which the French denote by the composite name of la
Bohème"; upon their shoulders, and upon the backs of the conservative
peasants, whom petty proprietorship had "transformed into troglodytes";
and upon the bayonets of a drunken soldiery, whom he had bribed with
brandy and sausages. What had been the upshot?

"The French bourgeoisie rose in revolt against the rule of the working
proletariat; with the result that it has brought the slum proletariat
into power, the loafers and tatterdemalions. ... The bourgeoisie kept
France breathless in alarm by talking about the menace of Red Anarchy;
on December 4th, Bonaparte gave it a taste of the future it had
prophesied when he had the most respectable burghers of the Boulevard
Montmartre and the Boulevard des Italiens shot, while they sat at their
windows, by the soldiers of the army of order, who had been made half
drunk to keep up their enthusiasm. The bourgeoisie glorified the sword;
now it is to be ruled by the sword. It destroyed the revolutionary
press; now its own press has been destroyed. It subjected public
meetings to police supervision; now its own drawing-rooms are under
police supervision. It disbanded the democratic National Guard; now its
own National Guard has been disbanded. It had cowed the workers by
declaring a state of siege; now it is itself cowed by the same weapon.
It had substituted courts martial for trial by jury; now its own juries
are replaced by courts martial. It had put elementary education under
the thumb of the priests; now it is to experience clerical dominion in
its turn. It had transported the workers without trial; now the
bourgeois are trans ported without trial. It had suppressed every kind
of social stir by the use of all the powers of the State; now every
social stir initiated by the bourgeoisie is suppressed by all the powers
of the State. In its passion for its money-bags, it had rebelled against
its own statesmen and men of letters; now its statesmen and men of
letters have been swept out of the way, and its money-bags are rifled
when its mouth has been gagged and its pen broken." Thus was the
bourgeoisie punished for all the sins it had committed against the
spirit of the revolution; and the instrument of this punishment, this
vengeance, was Louis Bonaparte, the chosen of the smallholders.

Nevertheless: "By the economic development of this smallholding system
the relationship between the peasantry and the other classes of society
has been turned upside down. Under the first Napoleon, the
parcelling-out of the land encouraged free competition in the rural
districts, and favoured the beginnings of great industry in the towns.
The peasant class was an embodied and ubiquitous protest against the
landed aristocracy, so recently overthrown. The roots, which the new
system of smallholding struck deep into French soil, cut off the supply
of nutriment upon which feudalism had depended. The landmarks of peasant
proprietorship were the natural fortifications of the bourgeoisie
against any attempt at a coup de main that might be made by the old
overlords. But in the course of the nineteenth century the feudal
extortioner was replaced by the urban usurer; the obligations that the
feudal system had imposed upon those who were bound to the soil found
their modern counterparts in the obligations to the mortgagee;
aristocratic landlordism had been exchanged for bourgeois capitalism.
The peasant's holding is still only the pretext whereby the capitalist
is enabled to draw profit, interest, and rent from the land, while
leaving the cultivator to wrest his own wages from the soil. French
agricultural land is so heavily burdened with mortgages that the
interest paid on them is equal to the interest on the British national
debt. ... At the beginning of the century, the bourgeois system of
society placed the State as sentinel in front of the newly created petty
landholdings, and manured their soil with laurels. Today, that same
bourgeois system has become a vampire which sucks the blood and marrow
from the peasants' little farms, and throws them into the alembic of
capital. The Code Napoléon is now nothing more than the warrant for
distraints and forced sales. ... The result is that the interests of the
peasants no longer coincide, as during the reign of the first Napoleon,
with the interests of the bourgeoisie, with the interests of capital.
There is now a conflict of interests. The peasants, therefore, find
their natural allies and leaders in the urban proletariat, whose mission
it is to subvert the bourgeois order of society."

"All 'Napoleonic ideas' (a vast expansion of bureaucracy, the rule of
the priests, the preponderance of the army) are the ideas of the petty
proprietors in their callow youth. When the peasants have grown old and
experienced, these ideas seem nonsensical to them. In the death struggle
of the system of petty proprietorship, the Napoleonic ideas have become
hallucinations; the words are empty phrases; the spirits are but ghosts.
Yet the parody of Empire was necessary that the mass of the French
nation might be freed from the yoke of tradition, and that the
opposition between the State authority and society might be displayed in
all its nudity. With the progressive decay of the system of petty
proprietorship, the State structure that was founded upon it collapses."

Again: "Bourgeois revolutions, like those of the eighteenth century,
spread from success to success; they vie with one another in the lustre
of their stage effects; men and things seem to be set in sparkling
brilliants; every day is filled with ecstasy: but they are shortlived;
their climax is soon reached; on the morning after, society has to pass
through a long fit of the dumps; and only when that is over can there be
a dispassionate assimilation of the achievements of the periods of storm
and stress. Proletarian revolutions, on the other hand, like those of
the nineteenth century, are ever self-critical; they again and again
stop short in their progress; retrace their steps in order to make a
fresh start; are pitilessly scornful of the half-measures, the
weaknesses, the futility of their preliminary essays. It seems as if
they had overthrown their adversaries only in order that these might
draw renewed strength from contact with the earth and return to the
battle like giants refreshed. Again and again, they shrink back appalled
before the vague immensity of their own aims. But, at long last, a
situation is reached whence retreat is impossible, and where the
circumstances clamour in chorus: 'Hic Rhodus, hic salta! Here is the
Rose; dance here!'"

### Sufferings in Exile

Marx and his family had reached London in the end of June 1849. They had
no money, no occupation, no source of help.

The funds derived from the sale of what was left of his property in
Treves were soon exhausted. The publication of the "Neue Rheinische
Revue" had been a failure.

More than once Marx had considered the possibility of setting to work in
conjunction with Wilhelm Wolff to supply syndicated correspondence for a
few dozen American journals, correspondence in which he would discuss
the problems of European politics and economics. Now, unexpectedly,
there came a chance for journalistic activity. In 1848, at Cologne,
Freiligrath had introduced him to Dana, the managing editor of the "New
York Tribune," then visiting Europe. In 1851, when Dana asked
Freiligrath, one of the German refugees in London, to send him reports
on European politics, Freiligrath turned the offer over to Marx.

Marx came to an understanding with Dana. Twice every week he was to send
an article dealing with European politics, and was to receive for each
article a fee of two pounds. This gave him an opportunity for which he
had long been eager. Now he could bring his opinions concerning
political matters before a large circle of readers, and make his
influence felt. Moreover, at a season of dire poverty, when he had found
the "nocturnal tears and lamentations" of his wife almost unendurable,
the work would provide him with an income which would at least keep the
wolf from the door.

But in 1851, Marx was not yet at home in the English tongue, and he
therefore had to ask Engels for help. After some hesitation, Engels
agreed, sent one article after another, and in the end wrote the whole
series of articles which Karl Kautsky republished in 1896 under the
title _Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany_, articles signed by
Marx. From the correspondence between Marx and Engels published at a
still later date by Franz Mehring, we learn that this incomparable
friend was Marx's ready helper in all possible difficulties. Not only
was he in unceasing correspondence with Marx upon political, literary,
and personal topics; not only was he untiring in the supply of pecuniary
aid; but he also unselfishly devoted his evenings, year after year, when
the day's work was over, to writing the necessary articles for the "New
York Tribune."

After a while, Engels, following his natural bent, concentrated upon
military topics, whereas Marx discussed English politics in their
interconnexion with economic conditions. Thus, in his articles on the
Crimean war, he disclosed the Anglo-Russian slavery which weighed so
heavily on Europe, proved from acts of parliament and blue-books that
there were secret diplomatic ties between the British and the Russian
cabinets, stigmatized Lord Palmerston as the purchased tool of tsarist
policy, adopted a definite attitude towards panslavism, towards the
Indian Mutiny, towards the Eastern question, towards the Italian war,
towards the North-American civil war, and so on.

Ryazanov has been at pains to make a careful examination of the files
of the "New York Tribune" from 1852 to 1862, in order to discover the
articles contributed by Marx and Engels.

The result has been rather unsatisfactory, for most of the articles were
unsigned. The name of Marx does not appear in the newspaper after 1855;
and many of the contributions were published as leading articles,
anonymously. As Ryazanov says, to begin with, Marx and Engels wrote
exclusively from a bourgeois-democratic outlook. Only by degrees did
they free themselves from this influence, and consistently present a
proletarian standpoint. "They recognized that the great aim they had set
themselves, the freeing of the working class, was incompatible (for the
very reason that it necessitated the collaboration of various nations)
'with a foreign policy which pursues criminal aims, takes advantage of
national prejudices, sheds the blood and wastes the goods of the people
in piratical wars.' While thus pointing out the necessary connexion
between home policy and foreign policy, and while proclaiming the class
struggle of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie to be the leading
principle in all domains and all phases of the historical evolution of
bourgeois society, they urged the proletariat never to lose sight of the
machinations of secret diplomacy, and to worm its way into the mysteries
of international politics."

Hence the collaboration on the staff of the "Tribune" was for Marx a
valuable school of mental development. But as far as material benefit
was concerned, it was less lucrative than he had been led to expect.
Dana was close-fisted. He committed to the wastepaper basket numberless
articles for which he had no use, and for which he did not pay the
author a cent. The result was that the income fell far short of
anticipations. Despite the utmost industry, and despite the unfailing
help of Engels, who was continually supplying him with articles, Marx
was unable to make ends meet.

He and his were living in excruciating poverty. They were ever on the
edge of an abyss. A letter penned by Frau Marx during this period gives
a heartrending picture of their distresses.

"Dear Herr Weydemeyer: Nearly a year has passed since you and your wife
gave me so friendly a reception, since you made me so cordially at home
in your house, and in all that long time I have not given you any sign
of life. ... Now circumstances force me to take up my pen. It is to beg
you that you will as soon as possible send us any money that has come or
is coming to hand from the 'Revue.' We are urgently, most urgently, in
need of it. Certainly no one can reproach us for having made much fuss
about what we have sacrificed and borne for years. The public has been
little if at all troubled with our private affairs. In these matters my
husband is extremely sensitive, and he would make any sacrifices rather
than practise the arts of democratic mendicancy, like great public men.
But he had certainly looked to his friends, especially those in Cologne,
for energetic support of his 'Revue.' Above all, he had reason to expect
such support from those who were acquainted with his sacrifices on
behalf of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung.' Instead of this, the affair has
been brought to utter ruin by neglectful and disorderly management, and
it is hard to say whether the procrastination of the bookseller or the
manager and acquaintances in Cologne, or the behaviour of the democracy
in general, has been the most disgraceful.

"My husband is almost overwhelmed here by the pettiest cares, which
press on him in so disturbing a way that all his energy, the quiet,
clear, tranquil self-consciousness of his nature, have been necessary to
maintain his equanimity in these daily, hourly struggles. You know, dear
Herr Weydemeyer, what sacrifices my husband made for the newspaper. He
paid thousands in cash, buying it (persuaded to this step by democratic
worthies) at a time when there was already very little prospect of a
successful consummation. For the sake of the newspaper's political
honour, and to save the civic honour of his acquaintances in Cologne, he
took upon himself all the burdens ... handed over his whole income; nay,
in the end he borrowed three hundred thalers to pay the rent of the new
offices, to provide arrears of fees for contributors, and so on--and
then he was driven out by force. You know that we had absolutely nothing
left for ourselves. I went to Frankfort to pawn my silver-plate, the
last thing we had; in Cologne I sold my furniture. When the unhappy
epoch of the counter-revolution began, my husband went to Paris; I
followed him thither with my three children. Hardly had we reached Paris
than we were driven out again; I and my children were forbidden to stay
there. I followed him once more across the sea. A month later, our
fourth child was born. You would need to know London, and the conditions
there, to understand what that meant: three children, and the birth of a
fourth. Simply for rent, we had to pay forty-two thalers a month. We
were able to manage for a time, out of the funds we had brought with us.
But our poor resources were exhausted when the 'Revue' was first
published. Agreements notwithstanding, money did not come to hand; or if
it did, it was in such small sums that we were in the most terrible
situation.

"Let me describe only one day of this life, as it actually was, and you
will see that perhaps few other refugees have had to suffer as much.
Since wet-nurses are exceedingly expensive here, I made up my mind,
despite terrible pains in the breasts and the back, to nurse the baby
myself. But the poor little angel drank in so much sorrow with the milk
that he was continually fretting, in violent pain day and night. Since
he has been in the world, he has not slept a single night through, at
most two or three hours. Of late, there have been violent spasms, so
that the child is continually betwixt life and death. When thus
afflicted, he sucked so vigorously that my nipple became sore, and bled;
often the blood streamed into his little mouth. One day I was sitting
like this when our landlady suddenly appeared. In the course of the
winter we had paid her more than two hundred and fifty thalers, and then
it had been agreed that in future we were not to pay her but her
landlord, who had put in an execution. Now she repudiated this
agreement, and demanded the five pounds which we still owed her. Since
we could not pay this sum instantly, two brokers came into the house,
and took possession of all my belongings--bedding, clothes, everything,
even the baby's cradle and the little girls' toys, so that the children
wept bitterly. They threatened to take everything away in two hours. If
this had happened, I should have had to lie on the floor, with my
freezing children beside me, and with my aching breast. Our friend
Schramm hastened forthwith to seek help. He took a cab, the horse fell
down, he jumped out, and was brought back into the house bleeding, the
house where I was lamenting and my poor children were trembling.

"Next day we had to leave. It was cold and rainy. My husband tried to
find a lodging, but as soon as he said we had four children no one would
take us in. At length a friend helped us. We paid what was owing, and I
quickly sold all my beds and bedding, in order to settle accounts with
the chemist, the baker, the butcher, and the milkman, who had heard that
the brokers had been put in, and had hastened to send in their bills.
The beds and bedding that had been sold were loaded on to a handcart at
the street door--and what do you think happened then? It was late in the
evening, after sunset; the English law forbids this; the landlord
arrived with policemen, saying that some of his goods might be on the
cart. Within five minutes, there was a crowd of two or three hundred
people in front of the door, the whole mob of Chelsea. The beds had to
be brought in again, and could not be sent to the purchaser until after
sunrise next morning. Now that the sale of all our possessions had
enabled us to pay our debts to the last penny, I removed with my little
darlings to our present address, two tiny rooms in the German Hotel,
Leicester Street, Leicester Square, where they were good enough to take
us in for five pounds ten a week.

"You must not imagine that I am cast down by these petty troubles. I
know only too well that we are not the only ones engaged in such a
struggle. I know, too, that I am among the lucky ones, am specially
favoured, seeing that my dear husband, the prop of my life, is still at
my side. But what really crushes me, what makes my heart bleed, is that
my husband has to suffer so many paltry annoyances, that so few have
come to his help, and that he, who has willingly and joyfully helped so
many others, should here be left unaided. ... The one thing which my
husband might certainly have expected of those who have had from him so
many thoughts, so much uplifting, so extensive a support, was that they
might have devoted more energy to his 'Revue,' might have shown more
participation in it. This small thing, at least, they owed him. ... This
hurts me. But my husband thinks otherwise. Never, not even in our most
terrible afflictions, has he lost hope of the future, has he ceased to
be cheerful; and he would be perfectly content if he could only see me
cheerful, and if our dear children could play happily round their
beloved mother. He does not know, dear Herr Weydemeyer, that I have
written to you at such length about our situation, so please keep these
lines to yourself."

The tragedy of this life in London as a refugee began in two small rooms
which Marx rented in Dean Street, in June 1850. The living room, which
had to serve the turn of seven persons, was at one and the same time
kitchen, study, and reception room for the numerous visits paid to him.
For real study, therefore, he had to depend on the British Museum
Reading Room, where for many years, day after day, he worked from
morning till night.

For Engels, it became a matter of course to give Marx financial aid.
Among the thousands of letters exchanged between London and Manchester,
there is hardly one in which we do not find a few words or a line or two
about money. Sometimes we read from Marx an outburst of despair or
wrath, in which he asks his friend for speedy help. Sometimes it is
Engels who, quietly and straightforwardly, pens the stereotyped phrase:
"Enclosed a post office order for ---- pounds." Yet at this time Engels
was by no means well off. He had a moderate salary, and had frequent
disputes with his father and with the other members of the firm because
he wanted an increase. Besides this, there were various troubles. At one
time, the cashier was short of money; at another time, the head clerk
refused to sanction an advance; at another, Engels' relatives were
visiting him, and must not be allowed to know about the sending of a
remittance to Marx: "My governor has been buzzing about here for a
week," writes Engels to Marx. "At length I am glad to say he has
departed, so that I can send you the enclosed post office order for five
pounds." Again: "My brother is leaving tomorrow, and I shall have peace
once more. I have not been alone for a moment during his stay, and it
was simply impossible for me to send you the banknote before Saturday."

From time to time, there came from London exceptionally loud cries of
distress. Under date March 31, 1851, we read: "You know that on March
23rd I had to pay £31.10s. to old Bamberger, and on the 16th, £10 to the
Jew Stiebel, all at the current rate of exchange. I had applied to my
mother-in-law through Jenny. The answer was that Edgar had been sent off
to Mexico with the rest of Jenny's money, and I could not raise a
centime. With Pieper's aid, I paid Stiebel his £10 on March 16th. All I
could do for old Bamberger, was to give him two bills of exchange. ...
My mother has positively assured me that she will protest any bill drawn
on her. On April 21st, therefore, I have the worst possible to expect
from old Simon Bamberger, who will be furious. At the same time, my wife
has been confined. The confinement was an easy one, but she is now very
ill in bed, from sentimental rather than physical reasons. Meanwhile, I
have literally not a farthing in the house, though there are plenty of
unpaid bills from the small shopkeepers, the butcher, the baker, and so
on. You will agree that the dish is agreeably sauced, and that I am
dipped up to the ears in a petty-bourgeois pickle. To crown all, I am
accused of exploiting the workers, and of striving to establish a
dictatorship! Quelle horreur! But that is not all. The factory owner who
in Brussels sent me money on loan from Treves, wants it back again,
because his iron mines are in a bad way. Tant pis pour lui. I cannot pay
him his due."

It was Engels, always Engels, who provided advice and money, without
ever growing impatient, without a single refusal. In letter after
letter, the remittances streamed into Lon don, to be emptied there into
the sieve of the Danaides, to vanish into the bottomless pit of a
household that was not very well managed. As late as 1854, Engels was
still entertaining tacit hopes of devoting himself to authorship, and of
removing to London. But the conviction that if he did this he would no
longer be able to give Marx material help, determined him to keep his
neck under the yoke of the "detested commerce."

In August 1851, the Marx household was once more at grips with penury.
"You will realize," wrote Marx to Weydemeyer, "that my situation is a
gloomy one. It will bring my wife down to the grave if it lasts much
longer. The unceasing troubles, the paltry struggles of life, are a
perpetual friction. Then there is the infamous conduct of my
adversaries. ... For my part, I should laugh at the scum; I should not
let them disturb me in my work for a moment. But you will understand
that my wife, who is ill, who has to endure the most dismal poverty from
morning till night, and who is nervously upset, gets none the better
because, day after day, idiotic chatterers bring her all the vapourings
of the democratic cesspools."

At Easter 1852, Marx's little daughter, born into this poverty-stricken
environment, quitted an inhospitable world. Here is what her mother
writes about the matter: "Our poor little Francisca fell ill with severe
bronchitis. For three days the poor child struggled with death. She
suffered so terribly. When it was over, her little body rested in the
small back room, and we all came into the front room. At night, we lay
down on the floor. The three other children were with us, and we wept at
the loss of the little angel. ... The dear child's death happened at a
time when we were in the direst need. Our German friends were unable to
help us. ... Ernest Jones, who paid us a visit at this time, and had
promised to help, was unable to do anything. ... In my overwhelming
need, I hastened to a French refugee who lived in the neighbourhood, and
had visited us not long before. At once, in the most friendly way
possible, he gave me two pounds. With this sum I was able to buy the
coffin in which my poor child now lies at peace. She had no cradle when
she came into the world, and for a long time it was difficult to find a
box for her last resting place."

The years from 1852 onwards were for Marx, politically considered,
almost "idyllic years of peace," for he had no further conflicts or
controversies with opponents, had withdrawn from political activity, and
had buried himself in scientific work. Pecuniarily, however, they were
no better than their predecessors. Consider two passages from the
letters of 1853. "Dear Engels: I have not written to you for a long
time, not even to acknowledge the receipt of the five pounds, for my
time and my energies were fully engaged in an indescribable stew. On
July 7th I had given a bill of exchange to Spielmann. On August 31st the
fellow, after I had been to see him seven times, declared that the bill
had been lost, and so on. Thus I had been dragging along for weeks, had
pawned the last thing pawnable, and had put all my creditors off until
September 3rd, having fended them away since July. Since I have no
resources beyond the income from the 'Tribune" you will understand my
situation." Again, under date October 8th: "For ten days we have been
without a son in the house. I have proof, now, that Spielmann has
cheated me. ... I must draw another twenty-four pounds."

Sickness, like poverty, was an unceasing guest. The dwelling was
unwholesome, airless, and sunless. Marx was kept in bed for weeks by a
disorder of the liver; a family trouble, he believed. Not long
afterwards, he wrote to Engels: "My wife is very ill, cough and loss of
weight." Another time: "My wife is ill, so is little Jenny, and Lenchen
has a sort of nervous fever. I cannot send for the doctor, having no
money. For the last eight or ten days I have fed the family upon bread
and potatoes, but I doubt if I can raise any for today. Of course this
diet was not calculated to improve matters in the present climatic
conditions."

There was great anxiety about the third child, the only son, at once his
pride and his hope. Little Edgar (named after Marx's brother-in-law) was
remarkably talented, and took after his father in his love for learning,
for books. But from earliest childhood he was sickly, lacking in vital
energy, the sort of plant that might be expected to grow where light and
nutriment were so inadequate. In 1855 came a new child of sorrow, little
Eleanor, the sixth in the series. Known by the pet name of Tussy, she
was at birth so immature, so weakly, that she was very difficult to
rear. Fed exclusively on milk until she was five years old, and mainly
on the same diet until she was ten, she grew plump and healthy, and was
the darling of all.

A few months after Eleanor's birth, Marx had to endure the greatest
affliction of his life. At the age of nine, Edgar, his dear "Musch,"
died in his arms after several weeks' illness. A few days later, Marx
wrote to Engels: "The house is desolate and orphaned since the death of
the dear child, who was its living soul. I cannot attempt to describe
how we all miss him. I have been through a peck of troubles, but now for
the first time I know what real unhappiness is. As luck would have it,
since the funeral I have been suffering from such intense headaches that
I can no longer think or see or hear. Amid all the miseries of these
days, the thought of you and your friendship has kept me going, and the
hope that you and I will still find it possible to do something worth
doing in the world."

A year afterwards, Baroness von Westphalen died in Treves. Frau Marx had
gone with her children to sit by the mother's deathbed. When all was
over, there was a small heritage for Frau Marx, amounting to a few
hundred thalers. Marx thereupon decided to seek a new dwelling. In the
beginning of 1857, the family settled into a roomier and healthier
habitation, 9 Grafton Terrace. This was a relief to them all, and Frau
Marx was happy. "We have a really princely home, compared with the
hovels we have lived in up to now," she wrote to a friend. "Although the
whole furnishings did not cost much more than forty pounds (second-hand
rubbish played a great part in them), our new parlour, to begin with,
looked splendid to me. ... Its splendours did not last very long, for
soon one article after another found its way to the pawnshop. Still, we
have been able to enjoy our bourgeois comfort."

In this house another child was born to Marx, but did not survive. The
circumstances were so dreadful, and made so terrible an impression on
the father, that for several days afterwards he was almost beside
himself. In letters to Engels he refers to the matter again and again.
He says that the retrospect is so painful that he cannot write any
details.

All who came into close contact with Marx were agreed in what they had
to say about the tenderness and affection he showed where children were
concerned. What could be more characteristic than this as regards the
delicate mysteries of his inner life. A violent, quarrelsome,
contentious man, a dictator and a swashbuckler, one at feud with all the
world and continually alarmed lest he should be unable to assert his
superiority--none the less, in the depths of his soul, he had vast
treasures of gentleness, kindliness, and capacity for self-sacrifice.
But because in the unconscious he was filled with anxiety lest his
gentleness and kindliness might prove disadvantageous to him, he kept
them under close guard, and was ashamed to display to grown-ups the
beauties which he regarded as weaknesses, and would only disclose them
in a region where there was no struggle with adult rivals, far from the
gladiatorial combats for mastery and self-assertion in the arena we call
life. With children, he could play like a child. In their company he
threw aside authoritarianism as burdensome armour; was never mortified,
never fretful, never concerned to maintain his prestige. Children called
him, as his intimate friends called him, "Mohr"; and in the
neighbourhood where he lived he was generally known as "Daddy Marx," the
man who always had a packet of sweets in his pocket.

There was one person besides Engels who did much to mitigate the
unspeakable miseries of the early years of the Marx family in exile.
This was the familiar spirit of the household, the faithful Helene
(Lenchen) Demuth. An embodiment of unselfishness, a counterpart to
Pestalozzi's Babeli, she had entered the house of the Baroness von
Westphalen at the age of eight or nine years. When Jenny married Marx,
her mother sent Lenchen away with her daughter "as the best thing I can
send you." Lenchen went with the Marxes to Paris, Brussels, Cologne, and
London; saw the children born and die; experienced poverty, hunger, and
sorrow with the family; cared indefatigably for the children, for the
friends of the house, for innumerable poverty-stricken refugees; served
bread at table when everything had been pawned; nursed the sick, sewed
and mended far on into the night; was the indispensable buttress of the
household, the guardian angel of the family, a perennially flowing
source of help. Wilhelm Liebknecht says of her: "All the same, she
exercised a sort of dictatorship. To this dictatorship Marx yielded like
a lamb. It has been said that no one is a hero to his valet. Certainly
Marx was not a hero to Lenchen. She would have sacrificed herself on his
behalf; if necessary, she would have given her life a hundred times over
for him and Frau Marx and any one of the children (and she did indeed
give her life for them), but Marx was not an imposing figure for her.
She knew him with all his whimsies and weaknesses, and she twisted him
round her finger. No matter how irritable he might be, no matter how he
might storm and rage so that every one else kept away from him in
terror, Lenchen would go into the lion's den; and if he roared at her,
she would give him such a rating that the lion became as tame as a
lamb." It was fitting that this devoted friend, who was united with the
Marx family by a thousand spiritual bonds, should in due course, as both
Frau Marx and Karl Marx had wished, find her resting place in the family
tomb.

### Associates and Friends

Repelled by the unsavouriness of party struggles, and full of bitterness
towards an environing world which he felt to be hostile, Marx had
withdrawn into the solitude of scientific research.

But the life he tried to escape followed him into his study, sat beside
him at his desk in the British Museum Reading Room, stood at his
shoulder when he was writing, and found issue through his pen. It
appeared in the vesture of the poverty which compelled him to write
articles for the "New York Tribune" upon the events of the day and upon
political problems. It disclosed itself in the form of the friends and
companions-in-arms who sought him out in London, asked his advice,
appealed to his political interest. It displayed itself in the form of
happenings on the political fighting front, happenings which constrained
him to adopt a position, to pass judgments, to take measures.

Thus it came to pass that living practice could not be kept away by
theoretical reflection. Nevertheless, the transition from a
contemplative and critical reserve to active participation and positive
collaboration was effected by slow degrees. Fundamentally, Marx was an
unsocial being, and was happiest in solitude.

Despite this temperament, he entered into relations with men who at that
time were playing an important part in the political life of England.
Among these may be mentioned, David Urquhart, George Julian Harney, and
Ernest Jones.

Urquhart was a British diplomatist, a turcophile who had made it his
business in life to counteract Russian plans for world dominion,
particularly in the East. According to Urquhart, Lord Palmerston, the
leading figure in the British foreign policy of that day, had been
bought by Russia. Urquhart hated Palmerston with a deadly hatred; and
the English liberals, to whom Palmerston was the arch-enemy, were glad
to avail themselves of all the materials and arguments that Urquhart
could bring forward. Marx, who was likewise opposed to Palmerston and
the latter's russophile policy (not as a turcophile, but as a
revolutionist), had an interview with Urquhart which led to permanent
relations; and he wrote articles for Urquhart's newspaper the "Free
Press" (in 1866 renamed the "Diplomatic Review"), though without getting
into dose touch with the man. For Urquhart, whom Marx described as "a
complete monomaniac," was an opponent of the Chartist movement, whereas
Marx was intimate with those who formed the left wing of Chartism.
Nevertheless, in the eight articles upon Lord Palmerston contributed to
the "People's Paper" in 1853, articles in which Marx threw a glaring
light on the underground trends of Anglo-Russo-Turkish policy in the
Balkans, he made use of all the information which Urquhart had gathered
together in diplomatic activities and in the study of the relevant
documents. "This is a fitting occasion," wrote Marx in the sixth of
these articles, "to give his due to Mr. David Urquhart, the
indefatigable antagonist for twenty years of Lord Palmerston who has
proved his only adversary--not one to be intimidated into silence,
bribed into connivance, charmed into suitorship--while, what with
cajoleries, what with seductions, Alcina Palmerston contrived to change
all other foes into fools."

With Harney and Jones, Marx had closer ties than with Urquhart. These
two men were leaders in the Chartist camp, were men of culture,
thoroughly trustworthy, and widely popular. Harney was a journalist of
proletarian origin, whilst Jones was a lawyer connected by blood with
the aristocracy he despised. Both of them had the greatest respect for
Marx's revolutionary personality, for his outstanding intelligence, and
for his unerring consistency. Harney had done good service by
publishing, in his newspaper the "Red Republican," a translation of the
_Communist Manifesto_ and of some of the "Rheinische Revue" articles.
Jones often rendered the Marx family much-needed help in its material
difficulties. But in the quarrels among the refugees, neither Harney nor
Jones took Marx's side without qualification, which was what Marx
demanded. Of Harney, Marx said that he had chosen for a following some
of his (Marx's) personal enemies; and of Jones that "despite his energy,
tenacity, and activity, he spoiled everything by charlatanry, a tactless
grasping at pretexts for agitation, and a restless desire to outrun
time." Since both of them made concessions to the opposing party, and
showed a reserved or hesitating attitude in some of the disputes, Marx
gave them a liberal taste of the gall with which, in his ebullitions of
impetuosity, he was so apt to ruin the possibilities of intimate
friendship and fruitful comradeship.

Even in his relations with young Wilhelm Liebknecht, who was a daily
guest in the house and a playfellow of the children, there was a period
of tension and irritability, with the result that for a long time
Liebknecht, most reluctantly, kept aloof. In this case the offence was
that Liebknecht had not broken away from the Workers' Educational
Society, but had earnestly endeavoured to mediate between the two
hostile camps. His attempts failed, and it soon became plain to him that
he was falling between two stools. Then, one day, he happened upon the
Marx children in the street. Delighted at meeting their favourite
playmate, they would give him no rest until he went home with them. They
smuggled him into the house, but could not restrain their rejoicings.
When Marx heard the clamour they were making, and found Liebknecht, he
stretched out his hand with a cordial laugh. No further word was said
about their differences.

In 1856, when the tailor Lessner, who had been one of those sentenced in
the Cologne communist trial, came to London after spending four and a
half years in prison, he found the Workers' Educational Society in a
very poor way, but was ready to give Liebknecht active assistance in its
reorganization. The Kinkel clique, which had been in control, was driven
out; a working programme was drawn up; and even Marx was induced to take
part in the educational activities. During the winter of 1856-1857, the
society was as flourishing as ever; many of the old members rejoined;
and the tactics of the ultra-radical hotspurs were abandoned. Once more
the society had become a centre of serious and fruitful work. Marx
delivered a course of lectures on political economy, thus resuming his
role of 1850-1851. He expounded his subject, as Liebknecht tells us, in
the most methodical way. He would formulate a proposition, as pithily as
possible, and would then proceed to elaborate it, carefully avoiding any
words or phrases which his working-class hearers might have found it
difficult to understand. Then he would ask for questions. "If there were
no questions, he would subject the audience to an examination, and would
do it with so much skill that no gaps and no misunderstandings could be
overlooked." Marx was not an orator; he lacked the faculty of speaking
easily before a considerable audience. Moreover, his speech was rather
thick, and he spoke with a broad Rhenish accent. When, as was inevitable
from time to time, he had to deliver a set speech, he would display
passionate excitement, which was an over-compensation for his dread of
failure. Throughout life, in all important situations, this titan, who
had made it his task to turn the world upside down, was overwhelmed with
a sense of inadequacy. The weaker he felt, the more was he inclined to
bluster.

The list of friends and companions with whom Marx had close association
in the fifties is concluded when the names of Ferdinand Freiligrath and
Wilhelm Wolff have been mentioned. When Freiligrath came to London and
was courted by refugees representing various trends and belonging to
various camps and faction, he categorically declared that he proposed to
associate "only with Marx, and Marx's most intimate friends." He was
manager of the London agency of the Genevese Banque Générale Suisse, and
had a good income, being thus able to say of himself that he was lucky
enough to eat the "beefsteaks of exile." He was liberal in furnishing
aid to less fortunate political refugees, and the, Marxes found in him a
valuable supporter. Wilhelm Wolff, a close friend of Marx since the days
of the "Rheinische Zeitung," was the latter's nearest intimate with the
exception of Engels. He was the son of a Silesian hotel-keeper, and had
inherited a small property from his father. He lived upon this in
England as best he could, supplementing it by occasional paid
occupation.

When he died in 1864 of a stroke, after a long illness, Marx became his
heir.

### _Herr Vogt_

For Marx the fifties, the first decade he spent on English soil, ended
as they had begun, with a feud. The witch's cauldron of the refugees was
boiling over once more, and was sending forth the vapours of a
pestiferous brew which poisoned the political life of Europe.

In 1859 Marx became involved in a controversy which was extremely trying
to his nerves. It concerned the Vogt affair, which originated as
follows.

For several decades the Italian bourgeoisie had been carrying on a
struggle on behalf of national independence and unity. By its unaided
powers, it could not hope within any reasonable time to bring this
struggle to a victorious issue. Ultimately, the liberal and democratic
bourgeois had harnessed the kingdom of Sardinia to their coach as
trace-horse, but this had not sufficed to pull them up the hill. Then
Sardinia, which now formed the nucleus of the national consolidation,
prompted by Cavour, turned to Napoleon III for armed assistance. In the
treaty of Plombières, it was agreed that Sardinia and France should make
common cause in a war on Austria, and that Nice and Savoy should be
ceded to France in return for this help. The unification and
independence of Italy were to be achieved, not by revolution, but by
war.

This diplomatic and militarist move, which excluded revolutionary action
on the part of the people, encountered widespread opposition in Italy
and elsewhere. Mazzini, who as a refugee in London was the father of all
the conspiratorial secret societies, declared the treaty to be a
dynastic intrigue, which would sacrifice the interests of Italy to the
imperialist lusts of Napoleon. In actual fact, Napoleon III was less
concerned about the liberation of Italy from Austria than about the
expansion of the French sphere of influence. The war was designed, not
so much to drive Austria out of Italy, as to keep Austria away from the
Balkans, where Russia wished to carry out her imperialist plans
undisturbed. Thus, for those who, as revolutionists, were opposed to the
policy of Russia and of France, but could not favour the maintenance of
Austrian dominion in Italy--and for those who were simultaneously
concerned about Italian interests and German interests--it was extremely
difficult to choose a political line.

Some regarded the Italian war as only a pretext behind which French
Bonapartism and Russian tsarism were joining hands against Germany,
which would be impotent without Austria's help. A victory of France in
Italy, they said, would mean for Germany the loss of the left bank of
the Rhine, as the outcome of a Franco-German war which would immediately
follow. They therefore advocated common action on the part of Prussia
and Austria, to attack Napoleon. Any one who wished to defend the Rhine
must stand beside Austria for the defence of the Po. Other onlookers
were filled with enthusiasm on behalf of the liberal and nationalist
aspirations of the Italians, who must be supported whatever happened.
They declared that Prussian action in favour of Austria would result in
strengthening the counter-revolution, and would be a crime directed
against historical evolution. In petty-bourgeois circles, however,
Napoleon had supporters and defenders, who urgently desired his success
should Prussia join forces with Austria. In Napoleon's own view, nothing
could be more dangerous to his schemes than active intervention of
Prussia on the side of Austria, and consequently, through his press
agents, he carried on a vigorous propaganda in favour of Prussian
neutrality.

In German nationalist circles yet another view prevailed, and found
considerable support. Those of this way of thinking were anti-Austrian
on the ground that if Austria were weakened or defeated, Prussia would
be strengthened. Thus the unification of Germany under Prussian hegemony
would be brought nearer to realization. Lassalle espoused this view, and
advocated it vigorously in his pamphlet _Der italienische Krieg und die
Aufgabe Preussens_ [The Italian War and Prussia's Tasks]. The German
nation, he said, was as keenly interested in the overthrow of Austrian
despotism as in the success of the Italian movement for unification,
seeing that Austria was the focus of reaction. Should Napoleon make war
on Prussia, the whole nation would rise like one man. Now, however, the
favourable moment had come for Prussia, not only to be neutral towards
Austria, but also to do in the north what Napoleon was doing in the
south. "If Napoleon alters the map of Europe in the south in accordance
with the principle of nationalities, let us do the same thing in the
north. If Napoleon frees Italy, let us take Schleswig-Holstein."

Much the same view was advocated by the Swiss professor Karl Vogt. In a
letter to Engels, Marx sketched Vogt's political programme in the
following words: "Germany gives up her possessions outside the German
frontier. She does not support Austria. The French despotism is
transitory, the Austrian is permanent. Allow both the despots to let
blood (a certain predilection for Bonaparte is manifest). Germany, armed
neutrality. Of a revolutionary movement in Germany there cannot be, as
Vogt has learned 'from trustworthy sources,' any thought during our
lifetime. Consequently, as soon as Austria has been ruined by Bonaparte,
they will spontaneously begin an all-German moderate national-liberal
development in the fatherland, and Vogt will perhaps become Prussian
court-fool to boot."

Marx adopted a very different standpoint from Lassalle and Vogt. Being
passionately opposed both to Bonaparte and to tsarism, he considered the
war to be the issue of a Franco-Russian alliance. In an article in the
"People's Press," Jones' newspaper, he let himself go against both
Lassalle and Vogt. In a letter to Engels, he wrote: "Lassalle's pamphlet
is an enormous blunder. ... As regards the 'governments,' obviously,
from all standpoints, were it only in the interests of the existence of
Germany, we must demand of them that they should not remain neutral,
but, as you rightly say, should be patriotic. Yet a revolutionary point
can be given to the affair simply enough, by throwing _even more_
emphasis on the opposition to Russia than on that to Boustrapa [Napoleon
III]. This is what Lassalle ought to have done, as contrasted with the
anti-French clamour of the '_Neue Preussische Zeitung_.' This, too, is
the point where, in practice during the continuance of the war, the
German governments will act treasonably, and where we can seize them by
the collar."

Meanwhile, Engels had incorporated his own and Marx's views in a booklet
entitled _Po und Rhein_, which, through Lassalle's instrumentality, was
published in April 1859 by Franz Duncker of Berlin.

At about this date, Marx was privately informed by Karl Blind, the
Badenese refugee, that Vogt was in Napoleon's pay, had received large
sums of money, had attempted to bribe a journalist, and so on. In
conversation, Marx made no secret of the matter; and at length it found
its way into the German newspaper "_Das Volk_," published in London, to
which Marx was an occasional contributor.

Vogt answered with a flood of invectives, and started in the German
press a furious campaign against the "band of ruffians," and its
"ringleader, Karl Marx."

As chance would have it, in a Manchester printing house, shortly
afterwards, Liebknecht came across a leaflet written by Blind,
containing the latter's revelations about Vogt. Liebknecht sent a proof
of the leaflet to the "Augsburger Allgemeine Zeitung," of which he was
correspondent. The substance of the leaflet was published in that
journal and attracted widespread attention. Vogt swore by all the gods
that he was the victim of a disgraceful calumny, and brought a libel
action against the newspaper.

The upshot was very unsatisfactory. Blind, when called as a witness,
wilted. No other proof of the accusation was forthcoming. In the end,
the charge was dismissed on technical, not factual grounds. Although
Vogt had not won his case legally, he had secured a moral victory, of
which he made the most before the public. As a further complication,
Blind now wrote to the papers declaring Liebknecht's story about the
leaflet to be a "malicious invention." Vogt published the shorthand
report of the proceedings at the trial, a report which told very much in
his favour. The general impression produced was that Marx and his
friends had circulated a base calumny. Thereupon Marx lost patience.
Returning to the charge, he attacked Vogt with all the weapons at his
command. He sought out witnesses; made careful investigations, explored
old correspondence; sharked up materials from every quarter of the
world; picked Vogt's articles to pieces, and showed that they were made
up of catchwords and commonplaces lifted from Bonapartist pamphlets;
opened all the sluices of his wit, his scorn, his pitiless satire, in
order to make Vogt appear ludicrous and contemptible. In the course of a
year, he compiled a volume of two hundred pages, entitled _Herr Vogt_.
It was published in London, but had so small a circulation that it was
without any notable influence on public opinion. The book was killed by
the silence of the press. Only the few who had a special interest in the
matter read it. Others were repelled by its bulk, its overweighting with
detail, and its prolixity. Vogt had triumphed. The artillery directed
against him had missed fire. His shield was untarnished.

But eleven years later, during the Commune of Paris, the archives of the
Napoleonic government were rifled in the Tuileries. There was found,
signed by Vogt, a receipt for 40,000 francs, paid over to this man of
honour in August 1859, out of the Bonapartist secret-service fund.

Not a word about this revelation found its way into the ordinary press.

Nevertheless, Marx had been justified.

### Condemned to Permanent Expatriation

In the year 1861, Prince William of Prussia came to the throne, and an
amnesty was declared.

It was an extremely ungracious amnesty, half-hearted, reluctant, petty;
"the scurviest which has been granted since 1849 in any country (Austria
not excepted)," as Marx wrote bitterly to Engels. The refugees of
1848-1849 were graciously permitted to return, but not unconditionally.
They had to make an "official" application for the king's clemency,
whereupon His Majesty would be guided "by a report from Our Military
justice department."

In this matter, Marx came worse off than most of the German refugees. It
was not merely that the conditional amnesty was no good to him, since he
was unwilling to demean himself by suing King William's favour.
Furthermore, he was no longer a Prussian subject, and had only a refusal
to expect should he apply for reinstatement. As an actual fact, when
Lassalle made zealous efforts to secure naturalization papers for Marx,
his applications were refused on the ground that Marx was "of
republican, or at least non-royalist sentiment."

Since Marx was unable to recover his status as a Prussian subject, he
was, in effect, condemned to permanent expatriation. For him, however,
expatriation implied the lack of a means of livelihood, economic
insecurity, incessant poverty.

At the time when the amnesty was declared, his financial embarrassments
had again become extreme, notwithstanding the unceasing help of Engels
and the frequent contributions to his expenses made by Lassalle. The
editor of the "New York Tribune" had cut down the space allotted to him,
and had for several weeks stopped publishing his contributions at all.
Urgent debts were accumulating. "I do not know how on earth I shall get
on," he wrote to Engels. "Taxes, school expenses, rent, the grocer, the
butcher, and God and the Devil alone know what others, will wait no
longer." Besides, Marx was ailing, his chronic liver trouble having
lighted up again. Frau Marx had just recovered from an attack of
smallpox, and this had cost a lot of money. The children had been taken
care of by Liebknecht, while Marx and Lenchen ran the house alone. Once
more everything possible had been pawned, and they were in dire need.

Then Marx made up his mind to go to Holland, and to ask an uncle who
lived there for help that would save his family from utter ruin. Engels
encouraged him to this undertaking, so with borrowed funds and a false
passport he made his "raid into the land of my maternal forefathers,
tobacco, and cheese."

This time, fortune smiled. His uncle Philips in Rotterdam forked out
£160, which would have enabled Marx to pay most of his debts. But, now
that he had money in his pocket, he had no fancy for returning home
immediately. Instead, he went to visit his mother at Treves, and she,
since "there was no talk of ready cash," was complaisant enough to tear
up his earlier notes of hand. From Treves he made his way to Berlin,
where he stayed as Lassalle's guest. He got in touch with various
friends, clinked glasses with Köppen, had himself photographed, made
arrangements for contributing to a Viennese newspaper, attended (in the
press gallery) a sitting of the Lower House, which seemed to him "an
extraordinary mixture of office and schoolroom," and talked over with
Lassalle the plans for founding a great newspaper. His general
impression of Berlin, where "an impudent and frivolous tone prevailed,"
was unfavourable. On the way home, he caroused with old acquaintances,
both in Elberfeld and in Cologne, and finally got back to London after
two months' absence.

Ere long he was on the rocks again. Within a month of his return he
wrote to Engels saying that the money he had brought back with him was
already finished. Since applications to his mother produced "only
affectionate phrases, but no cash," Engels had to come to his help once
more. From a visit to Manchester, Marx brought back some money with him.
There followed the usual remittances by letter. But in November he was
in trouble once more: "With the last money you sent me I paid the school
fees, so that I might not have to pay two terms' fees in January. The
butcher and the grocer have forced me to give them notes of hand.
Although I do not know how I shall pay these notes when they fall due, I
could not refuse without bringing the house down about my ears. I am in
debt to the landlord, also to the greengrocer, the baker, the newspaper
man, the milkman, and the whole mob I had appeased with instalments when
I came back from Manchester; also to the tailor, having had to get the
necessary winter clothing on tick. All I can expect to receive at the
end of the month will be £30 at most, for these infernal devils of the
press are only printing part of my articles. ... What I have to pay
(including interest to pawnbrokers) amounts to about £100. It is
extraordinary how, when one has no regular income, and when there is a
perpetual burden of unpaid debts, the old poverty persistently recurs,
despite continual dribbles of help."

The "dribbles of help" that came in from Engels amounted to a very large
sum in the course of the year. But Engels was only a salaried employee,
kept on short commons by his father, and with no share in the profits of
the factory. Writing to Marx in February 1862, he said: "This year I
have spent more than my income. We are seriously affected by the crisis,
have no orders, and shall have to begin working half time next week. I
shall have to pay the £50 to Dronke in a month, and during the next few
weeks a year's rent for my house falls due. This morning, Sarah (be
damned to her) stole the money out of my coat pocket. ... I am now
living almost entirely at Mary's, to keep down expenses as much as
possible; unfortunately, I cannot get on without a house of my own, or
otherwise I should remove to her place altogether." The more Engels
denied himself, and the more he sent to his friend, the more hopeless
became the condition of the Marx household, whose shiftlessness seemed
irreparable.

"It is sickening to have to write to you in this way once more," said
Marx apologetically in a letter under date June 18, 1862. "Yet what can
I do but pour my miseries into your ears again? My wife says to me every
day that she wishes she were with the children in the grave, and I
really cannot take it amiss of her, for the humiliations, torments, and
horrors of our situation are indescribable. As you know, the fifty
pounds went to the payment of debts, but did not suffice to settle half
of them. Two pounds for gas. The pitiful sum from Vienna will not come
in before the end of July, and will be damned little, for the dogs are
not printing as much as even one article a week now. Then I have had to
meet fresh expenses since the beginning of May. I will say nothing about
the really desperate situation in London, to be without a centime for
seven weeks, since this sort of thing is chronic. Still, you will know
from your own experience that there are always current expenses which
have to be paid in cash. As far as that was concerned, we got on for a
time by pawning again the things we had taken out of pawn in the end of
April. For some weeks, however, that source has been so utterly
exhausted that last week my wife made a vain attempt to dispose of some
of my books. I am all the more sorry for the poor children seeing that
we are so short in this season of exhibitions, when their acquaintances
are amusing themselves, and when their one terror is that any one should
visit them and see the nakedness of our poverty." In another letter he
writes: "With Jenny it has gone so far that she feels all the pressure
and filthiness of our circumstances, and this, I believe, is one of the
main causes of her bodily troubles (Apropos! Allen ordered wine for her
yesterday, and I should be awfully glad if you could send a few
bottles.) Without telling us, she went to Mrs. Young, to see if she
could get an engagement at the theatre."

In July 1862, Lassalle spent several weeks in London. Marx, wishing to
return his hospitality, had invited him to stay in the house. "To be
able to keep up appearances before him," wrote Marx to Engels, "my wife
had had to pawn practically every thing that was not nailed down."
Lassalle made the best of things, but was, in the end, profoundly moved
when he became aware of the abysses that had been laboriously and
exiguously hidden out of sight. "He realized from my dejected aspect
that the crisis which he had long known to be impending was about to
culminate in a catastrophe. He questioned me. When I told him how things
were, he said he could lend me fifteen pounds up to January 1, 1863; and
that I could draw upon him to any amount." Marx wished to avail himself
of this offer forthwith, and tried to secure four hundred thalers, but
Lassalle wanted Engels' guarantee, and Engels, through Freiligrath's
instrumentality, had the amount covered in Berlin. A few days later came
another urgent appeal to Engels: "Eccarius has lost three children one
after another from scarlet fever. They are in terrible straits. Beat up
a trifle amongst our friends, and send it to him." Six days later:
"Since you have just sent money to Eccarius, as well as paying the large
sum for the Lassalle bill of exchange, you must be 'stony' yourself.
Still, I have to beg you to send me a trifle by Monday, for I have to
buy coal, and also food. The grocer has refused me credit for three
weeks past, and until I have paid the pig off I must buy of him for
cash, if I do not want him to sue me." And so on, letter after letter,
week after week.

Thus Engels was incessantly dipping his hand into his pocket. Sometimes,
when he took stock of his payments, he realized that they were far
greater than he could afford, and that he was living beyond his means;
but he never refused help. When his father died, and his position in the
firm had consequently improved, so that he had a larger income, he was
able to hand over more considerable sums without pinching himself
unduly. Nevertheless, since Marx's claims on his generosity continually
increased, there was a strain on both sides. In the end, just as towards
the close of 1862 there had been a breach between Marx and Lassalle "for
financial reasons," so, early in 1863, there was grave risk of a sudden
end to the friendship between Engels and Marx. The trouble came from
Marx's side.

In the beginning of January 1863, occurred the death of Engels' friend
Mary Burns, an Irish working-class girl with whom he had been living in
a free union. Her loss was a bitter grief to him, and on January 7th he
wrote to Marx: "Dear Mohr: Mary is dead. Yesterday evening she went to
bed early. When Lizzy went up to bed towards midnight, she was dead
already. Quite suddenly. Heart disease, or a stroke. I did not hear of
it till this morning; on Monday evening she was perfectly well. I simply
cannot tell you how I feel about it. The poor girl loved me with all her
heart."

To this letter so moving in its simplicity, to this letter in which his
friend's tears could be read between the lines, Marx wrote the following
almost incredible answer: "Dear Engels: The news of Mary's death has
both astonished and dismayed me. She was extremely good-natured, witty,
and much attached to you. The devil knows that there is nothing but
trouble now in our circles. I myself can no longer tell whether I am on
my head or my heels. My attempts to raise some money in France and
Germany have failed, and it is only to be expected that £15 would not
hold off the avalanche more than a week or two. Apart from the fact that
no one will give us credit any more, except the butcher and the baker
(and they only to the end of this week), I am harried for school
expenses, for rent, and by the whole pack. The few of them to whom I
have paid a little on account, have pouched it in a twinkling, to fall
upon me with redoubled violence. Furthermore, the children have no
clothes or shoes in which to go out. In a word, there is hell to pay.
... We shall hardly be able to keep going for another fortnight. It is
abominably selfish of me to retail all these horrors to you at such a
moment. But the remedy is homoeopathic. One evil will help to cancel the
other."

Although Engels was familiar with Marx's cynicism, and with his friend's
inclination to make a parade of coldness, he was thunderstruck by this
letter. He had not expected an outburst of sentiment, but he had not
been prepared for an answer couched in such terms. It was five days
before he replied, writing: "You will find it natural enough that on
this occasion my own trouble and your frosty attitude towards it have
made it impossible for me to write to you sooner. All my friends,
including acquaintances among the philistines, have on this occasion,
which indeed touches me shrewdly, shown more sympathy and friendship
than I could have anticipated. To you it seemed a suitable moment for
the display of the superiority of your frigid way of thinking. So be
it!"

This call to order, so delicate, so magnanimous, brought Marx to his
senses. The crust of ice in which his heart was wrapped, speedily
melted, and within a few days he answered ruefully: "It was very wrong
of me to write you that letter, and I repented it as soon as it was
posted. My wife and children will confirm me when I say that on receipt
of your letter I was as deeply moved as by the death of one of my own
nearest and dearest. But when I wrote to you in the evening, I had been
driven desperate by the state of affairs at home. The brokers were in; I
had a summons from the butcher; we had neither fire nor food; and little
Jenny was ill in bed. In such circumstances, I can, generally speaking,
only help myself out by cynicism."

Engels knew his friend so well that he could not but be aware of the
weakness, the desperate anxiety, that were masked by this cynicism.
Though he was still profoundly shaken by the loss of his companion, he
thanked Marx for replying so frankly, and went on to say: "I felt that
when I buried her, I buried with her the last fragment of my youth. Your
letter came before the funeral. I must tell you that I could not get the
letter out of my head for a whole week, could not forget it. Never mind,
your last letter has made up for it, and I am glad that in losing Mary I
have not at the same time lost my oldest and best friend."

As if nothing had happened, Engels promptly turned to consider what he
could do to straighten out the hopelessly disordered finances of the
Marx household. After casting this way and that for means of raising
money, he ventured upon "the bold coup" of borrowing a hundred pounds on
account of the firm, without consulting his partners. Speedy aid was
essential. Marx had announced that he contemplated the desperate step of
going through the bankruptcy court, breaking up his home, getting the
children placed elsewhere, dismissing Lenchen Demuth, and going with his
wife into cheap lodgings. "I cannot bear to look on while you carry out
your plan," wrote Engels. "Still, you will understand that after my
exceptional efforts I am absolutely cleaned out, and that therefore you
will not be able to count on anything from me before June 30th."

In the Marx family, after all the agitations, conflicts, and conjugal
disputes, there now prevailed the greatest possible delight at the happy
turn of events. But only two months later, Dronke had to help them out
with £50, to which, with Engels' assistance, he added an additional £200
in July. At odd times in between, Engels continued to send small
remittances. When, in December 1863, old Frau Marx died in Treves,
Engels had to supply a further £10 in order that Marx, who had just been
very ill with boils and was still in extremely poor health, could go to
the funeral. No man ever had a better friend than Marx had in Engels.
Never a reproach, never a refusal, never an evasion. To the last of
these letters, clamouring for money and draining his purse to the dregs,
he answered, referring to Marx's handwriting (which no one could read so
well as he): "I was damned glad to see your crabbed old fist once more."

### Lassalle

Whereas for the bourgeoisie, the fifties, the years of the
counter-revolution, were a period characterized by a tremendous economic
impetus, for the proletariat they were a period of limitless
exploitation, which the workers were powerless to resist. Towards the
end of the decade, however, from 1857 onwards, there came a crisis which
arrested the victorious advance of the capitalist economy. Marx had
staked all his revolutionary hopes on the prospect of this crisis, and
he was bubbling over with cheerful anticipation when the wave of
bankruptcies, failures, arrest of production, and difficulty in making
ends meet, spread across the Atlantic from America to England, and
ultimately overwhelmed the continent of Europe. "Although the crisis in
America has a very unpleasant effect on our own purse," wrote Frau Marx
to Comrade Schramm in Jersey, "you can imagine how delighted Mohr is.
His old capacity for work has come back, with the old freshness and
cheerfulness which have been in abeyance for years. ... In the daytime,
Karl works for daily bread, and at night to finish his _Ökonomie_. Now,
when this book is so greatly needed, one may hope that it will find a
publisher."

As things turned out, the crisis had not the result anticipated by Marx.
It did not restore the revolutionary enthusiasm of the workers. The
proletariat had been too much disheartened by the counter-revolution
after 1848; and the stimulating effects of the economic catastrophe,
terrible as it was, were insufficient. Still, and this was a gain
anyhow, the workers were scared out of their paralysis, were induced to
think things over, and were spurred into political activity. That had
brought Lassalle into contact with Marx once more. What Lassalle had
said in 1852, namely that "during this apparent stillness of death the
genuine German labour party will be born," seemed likely, now, to find
confirmation.

Down to 1855, in numerous letters, Lassalle had tried to get into closer
touch with Marx, working for a vigorous exchange of ideas. Again and
again, with all possible respect, and with assurances of the most
friendly sentiments, he had sent Marx information concerning the
political situation in Germany; concerning his own views, experiences,
and projects; concerning his literary undertakings, and the like. He was
never tired of saying how much he admired Marx's historical erudition,
penetrating insight into economic categories, and revolutionary impetus.
He had written enthusiastic letters to Frau Marx; had gone out of his
way to secure information for Marx from diplomatic sources; had found a
publisher for one of Marx's books; had sent money (a whole two hundred
thalers in the New Year of 1855); had found Marx openings in the press;
had been exuberant in proofs of friendship. Yet always Marx had kept him
at a distance, had been coldly uncivil, had been provocative in the
assumption of superiority. Often he left Lassalle's letters unanswered;
and when he did answer them, it was distantly, irritably, and with an
obvious lack of interest. He rarely tried to mask his contempt by
introducing a few cordial words.

Almost all Lassalle's letters begin with a complaint because Marx does
not write. "Why don't you write to me? Why do you never let me hear
direct from you? I learn from others that you have been through a very
bad time, but that now things are a little better. I was sorry to learn
of your troubles, for you are among the very few for whom I really have
a weakness, and whom I would often be glad to see helped rather than
myself" (1851). Again: "At length I have a line or two from you, a real
Christmas present. It was so long since I had heard from you that I had
positively begun to wonder" (1852). And so on, in subsequent years.

Marx never gave any frank explanation of his coldness towards this man.
Lassalle was not in any way to his taste. Our minds tend to react with
sympathy towards those from whom we expect advancement and profit, and
with antipathy towards those from whom we expect danger and loss. It is
fairly obvious that Marx must have regarded Lassalle as a dangerous
rival in the field where both men were at work, the field of political
theory, the labour movement, and the revolution. Since Lassalle was not
a second Engels, was not willing to put himself entirely into Marx's
hands, but strode forward independently towards his own goal as hero of
the European revolution, Marx was naturally confirmed in this sentiment
of hostility. That was why his letters to Lassalle were so sparse, so
laconic, and so cold.

Lassalle's energies were fully engaged in other concerns and other
tasks. He successfully wound up Countess Hatzfeld's divorce proceedings,
which had occupied much of his time for years; wrote an extremely able
book on Heraclitus, which brought him considerable renown in the world
of learning; made a journey to Egypt, Constantinople, Smyrna, and the
Balkans; and, "as the last of the Mohicans in revolutionary Rhineland,"
was able ultimately, after considerable difficulties, and after
humbugging the authorities by the pretence that he needed specialist
treatment for an affection of the eyes, to achieve a removal to Berlin.
On April 26, 1857, he wrote cordially to Marx: "You are not exiled, but
I! You are living in the same city with numbers of the old
companions-in-arms; whereas I, these many years, have been living so
much alone, quite cut off from them all. ... That is really very trying.
If we leave out of account the working class, whose heart and
sensibilities are not merely as healthy and fresh as of old, but have
greatly developed since those days--among the so-called cultured people
there still prevails, and more than ever, the same timidity, the same
anxiety, the same tendency to skulk in the corner, as of old. In the
long run it becomes an urgent need to refresh oneself among those who
are of the same way of thinking as oneself and have enjoyed the same
sort of education. I have been feeling this need for a long, long time;
so keenly that I am almost prepared to swear it will drive me to London
next year--I have long wished to come thither, that I may see old
associates once more."

Lassalle's visit to London did not mend matters between the two men.
Their correspondence did not become more regular or more fruitful. When
Lassalle sent Marx a copy of his _Heraclitus_, the unfortunate fact that
Marx had to pay excess postage to the amount of two shillings, at a time
when this sum was almost the last he possessed, ensured a bad reception
for the book. Despite its colossal erudition, Marx could not admire it,
but could only make fun of it. Writing to Engels, Marx said that
Lassalle moved to and fro "in his philosophical spangle-bedecked State
with all the grace of a rough fellow who has for the first time put on a
well-fitting suit." His thanks to Lassalle for the gift were expressed
in two lines, "curtly and coolly." Lassalle was wounded, but hid the
smart, and made no moan of mortified vanity. Instead, he persisted in
wooing the friendship of his suspicious rival. He offered to find a
publisher for the forthcoming work on economics, and brought pressure to
bear on his own publisher Franz Duncker, until the latter agreed to
issue the book, and to pay Marx a fee far higher than was customary.
Marx took all these manifestations of friendship as a matter of course,
tendering no thanks for them, but regarding them as a perfectly natural
tribute to his own abilities. He was almost a year behind time in the
delivery of the manuscript, and offered no excuses to Lassalle for this
delay, which had put Lassalle in Duncker's bad graces. Then, when
Duncker delayed publication for a few months, Marx loaded the innocent
Lassalle with reproaches. He considered that Lassalle was working
against him behind the scenes, and thus stripped the last veils which
had hidden the jealousy with which his own soul was poisoned. Lassalle,
however, merely wrote good-naturedly to Duncker: "Marx is the Marat of
our revolution. No web of treason can be spun betwixt heaven and earth,
but Marx will have foreseen its spinning. Indeed, he will foresee many a
web which no one has ever thought of spinning. Well, one must take the
rough with the smooth."

In the year 1859, in connexion with the Italian war, there was an open
conflict between Marx and Engels on one side and Lassalle on the other.
Lassalle was always ready to learn from his friends; but always brought
forward material considerations in support of his opinion; and, having
done so, with due modesty he would ask for an admission that he had been
right. All he could get from Marx was blunt contradiction, malevolent
suspicion, uncomradely behaviour! While we cannot but admire Lassalle
for his courage and confidence, it is painful to contemplate Marx in the
role of one who defends a case in a way calculated to lose it. At any
rate, the course of the Italian movement rewarded Lassalle for the fine
humanity of his attitude by proving him to have been right in his
judgment.

The Vogt affair led to another controversy between Marx and Lassalle, a
fierce and bitter one this time. To Lassalle, Blind seemed an infamous
liar, who had scattered accusations without having any evidence to
substantiate them, and had then backed down. Liebknecht, for him, was a
ne'er-do-well who, though professing to be a revolutionist, contributed
to reactionary journals; and Marx was a man who had been rashly eager to
attack, and then, when his accusations had proved untenable, had not
been honest enough to withdraw them frankly. In long letters full of
"sincerest and most heartfelt friendship," he put his views before Marx.
What did Marx do? Not only did he shower vulgar abuse on Lassalle in his
letters to Engels; but he hunted up the "most abominable, most odious
inventions," flinging them as charges against Lassalle--on whom he
wished to revenge himself because he had not succeeded in extorting from
him as much money as he wanted. A man must have great magnanimity to
maintain his composure in face of such behaviour. Lassalle did more,
quietly explaining that the charges were malicious calumnies, and
continuing his correspondence with Marx as if nothing had happened. He
wrote long letters discussing important political topics; supported Marx
in the action for libel which the latter brought against the
"Nationalzeitung"; provided funds for the publication of the book
against Vogt; and in all possible ways showed himself a true friend.

Thus by the beginning of the sixties, the two men were on sufficiently
friendly terms for Marx to stay with Lassalle when he visited Berlin.

At this time Lassalle's mind was full of great schemes. Being extremely
ambitious, he was on the look-out for some field which would open
exceptional possibilities. His close ties with Countess Hatzfeld, who
since her divorce had regained control of her extensive possessions,
provided him with abundant means for these far-reaching enterprises.
Lassalle's first desire was to found a great daily newspaper in Berlin.
He had broken away from the bourgeois democrats, and aimed at
establishing the labour movement upon a broader foundation, of which he
would be one of the main buttresses. This new movement was to be a trump
in his political game, and was to be played with a sensational gesture.
When Marx was in Berlin, Lassalle talked over with him the question of
the proposed daily newspaper. "It would, no doubt, be opportune," wrote
Marx to Engels after returning to London, "if next year we could issue a
newspaper in Berlin, much as I detest the place. With the aid of
Lassalle and others we could get together twenty or thirty thousand
thalers. But hic jacet. Lassalle made me a direct proposal. At the same
time he confided to me that he must act with me as editor-in-chief.
'What about Engels?' I enquired. 'Well, if three are not too many,
Engels can join us as one of the chief editors. But you two must not
have more votes in the matter than I, for if you had I should always be
outvoted.' As reasons why he must have an equal voice in the
chief-editorship he alleged: first, that in the general view he was more
closely connected with the bourgeois party, and could therefore more
readily secure funds; secondly, that in this venture he would sacrifice
his 'theoretical studies and theoretical repose,' and must get something
out of it in return. Lassalle, being blinded by the prestige he has
secured in certain learned circles by his _Heraclitus_, and which
toadies ascribed to him because he has a good cellar and a good cook, is
naturally unaware that as far as the general public is concerned he is a
discredited man. Then we have to remember his disputatiousness, the way
in which he is 'still entangled in speculative concepts' (the fellow
actually dreams of writing a new Hegelian philosophy multiplied to the
second power), his infection with old-school French liberalism, his
overbearing pen, his obtrusiveness, his tactlessness, and so on.
Lassalle might be of service as a member of the staff, under strict
discipline. Otherwise, he would only make us all ridiculous. But, as
will be obvious to you, the position was an embarrassing one, in view of
his extremely friendly attitude towards me. It was hard to know what to
say. I was vague, therefore, and said that I could decide nothing until
I had consulted you and Lupus [Wilhelm Wolff]."

An essential preliminary to Marx's proposed removal to Berlin was that
he should once more be naturalized as a Prussian subject. Lassalle had
undertaken to pull the necessary strings. He ran from pillar to post,
interviewed ministers of State, sent in petition after petition, had a
question asked in the Landtag, and displayed the utmost zeal--at the
very time when, in letters to Engels, Marx was writing of him with
contempt and mockery. When Lassalle published his work in two volumes,
_System der erworbenen Rechte_ [System of Acquired Rights], Marx fobbed
it off with a few casual observations, although he knew that Lassalle
was eagerly awaiting a detailed criticism from his pen. "I am really
very much annoyed at your way of reading my book," wrote Lassalle, in
justified ill-humour. "If I write such a book, it is done with my best
blood and all my nervous energy, au fond, and, in the last resort, only
for a very few persons. ... Surely of these few, anyhow, I may expect
that a work which is the outcome of so much self-martyrdom shall at
least be read in the precise order and evolution of the thoughts in
which it was written by the author." In detailed letters, Lassalle
endeavoured to answer Marx's objections, and to correct his
misunderstandings, but it was all love's labour lost. Marx ignored the
"schoolboy theme."

In 1862, Lassalle at length came to London, and, under very distressing
conditions, was a guest in Marx's house. Since Lassalle had the airs of
a grand seigneur, Marx felt that the poverty of his own household was
shown up in a ludicrous light. His vanity was touched; he conceived
himself forced into an inferior position; and he gave vent to his
feelings in outbursts of spleen. "Lassalle," he wrote to Engels, "is now
posing, not only as the greatest of scholars, the profoundest of
thinkers, the most brilliant of investigators, etc., but also as a Don
Juan and a revolutionary Cardinal Richelieu. He confided to me and my
wife in the utmost confidence that he advised Garibaldi not to attack
Rome but ... also that he had recently been to see Mazzini, who had
approved and 'admired' his plan. He presented himself to these people as
'representative of the German revolutionary working class,' and declared
to them (this is literally true!) that he (Lassalle) 'by his pamphlet on
the Italian war had prevented Prussia's intervention,' and, in fact,
'had guided the history of the last three years.'" In another letter
Marx wrote: "Lassalle also informed me that he would perhaps found a
newspaper when he got home in September. I told him that for good fees I
would supply his paper with English correspondence, without undertaking
any responsibility or political partnership, seeing that politically we
were agreed as to nothing except certain distant goals."

The newspaper scheme fizzled out. But Lassalle entered the political
arena, and placed himself at the head of the labour movement, which he
had conjured up out of the ground by loud and fiery appeals. He
expounded his labour programme to the manual workers of Oranienburg, a
suburb of Berlin. To the Leipzig workers, who had applied to him through
Vahlteich, Dammer, and Fritzsche, he sent his _Offenes Antwortschreiben_
[Open Answer]. He secured publicity by his speech on the constitution;
and by a propagandist tour, which resembled a triumphal procession. When
he founded the General Union of German Workers, he provided the working
class of his native land with its first political organization, its
first contact with the vanguard of the class struggle.

Marx's attitude towards these multifarious activities, which implied
nothing less than the awakening and mobilization of the proletariat for
the tasks of the social revolution, was one of chill reserve and
scarcely concealed enmity. He looked upon Lassalle as a successful
rival, who threatened to outdo him; as "the fellow who obviously
believes himself to be the man who will enter into our heritage." Marx
did not show the smallest readiness to recognize at least Lassalle's
good intentions; did not make the slightest endeavour to do justice to
Lassalle's activity; did not manifest a trace of glad recognition of the
historical fact that a breach had at length been made in the political
passivity and indifference of the German proletariat. Instead, in his
letters to Engels, Marx continued to display envy, malice, and all
uncharitableness towards the person and the doings of Lassalle. "This
fellow"; "this boomster"; "this future dictator of the workers"; "these
commonplaces"; "these borrowed phrases" "this monumental arrogance";
"this ridiculous assumption of learning and preposterous sense of
self-importance" "this botched work of a schoolboy, who is in a hurry to
parade himself as a learned man and an independent investigator"--such
are the tones in which Marx passes judgment. "Since the beginning of
this year, I have not been able to bring myself to write to him. It
would be a waste of time to criticize his stuff. Besides, he
appropriates every word as a 'discovery' of his own. But it would be
absurd to rub his nose in his plagiaries, for I will have no truck with
our own things after he has smeared them all over. Nor will it do to
recognize these pufferies and exhibitions of tactlessness. He would
hasten to turn that to account. All that remains, therefore, is to wait
until his anger breaks out at last. Then I shall have a fine answer
ready: that he always remarks 'this is not communism,' and so on."
Engels sounded the same note: "The stories about Lassalle, and the
scandal they are making in Germany, are beginning to become
disagreeable. It is certainly time that you finished your book. ... It
is disastrous that the man should get a position for himself in this
way."

That was the sore point! Lassalle was making a position for himself. A
criminal undertaking, which could only be answered with enmity, battle,
and annihilation! Marx, who throughout life was feverishly striving for
the highest possible achievement, for success, and for recognition, was
made blind and crazy by hatred for his rival. No longer could he think
of the joint mission, of the great historical task, of the revolutionary
aim. He could think of nothing but priority, the right of the
first-born, the triumph of uniqueness, the glory of the originator, the
dictatorship of the victor. This hysteria of the struggle for power
found expression in venomous outbreaks.

Who can doubt that Marx breathed more freely when Lassalle was killed in
a duel? There is no word of regret, no indication of a sense of loss, in
the heartless and frivolous words he wrote to Engels when the news came.
"It is hard to believe that so noisy, so stirring, so pushful a man
should be as dead as a doornail, and have to hold his tongue
altogether." Nothing but profound hostility could make any one speak in
this way of a companion-in-arms.

At a later date, when hatred had been mitigated by time, and when no
further rivalry was possible, Marx was able to appraise Lassalle and his
work in a more concrete way, though not less critically. Writing to
Schweitzer, Lassalle's successor in the General Union of German Workers,
under date October 13, 1868, Marx said: "As regards the Lassallist
Union, it was founded during a period of reaction. When the labour
movement had been slumbering in Germany for fifteen years, Lassalle
wakened it once more, and this was his imperishable service. But he made
great mistakes. He was unduly influenced by the immediate circumstances
of the time. He made a small starting-point (his opposition to a dwarf
like Schulze-Delitzsch) into the central feature of his agitation
(State-help versus self-help). ... For him, the State transformed itself
into the Prussian State. Thus he was compelled to make concessions to
the Prussian monarchy, the Prussian reaction, and even the clericals.
With the demand for State-help on behalf of associations, he combined
the Chartist demand for universal suffrage. He overlooked the difference
between German and English conditions. Also, from the very start--like
every one who believes that he has in his pocket a panacea for the
sufferings of the masses--he gave a religious sectarian character to his
agitation. ... Furthermore, being the founder of a sect, he repudiated
all natural connexion with the earlier movements. He fell into the same
mistake as Proudhon, in that he did not seek his concrete foundation in
the actual elements of the class movement, but wished to prescribe its
course to the class movement in accordance with a doctrinaire
prescription of his own."

Marx's judgment of Lassalle's mission, which is substantially just in
this respect: that Lassalle was not in fact a historical materialist,
and did not ground his theory upon a fundamental knowledge of economics,
became a one-sided and erroneous judgment in this respect: that it was
coloured with personal animus. And it became utterly fallacious in this
respect: that it contained no syllable about the enormously important
fact that Lassalle (for whatever reason and with whatever programme) had
actually appeared in history, and, at this particular epoch, had
conjured up the labour movement out of the ground. It is of minor
importance how much in Lassalle's theory and in his method of agitation
may have been sound or unsound, how much he may have borrowed from
Buchez, taken over from Malthus, understood in Ricardo, or misunderstood
in Marx. The decisive thing was that he succeeded in marshalling the
proletariat in a politically independent formation upon the battlefield
of history. Mehring rightly points out that at a later date, when the
proletarian movement began to develop in the United States, Engels,
writing to Sorge anent the criterion of achievement in a particular
historical situation, said: "The first great step when, in any country,
the movement makes its appearance, is the constitution of the workers as
an independent political party, no matter how, so long only as it is a
separate labour party." That was the sense in which Lassalle acted; and
in that sense, Lassalle's achievement was a historical deed of supreme
importance.

Man of transcendent genius though he was, Marx's insight failed him when
his emotions were profoundly stirred by the appearance of a formidable
rival. He forfeited his revolutionary infallibility as soon as nervous
anxiety for the maintenance of his personal prestige marred his devotion
to the material advancement of the cause.

Marx was not a team worker. He was not a man of comradely spirit, not
one of those whose powers are intensified by the sense of living
community with others. He was not a rank-and-file fighter.

He could only create as first in the field; could only fight as
generalissimo; could only conquer when assigned the heroic role. He was
a lonely eagle upon an icebound crag.

## Chapter 06: Achievement, Part 1

### Foundation of the International

The international exhibition held in London during the year 1862 was a
rendezvous at which worldwide capitalism was given an opportunity of
publicly demonstrating its wealth and its achievements.

Before the astonished eyes of the international bourgeoisie, the lords
of commerce, the magnates of finance, and the kings of industry, puffed
up with the pride of success, displayed the tremendous results of
capitalist economic development. Not only did they exhibit their
machines, raw materials, methods of production, technical discoveries,
and statistical tables; but they also assembled at this centre of
progress their technicians, masters of works, and manual operatives,
whose zeal was to be stimulated by the spectacle, that they might be
spurred on to fit themselves for the tasks of the day and to make
themselves more efficient for the purposes of capitalist production. In
Prussia and other parts of Germany, the sending of working-class
delegates to London was the outcome of private enterprise; but from
France delegates were dispatched under official auspices and with
government support. Proudhon was an enemy of the Bonapartist regime, and
Louis Napoleon wishing to undermine his influence with the proletariat
was not content to extend an amnesty to numerous workers who had been
imprisoned in connexion with strikes or for infringing the draconian
laws against combination; but was also active in promoting the dispatch
of a working-class delegation to the London exhibition. A special
electoral bureau was installed, two hundred delegates were chosen, the
cost of sending them was defrayed from public funds and by
subscriptions; and in order that the activities of the delegation might
be freely reported at public meetings of the workers, the relevant
passages in the laws which forbade such meetings were tacitly suspended.

It was inevitable that the French and German delegations, in their visit
to London, should come into contact with British trade unionists, should
become acquainted with the economic and political influence of the
British unions, and thus derive agitatorial impetus for their work in
their own lands. The British trade unions had a direct interest in
promoting such contacts, for the British workers, whenever the class war
entered upon an active phase, were seriously injured by the blackleg
competition of foreign workers whom the capitalists used to ship across
the Channel on such occasions. They hoped, by enlightening their
continental brethren, and by promoting the organization of these, to put
an end to strike-breaking of this kind. During the exhibition,
therefore, they did everything they could to encourage an international
exchange of ideas among the workers, being especially interested in the
Parisian delegates.

Since 1860, the trade-union movement had in England been advancing with
rapid strides, especially in London. Not only were wider and ever wider
circles of the workers being organized, but the organized British
workers were modifying their attitude towards the problem of political
action. Whereas hitherto it had been a principle of the trade unions to
ignore politics, parliamentarism and elections, the Amalgamated Society
of Engineers, the Amalgamated Society of Carpenters, and the Ladies
Shoemakers' Society, under the leadership respectively of William Allan,
Robert Applegarth, and George Odger, were now beginning to interest
themselves in political problems and political action. A working-class
newspaper, the "Beehive," edited by George Potter, favoured this change
of policy by its advocacy. Eccarius, a tailor from Thuringia, who had
been a member of the Federation of the Just and then of the Communist
League, and had for a long time been Marx's right-hand man, did his
utmost to promote the expansion of the organizational field, with the
design of founding an international working-class organization. It was
to him, in especial, that the formation of effective ties between
British trade unionism and the foreign labour delegations to the
exhibition was due.

It is probable, however, that the interest of the French and German
labour delegates would soon have cooled, had not the general political
situation on the Continent helped to fan the flames. The paralysing
reaction of the fifties was now spent. Capitalism, for the purposes of
its own development, needed freer and more mobile working-class
elements, and for this reason it had been necessary to mitigate the
pressure of tsarist, Bonapartist, and Bismarckian policy. The flowers of
liberty were blossoming once more. Lassalle, in his letters to Marx, had
referred to the new vital impetus that was manifesting itself everywhere
in the proletariat. In Italy and Hungary, the movements for national
independence had become active once more, diffusing a stimulant
influence.

The Polish rising of 1863 opened a new ventilating shaft for the
accumulated energies of the movement on behalf of freedom. "This much is
certain," wrote Marx to Engels under date February 13, 1863 "that the
era of revolution has at length been reopened in Europe. The general
posture of affairs is good. But the cheerful deceptions and the almost
childlike enthusiasm with which we acclaimed the revolution before
February 1848, are over and done with. Old comrades have passed away,
others have backslidden or been corrupted, and, as yet at least, there
is no sign of any new growth. Moreover, we know now how great a part
stupidity plays in revolutions, and how they are exploited by rotters.
One may hope that this time the lava will flow from east to west, and
not in the opposite direction." When, in the course of the Polish
rising, Prussian soldiers were used against the revolution, this was,
according to Marx, "a combination which compels us to raise our voices."
The Workers' Educational Society certainly ought to issue a manifesto.
"You must," wrote Marx to Engels, "write the military portion--that
which concerns Germany's military and political interest in the
re-establishment of Poland. I will write the diplomatic portion."

The Polish rising speedily collapsed, but the idea mooted by Marx took
due effect. The representatives of the London workers sent the Parisian
workers a manifesto they had drafted in favour of the Poles, and asked
their French comrades to take joint action. Thereupon the Parisian
workers sent a delegation to London, headed by Tolain, who had been
labour candidate at the recent elections in Paris. This delegation
participated at a meeting held in St. James' Hall in honour of the
Poles. At this meeting a committee of British workers was appointed, to
send a fraternal address to the Parisian workers and to arrange for a
subsequent meeting. The second meeting was held at St. Martin's Hall on
September 28, 1864, having been summoned by Odger, chairman of the
London Trades Council, and Cremer, secretary of the Building Workers'
Union. Reporting to Engels, Marx said: "A certain Le Lubez was sent to
me, to ask if I would come on behalf of the German workers, would find a
German worker to speak at the meeting, and so on. I suggested Eccarius,
who did splendidly, and I assisted as a lay figure on the platform. I
knew that on this occasion real forces were present, both from London
and from Paris, and I therefore decided to waive my usual rule, which is
to refuse all such invitations.

"At the meeting, which was packed out (for manifestly there is now a
revival of the working classes), Major Wolff (Thurn and Taxis,
Garibaldi's adjutant) represented the London Union of Italian Workers.
It was decided to found an International Workingmen's Association, whose
General Council is to sit in London, acting as intermediary for the
workers' societies in Germany, Italy, France, and England. In 1865, a
general working-class congress is to be summoned in Belgium. At the
meeting, a provisional committee was appointed, Odger, Cremer, and many
others, in part sometime Chartists, sometime Owenists, etc., for
England; Major Wolff, Fontana, and other Italians, for Italy; Le Lubez,
etc., for France; Eccarius and myself, for Germany. The committee was
empowered to co-opt as many members as it likes.

"So far, so good. I attended the first sitting of the committee. A
sub-committee (of which I am a member) was appointed to draft a
declaration of principles and provisional rules. Being indisposed, I was
unable to attend the sitting of the subcommittee and the subsequent
meeting of the General Council. At these two meetings, in my absence,
this was what happened:

"Major Wolff handed in a rules and constitution (statutes) translated
from those of the Italian workingmen's associations (which have a
central organization, but are, as appeared later, essentially associated
mutual aid societies); this he thought was suitable for use by our new
association. I saw the thing later. It was obviously botched up by
Mazzini, and you will know without my telling you in what sort of spirit
and what kind of phraseology the essential question, the labour problem,
was treated. Also the problems of nationality were dragged in by the
ears. In addition, a sometime Owenist, Weston, an amiable and worthy
man, submitted a programme of unspeakable length and full of unutterable
confusion.

"At the next meeting of the General Council, the subcommittee was
instructed to remodel Weston's programme and Wolff's rules and
regulations. Wolff departed to attend the congress of the Italian
Workingmen's Association at Naples, and to ask this body to affiliate to
the London central association.

"Another meeting of the sub-committee, which I again failed to attend,
having been notified too late. To this was presented a 'declaration of
principles' and an elaboration of Wolff's rules and regulations drafted
by Le Lubez, which was adopted by the sub-committee to lay before the
General Council. The General Council met on October 18th. Since Eccarius
had written to warn me that there was danger in delay, I turned up, and
was truly terrified to hear the good Le Lubez read out a horribly
worded, badly written, and utterly raw foreword, which professed to be a
declaration of principles. Mazzini peeped through it all, crusted over
with vague rags of French socialism. Substantially, the Italian rules
and regulations were adopted. Whatever their faults may be, they have a
quite remarkable aim, that of establishing a sort of central government
(of course with Mazzini in the background) of the European working
classes. I played the part of moderate opposition; and, after lengthy
discussions, Eccarius proposed that the subcommittee should subject the
whole thing to 're-editing.' The 'principles' contained in Le Lubez's
declaration were, however, accepted.

"Two days later, on October 20th, there was a meeting in my house,
attended by Cremer for the British, Fontana (Italian), and Le
Lubez--Weston could not come. I had not as yet had the papers (Wolff's
and Le Lubez's) in my hands, and therefore had been unable to prepare
anything; but I had made up my mind that if I could prevent it not a
line of the thing should be left. To gain time, I proposed that before
'editing' the foreword, we should 'discuss' the propositions. This was
agreed. It was one in the morning before the first of forty propositions
was adopted. Cremer said (at my instigation): 'We have nothing to put
before the General Council, which is to meet on October 25th. We must
postpone it until November 1st. The sub-committee can meet on October
27th, and try to come to a definite conclusion.' This proposal was
accepted, and the 'papers' were 'left' for me to look through.

"I saw that it was impossible to make anything out of the document. In
order to justify the very remarkable way in which I intended to re-edit
the already 'voted principles, I wrote an Address to the Working Classes
(which was not in the original plan); a sort of retrospect of what had
happened to the working classes since 1845. Under the pretext that all
factual matters were contained in this Address, and that we need not say
the same things thrice over, I modified the introduction, cut out the
declaration of principles, and finally reduced the four and twenty
propositions to ten. In so far as international politics are mentioned
in the Address, I refer to countries and not to nationalities; and I
denounce Russia, not the minor States. My proposals were all adopted by
the sub-committee. Only one thing, I had to pledge myself to insert in
the preamble to the rules two phrases about 'duty' and 'right'; also
about truth, morality, and justice--but they are all so placed that they
cannot do any harm.

"At the sitting of the General Council, my Address, etc., were adopted
with great enthusiasm (unanimously). The discussions about printing, and
so on, will take place next Tuesday. Le Lubez has a copy of the Address
for translation into French, and Fontana one for translation into
Italian (and there is a weekly, the 'Beehive,' edited by the trade
unionist Potter, a sort of 'Moniteur'). I myself am to translate the
thing into German.

"It was very difficult to arrange matters so that our views should
appear in a form which would make them acceptable to the present
standpoint of the labour movement. The same people will in a few weeks
be holding joint meetings with Bright and Cobden on behalf of an
extension of the suffrage. It will be some time before the reawakened
movement will permit of the old boldness of speech. We must he strong in
the substance, but moderate in the form."

So much for Marx's report to Engels. Enough to add that the chairman of
the provisional General Council was Odger, and its vice-chairman
Eccarius. It was to have its headquarters in London. That is all the
noteworthy information that can be given as to the founding of the
International Workingmen's Association.

Summarizing the matter, it may be said that the objective conditions
requisite for the foundation of the International were furnished by the
general situation; that the subjective stimulus proceeded from the trade
unions; and that the intellectual leadership and the furnishing of a
political objective came from Marx.

### The Inaugural Address

The Address, Preamble, and Provisional Rules of the International
Workingmen's Association is extant in the original English text that was
adopted by the Association, but Marx's German version of this original
has not come down to us.

The first version published in German was the work of J. B. von
Schweitzer, Lassalle's successor in the General Union of German Workers.
It appeared in 1864, in the second and third issues of the
"Sozialdemokrat," the organ of the union.

In 1866, J. T. Becker, who had fled to Switzerland after the rising in
the Palatinate and Baden, and had settled down in the Swiss republic,
published another German version of the Address in the "Vorbote," issued
in Geneva as the central organ of the German-speaking group of the
International.

Two years later still, Wilhelm Eichhoff, in _Die Internationale
Arbeiterassociation_, a book published in Berlin, gave yet another
translation of the Inaugural Address, described as "as faithful a
rendering as possible." Since these translations differed in certain
respects, containing errors as well as conflicting interpretations, Karl
Kautsky subsequently published an authorized translation, made by Luise
Kautsky under his supervision.

In the preface to this translation Kautsky points out that in Marxist
literature the Inaugural Address has a significance, as far as
exposition of programme is concerned, second only to that of the
_Communist Manifesto_. But though the two documents agree in
fundamentals, the Inaugural Address has a very different visage from the
_Communist Manifesto_.

When the _Communist Manifesto_ made its way into the world with all the
splendour of a mounted pursuivant, Marx was addressing himself to a
choice group of working-class intellectuals, who were to form a
propagandist society of persons carefully trained in matters of theory,
persons who, in the forthcoming revolution, would seize the leadership,
and would conduct the movement forward towards its goal. In the interim,
seventeen years had passed away. The hopes of revolution had not been
fulfilled. The revolutionary outburst of 1848 had been followed by a
widespread reaction, and by a formidable development of capitalism. The
bourgeoisie had made common cause with the vestiges of the feudalist
powers, and the two had constituted a firm front. Against these united
forces, no headway could be made by a small group of tried and trusty
revolutionists backed up only by a blind following of the masses. What
was needed now was a spontaneous mass movement of those who were
thoroughly well informed regarding methods and aims. The Inaugural
Address was designed to provide such a mass movement with practical
objectives and immediate tasks. Thus it substituted concrete
demonstrations for enthusiastic impetus, and provided a soberly drawn
map of the nearest sections of the route for a splendidly conceived
historical perspective.

The Address begins with a drastic and overwhelmingly powerful but
concise statement of the contrasts characteristic of capitalist
evolution: exuberant wealth among the possessing classes, and terrible
poverty among the non-possessing. "The total import and export trade of
England had grown in 1863 to £443,955,000, an astonishing sum, about
three times the trade of the comparatively recent epoch of 1843. ...
From 1842 to 1852, the taxable income of the country increased by six
per cent; in the eight years from 1853 to 1861, it has increased from
the basis taken in 1853 twenty per cent. ... 'This intoxicating
augmentation of wealth and power,' adds Mr. Gladstone, 'is entirely
confined to classes of property.'" That was one side of the medal. Here
was the obverse: "The House of Lords caused an inquiry to be made into,
and a report to be published upon, transportation and penal servitude.
Out came the murder in the bulky blue-book of 1863, and proved it was by
official facts and figures, that the worst of the convicted criminals,
the penal serfs of England and Scotland, toiled much less and fared far
better than the agricultural labourers of England and Scotland. But this
was not all. When, consequently upon the Civil War in America, the
operatives of Lancashire and Cheshire were thrown upon the streets, the
same House of Lords sent to the manufacturing districts a physician
commissioned to investigate into the smallest possible amount of carbon
and nitrogen, to be administered in the cheapest and plainest form,
which, on an average, might just suffice to 'avert starvation diseases.'
... He found ... that quantity pretty nearly to agree with the scanty
nourishment to which the pressure of extreme distress had actually
reduced the cotton operatives ... and ... that the silk weavers, the
needlewomen, the kid glovers, the stocking weavers, and so forth,
received, on an average, not even the distress pittance of the cotton
operatives, not even the amount of carbon and nitrogen 'just sufficient
to avert starvation diseases.' ... As regards the examined families of
the agricultural population, it appeared that more than a fifth were
with less than the estimated sufficiency of carbonaceous food, that more
than one-third were with less than the estimated sufficiency of
nitrogenous food ... The agricultural population of England [the richest
division in the United Kingdom was considerably the worst fed; but even
the agricultural wretches of Berkshire, Oxfordshire, and Somersetshire
fare better than great numbers of skilled indoor operatives of the East
of London." Such was the picture in England, the exemplary land of
capitalism--a horrible contrast between superfluity and starvation. But
"with local colours changed, and on a scale somewhat contracted, the
English facts reproduced themselves in all the industrious and
progressive countries of the Continent. In all of them there has taken
place, since 1848, an unheard-of development of industry, and an
undreamed-of expansion of imports and exports. In all of them 'the
augmentation of wealth and power entirely confined to classes of
property' was truly 'intoxicating' ... Everywhere the great mass of the
working classes were sinking down to a lower depth, at the same rate at
least that those above them were rising in the social scale. In all
countries of Europe it has now become a truth demonstrable to every
unprejudiced mind, and only denied by those whose interest it is to
hedge other people in a fool's paradise, that no improvement of
machinery, no appliance of science to production, no contrivances of
communication, no new colonies, no emigration, no opening of markets, no
free trade, nor all these things put together, will do away with the
miseries of the industrious masses; but that, on the present false base,
every fresh development of the productive powers of labour must tend to
deepen social contrasts and point social antagonisms."

Having given this demonstration of the economic and social situation,
the Address turns to consider the political situation. "After the
failure of the revolutions of 1848, all party organizations and party
journals of the working classes were, on the Continent, crushed by the
iron hand of force; the most advanced sons of labour fled in despair to
the transatlantic republic; and the short-lived dreams of emancipation
vanished before an epoch of industrial fever, moral marasm, and
political reaction. The defeat of the continental working classes,
partly owed to the diplomacy of the English government, acting then as
now in fraternal solidarity with the Cabinet of St. Petersburg, soon
spread its contagious effects to this side of the Channel. While the
rout of their continental brethren unmanned the English working classes,
and broke their faith in their own cause, it restored to the landlord
and the money-lord their somewhat shaken confidence. They insolently
withdrew concessions already advertised. The discoveries of new gold
lands led to an immense exodus leaving an irreparable void in the ranks
of the British proletariat. Others of its formerly active members were
caught by the temporary bribe of greater work and wages, and turned into
'political blacks.' All the efforts made at keeping up, or remodelling,
the Chartist movement failed signally, the press organs of the working
class died one by one of the apathy of the masses, and, in point of
fact, never before seemed the English working class so thoroughly
reconciled to a state of political nullity."

Only two great happenings had lightened the darkness of this gloomy
period, the introduction of the Ten Hours Bill after a thirty years'
struggle, fought with most admirable perseverance, a struggle in which
the English working classes had turned to account a temporary feud
between the landlords and the money-lords; while the other redeeming
feature had been the foundation of the co-operative movement by a few
bold innovators, the Rochdale pioneers. "The Ten Hours Bill was not only
a great practical success, it was the victory of a principle. ... But
there was in store a still greater victory of the political economy of
labour over the political economy of property. We speak of the
co-operative movement, especially the co-operative factories." The great
value of the co-operative movement was that it did not represent the
outcome of a casual favourable turn in the parliamentary situation, but
was the expression of a deliberate, spontaneous, and fully conscious
attempt to overthrow the capitalist system. Herein is disclosed the fact
that "like slave labour, like serf labour, hired labour is but a
transitory and inferior form, destined to disappear before associated
labour plying its toil with a willing hand, a ready mind, and a joyous
heart."

Experience has indeed shown that "however excellent in principle, and
however useful in practice, co-operative labour, if kept within the
narrow circle of the casual efforts of private workmen, will never be
able to arrest the growth in geometrical progression of monopoly, to
free the masses, nor even perceptibly to lighten the burden of their
miseries. ... To save the industrious masses, co-operative labour ought
to be developed to national dimensions, and, consequently, to be
fostered by national means. ... To conquer political power has therefore
become the great duty of the working classes. They seem to have
comprehended this, for in England, Germany, Italy, and France, there
have taken place simultaneous revivals, and simultaneous efforts are
being made at the political reorganization of the workingmen's party.
One element of success they possess--numbers; but numbers weigh only in
the balance if united by combination and led by knowledge. Past
experience has shown how disregard of that bond of brotherhood which
ought to exist between the workmen of different countries, and incite
them to stand firmly by each other in all their struggles for
emancipation, will be chastised by the common discomfiture of their
incoherent efforts."

After referring to the war against Negro slavery in the United States,
to the Russian conquest of Caucasia, and to the suppression of the
Polish rising by Russian armies, the Address goes on to say that these
things "have taught the working class the duty to master themselves the
mysteries of international politics; to watch the diplomatic acts of
their respective governments; to counteract them, if necessary, by all
means in their power; when unable to prevent, to combine in simultaneous
denunciations, and to vindicate the simple laws of morals and justice,
which ought to govern the relations of private individuals, as the rules
paramount of the intercourse of nations. The fight for such a foreign
policy forms part of the general struggle for the emancipation of the
working classes."

The fundamental ideas of the Address are reiterated in the Preamble to
the Provisional Rules, in a more concentrated form. Here we read "that
the emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working
classes themselves; that the struggle for the emancipation of the
working classes means, not a struggle for class privileges and
monopolies, but for equal rights and duties and the abolition of all
'class rule.' That the economical subjection of the man of labour to the
monopolizer of the means of labour, that is, the sources of life, lies
at the bottom of servitude in all its forms, of all social misery,
mental degradation, and political dependence; that the economical
emancipation of the working classes is therefore the great end to which
every political movement ought to be subordinate as a means; that all
efforts aiming at that concrete end have hitherto failed from the want
of solidarity between the manifold divisions of labour in each country,
and from the absence of a fraternal bond of union between the working
classes of different countries; that the emancipation of labour is
neither a local, nor a national, but a social problem, embracing all
countries in which modern society exists, and depending for its solution
on the concurrence, practical and theoretical, of the most advanced
countries."

These important considerations once more give plain expression to the
meaning and the aims of the International. Although the Inaugural
Address lays so much stress upon the Ten Hours Bill and the co-operative
movement as immediate aims of the working class, this nowise implies
that the document represents a trend in favour of renouncing revolution
and returning to reformist methods. Nothing could have been further from
the author's mind than the idea of regarding an opportunist endeavour to
fulfil immediately practical demands as a panacea for the miseries of
the proletariat. The aim of the Address was, rather, to make the workers
aware of the need for international cohesion, and to do this by laying
strong emphasis upon concrete practical interests; seeing that the
comparatively abstract argumentation of the _Communist Manifesto_ had
been practically without influence upon the intelligence and the will of
the proletariat. Incitement of the workers of England, France, Belgium,
Germany, Italy, and Spain to join forces in a living solidarity; the
enlisting of Chartists, Owenists, Proudhonists, Blanquists, Mazzinists,
and Lassallists by a programme which would not offend or exclude any of
them--these were the fundamental motifs and aims of the Address. Both in
form and content, it was admirably designed to achieve its end.

### The Tower of Babel

Since the International did not absorb into its own structure the
working-class organizations of the various countries, but left them
intact as independent structures, it soon comprised a motley mosaic of
groups, trends, schools, and camps; and it had to conduct its affairs in
a multiplicity of languages, as at the Tower of Babel after the
confusion of tongues.

Not only had the labour movement in every country its own specific
national imprint; but further, in every country, there existed
conflicting types of organization and movement. In England, for
instance, there were still to be found considerable vestiges of Owenist
utopism, which had degenerated into freethinking sectarianism. There
were also the relics of the Chartist movement, which had now fallen into
hopeless decay. Among the trade unionists, although collectivist ideas
were gaining ground, individualist notions were still dominant, so that
there was a strange mishmash of doctrine. Worst of all, as the Webbs
point out in their _History of Trade Unionism_, the leaders of the
movement were unaware that they were trying to combine incompatibles.
The majority of the British trade unionists, moreover, like the
Christian socialists led by Kingsley and Maurice, would not hear a word
of political activity on the part of the workers. Nor were things any
better in France. There, Fourierists and Cabetists continued to enjoy a
popularity that was long overripe. Louis Blanc's scheme for national
workshops had still numerous supporters; and Blanqui's futile policy of
extemporized insurrectionism had not ceased to attract persons with a
fondness for action in season and out of season. But among all the
programmes that competed for popular support, Proudhon's scheme for
getting rid of capitalist society, and liberating every one peacefully,
by means of a people's bank secured the strongest support. In Germany,
the utopian ideas of Weitling were still flourishing amid the moribund
traditions of the petty-bourgeois radicalism of 1848. But in the
foreground here, far more imposing than all the rest, stood the General
Union of German Workers, enjoying widespread popularity which had been
artificially inflated by Lassalle's skill as an agitator. Since
Lassalle's death, however, its influence had begun to decline, owing to
the civil war between those who adhered to the masculine trend under
Schweitzer and those who adhered to the feminine trend under Countess
Hatzfeld. In Italy, the nationalist-mystical republicanism of Mazzini
was closely akin to the revolutionary anarchism of Bakunin. Switzerland,
finally, was the happy hunting-ground of cantonal particularisms.

Not that most of the groups and organizations just mentioned belonged as
yet to the International. But it was to be foreseen that when they did
join the International the result would be a mad confusion of ideas, a
chaos of conflicts and the development of socialism into a monstrosity.

Marx recognized these dangerous possibilities, and therefore made it his
business to ensure that the opposing outlooks should not forthwith find
expression in the publicity of a congress, but that their discussion
should be restricted, to begin with, within the narrow limits of a more
or less confidential conference.

He was aided by the fact that the progress of the International, at
first, was anything but rapid. Indeed, the beginnings were on a very
small scale. After considerable hesitation, a few trade unions in which
propaganda work had been carried on for a considerable time had decided
to adhere. For the rest, the organization contained only individual
members, who were grouped in sections. Even in this respect, the growth
of the membership lagged behind expectations. The first to join, other
than English, were the members of the Italian Workingmen's Club in
London. Then came three German workers' societies, among them the
Communist Workers' Educational Society. A working-class society for the
support of Polish refugees also affiliated. In Switzerland a few
sections were formed. In Germany, although fifty thousand copies of the
Address were circulated, there was no more than a feeble response. After
the lapse of a year, the growth of the International had still been so
inadequate that its voice could not have been expected, at a congress,
to produce the desired political effect. On Marx's initiative,
therefore, the General Council decided that the congress planned for
Brussels in 1865 should be replaced by a conference in London.

The London Conference was held from September 25 to 29, 1865. British
labour was represented by Odger, Cremer, Howell, Wheeler, Dell, and
Weston. From France came Tolain, Limousin, Varlin, Fribourg, Schily, and
Clarion; from Brussels, César de Paepe, a qualified medical man, working
as a compositor. Switzerland had sent J. P. Becker for the
German-speaking and Dupleix for the French-speaking section. Besides
this, the continental workers were represented by delegates from the
respective national societies in London: Germany, by Lessner and
Schapper; Italy by Major Wolff; Poland by Bobczynski. Finally, the
following were present as corresponding members of the General Council:
Marx for Germany, Jung for Switzerland, and Dupont for France. Eccarius
reinforced the German representatives, being present as vice-chairman of
the General Council.

The general secretary of the International, Cremer, reporting for
England, said that as yet only a very small part of the trade unions had
been won over to support the International. There was, however, he said,
good reason to hope that, in view of the recently opened campaign on
behalf of an extension of the suffrage (a campaign which the
International would energetically support), a considerable accession of
membership would be secured. The reports from France were little more
encouraging, and the wrangling between the French delegates gave
sufficient explanation for the failure of the International in that
country. In Switzerland, on the other hand, thanks to the indefatigable
and able recruiting work that had been carried on by Becker, a number of
large working-class organizations had come into being, but this result
was less encouraging than it might otherwise have been because Becker
was so obviously nothing more than a reformist. The same tendency
towards reformism, fostered in especial by the Proudhonist trend of so
many of the French, and complicated by the general confusion of ideas,
was manifest throughout the discussions. No matter whether the topic of
debate was the Polish question, the religious problem, or the
desirability of speedily holding a general congress--irreconcilable
opinions were voiced, incompatible principles were advocated with
violence on both sides, and a situation developed which represented the
very opposite of international harmony.

### Conflicts, Crises, Struggles

The development of the International Workingmen's Association proceeded
along lines which soon made Marx "for practical purposes the head of the
concern."

This involved for him a tremendous expenditure of energy and time, which
were eaten up by meetings, correspondence, and negotiations. His days
ere long proved too short, and he had to steal time from the night.
During these years, he was engaged in writing _Capital_, his great work
on political economy. This involved extensive studies, which were
perpetually being interrupted by the sittings of the General Council and
its subcommittees. The newspaper articles on which he was dependent for
daily bread remained unwritten, and again and again he grumbled about
"the enormous waste of time," and the "frequent interruptions." Engels,
likewise, whom Marx had often to call upon for help, occasionally lost
patience. "The new movement," he wrote angrily, "makes me sweat
abominably. It is the devil and all when, having written the livelong
day for one's business, one has to go on writing afterwards till one or
two in the morning for the party and publishers and so on." Yet all the
while the movement was expanding; was demanding more energy, closer
supervision, keener participation; would give its directors no rest.

Worse still, from day to day the affair seemed more and more
unsatisfactory, owing to the innumerable quarrels, jealousies, and
faction fights with which the inner life of the International was
convulsed. "I had said to myself," wrote Engels, "that a naive
fraternity would not last long in the International. ... There will
certainly be a lot more phases of the kind, which will cost you a great
deal of time." In actual fact, brawls were unceasing. Now it was the
French who were taking up the cudgels against the brain-workers, and
were ready to tear one another's eyes out because of differences upon
the religious problem; now the management of the Polish question gave
rise to violent disputes; now embittered struggles raged round the
periodical, the "Commonwealth," which had been appointed the official
organ of the International, and appeared to be too much inclined to
espouse a bourgeois reformist outlook; now there was a fight between
Odger and Potter, the editor of the "Beehive," a fight which threatened
to become a public scandal; now it became necessary to expel members who
had gravely infringed the rules, or had published false reports
concerning the internal affairs of the organization. So it went on,
month after month. Once, when Marx returned from a journey, he wrote to
Engels: "This evening I was at a sitting of the International again for
the first time after three weeks. In the interim, there has been a
revolution. Le Lubez and Denoual have resigned, Dupont has been
appointed French secretary. Owing to the intrigues of Le Lubez and
especially of Major Wolff (who is a tool of Mazzini), the Italian
delegates Lama and Fontana have resigned. The pretext is that Lefort
(who has also in the interim declared his intention to resign) is to
retain his post as general defender of the Parisian press. The Italian
Workingmen's Club has not withdrawn from the organization, but no longer
has a representative on the Council. Meanwhile, through the
instrumentality of Bakunin, I propose to countermine Signor Mazzini in
Florence. The English Bootmakers' Union, with a membership of five
thousand, has joined the International while I have been away." Engels,
in his answer, expresses the hope that "the rumpus will soon come to an
end." His hope was not destined to be fulfilled, for, with innumerable
variations, the rumpus went on for weeks, months, years. As soon as one
conflict had been mitigated or settled, two new ones would break out
elsewhere.

Inasmuch as, whatever Marx may have been, he was not a peacemaker, his
influence tended rather to intensify than to mitigate these frictions
and quarrels. The effect he had in this respect was aggravated by the
unfortunate circumstance that years of bodily indisposition had made him
irritable and bitter. He had long suffered from liver trouble, to which
of late an obstinate tendency to boils had been superadded, so that for
many years this painful ailment was breaking out now in one part of his
body and now in another, hindering his work, and often reducing him to
despair. His letters to Engels are full of complaints and outbursts of
wrath on this account. "I am tormented with the old evil in various and
most inconvenient parts, so that it is very hard for me to sit." ... "I
have spent the greater part of a week in bed because of a carbuncle."
... "To my extreme disgust, after being unable to sleep all night, I
discovered this morning two more first-class boils on my chest." ... "I
am working now like a dray-horse, seeing that I must make the best use
of all the time available for work, and the carbuncles are still there,
though they are now giving me only local trouble, and are not
interfering with my brain." ... "This time it was really serious--the
family did not know how serious. If it recurs as badly three or four
times more, it will be all up with me. I have wasted amazingly, and am
still damnably weak not in the head but in the trunk and limbs. ...
There is no question of being able to sit up. But, while lying down, I
have been able, at intervals, to keep on digging away at my work."

Engels had again and again, ever more urgently, begged Marx "to do
something reasonable, that you may rid yourself of this tyranny of
boils." He asked the advice of doctors, studied medical literature, sent
his friend prescriptions. Marx could not make up his mind to undergo
methodical treatment. He lacked time and money, was afraid of forfeiting
his earnings, and was loath to leave the movement to itself at so
critical a time. But when, in the winter of 1865-1866, the boils grew
continually more troublesome, Engels wrote more seriously than ever: "No
one can permanently endure this chronic fight with carbuncles, without
mentioning that sooner or later you may have one assuming such a form
that it will send you to the devil. What will happen then to your book
and your family? You know that I am ready to do anything in my power,
and, in this extreme instance, even more than I would risk in other
circumstances. Do be reasonable, then, oblige me and your family to this
extent at least, that you will have methodical treatment. What would
happen to the whole movement if anything went wrong with you? ... I can
get no rest by day or by night until you have got over this trouble."

Marx still hesitated. But at length the illness made it absolutely
impossible for him to work. He had become so irritable that he did not
venture to go to sittings of the General Council, finding it "barely
possible to retain the storms within 'the limits of pure reason,' and
being much more inclined to burst forth with undue violence." He
therefore decided, in March 1866, to spend a few weeks at Margate,
enjoying the benefits of sea air and sea bathing.

Four weeks relaxation and change of air set him up once more. Although,
after his return, he suffered in brief succession from a bad cold, from
influenza, and from rheumatism, he was at any rate free from the
carbuncles.

But he was not free from the material embarrassments by which,
throughout that winter, he had been troubled almost as much as by the
illness.

His work for the International (which was, of course, unremunerated),
his expenditures upon postage, travel to meetings, minor journeys,
doctor and medicines, in conjunction with the falling-off in his fees
for newspaper articles, had completely upset his tottering finances. In
the summer of 1865 he wrote despairingly to Engels: "For the last two
months I have been living on the pawnshop, while suffering from
accumulated and ever more intolerable appeals from duns. You will not be
surprised at the state of my finances when you bear in mind: first, that
throughout this time I have not earned a penny; and, secondly, that the
mere liquidation of my debts and the furnishing of the house cost about
£500. I have kept an account down to the last farthing, for it seemed
incredible to me how the money was running away. Add that from Germany,
where God knows what has been spread abroad, all possible antediluvian
demands have been made. ... I assure you that I would rather have my
thumb cut off than write this letter to you. It is crushing to be
dependent for half a lifetime. The only thought which consoles me is
that we are running a joint business in which I give my time to the
theoretical side of the matter and to party affairs." Engels,
sympathetic as ever, and always ready to help, promptly sent £50,
following this up with £15, £20, and £10. Meanwhile Jenny had fallen
sick, and had to be sent for change of air to the country. Marx, going
to visit her, found her still very ill; he had his portmanteau stolen,
and wrote to Engels for money. The landlord had called, had talked of
distraint, and of cancelling the lease. "The landlord's visit was
followed up by that of the rest of the pack, partly in person, and
partly in the form of threatening letters. I found my wife so
desperately ill that I had not the courage to tell her the true state of
affairs. I really don't know what to do!" Engels answered by return of
post with a remittance of £1, and the assurance: "I am trying to think
out ways of providing at least in instalments for the others." Then,
letter after letter, £50, a Christmas present, £15, £20, and £10, and
finally the funds for the visit to Margate.

To this period belongs a temptation to which a reference must be made,
because it subsequently played a part in the history of the German
social democracy. One day Marx received from Lothar Bucher, friend and
executor of Lassalle, the offer of a well-paid position on the staff of
the "Staatsanzeiger" in Berlin. In return for his salary, he was to
supply a monthly report upon the movements of the money market and the
commodity market. Marx, not in general scrupulous about the choice of
the newspapers to which he contributed, was quick to suspect that
Bismarck lurked behind the offer. At this juncture Bismarck was strongly
interested in the idea of getting into political touch with the labour
movement. He had tried to win over Lassalle to support his policy; had
actually won over Countess Hatzfeld; and Marx (erroneously) believed
that he had already got Herr von Schweitzer under his spell. After
discussing the matter with Engels, Marx left the offer unanswered. Not
long afterwards, Lothar Bucher entered openly into Bismarck's service,
and compiled the draft of the Anti-Socialist Law. During the worst days
of the persecution of the socialists in Germany, Marx published Lothar
Bucher's letter. It was used by the social democrats as a weapon in
their campaign against Bismarck, for they declared that he wanted to
make friends with the workers when he needed them as pawns against the
bourgeoisie; and treated them as enemies when he no longer had any use
for them, or found them in the way of his policy.

While Bucher's letter was calculated only to increase the depressing
effect of this depressing period, the advance now made by the
International could not but promote a recovery of spirits. "As regards
the London unions," wrote Marx to Engels, "every day we have fresh
accessions, so that by degrees we are becoming a power." Engels answered
with delight: "The International Association has really, in a very short
time and with very little fuss, conquered a vast territory. ... At any
rate you have gained something out of the time you have spent on it."

Still, this objective growth was but poor compensation for the crisis
that raged within. All was going awry in the General Council; everywhere
rivalry, jealousy, hostility prevailed. Cremer was fighting Eccarius. Le
Lubez was intriguing against the Germans. Major Wolff was at war with
Jung. The Mazzinists were arming themselves against doctrinal control by
those whom they stigmatized as tyrants. In the official organ, which was
dependent upon "bourgeois funds," and therefore lacked the requisite
independence, political and commercial rivalries culminated in something
that was little better than a dog-fight. "I have shown the utmost
patience in this affair," said Marx, "hoping that the workers would make
a push to carry it on themselves independently, and also because I did
not wish to be a spoil-sport."

Notwithstanding these internal dissensions, the public side of the
movement was successful. A huge meeting in St. Martin's Hall on behalf
of the extension of the suffrage was entirely under the inspiration of
the International Workingmen's Association. Writing to Engels about the
franchise demonstrations in London, inaugurated, after the fall of the
Russell government (in which Gladstone was the leading spirit), against
the procrastinatory policy of Disraeli, Marx said: "It is really amazing
compared with anything seen in England since 1844, and wholly the work
of the International. ... This shows how different it is when one works
behind the scenes and disappears from the public eye, as compared with
the democratic manner of assuming important airs in public and doing
nothing at all."

True that behind the scenes there was still a great deal to do. "The
cursedly traditional character of all English movements, a lukewarm
reformism, coquetting and compacting often enough with bourgeois
radicalism, had their way, and quenched the early fire of the movement."
As J. P. Becker once wrote to Jung, there was "lacking among the English
workers a spice of revolutionary salt, which might have roused them from
the slumber of legalism." Or, as Marx complained: "In France, Belgium,
Switzerland (even here and there in Germany, and actually in a sporadic
way in America), the society has made great and continuous progress. In
England, the reform movement, which we called into life, has nearly made
an end of us. That would not matter, were it not that the Geneva
Congress has been summoned for the end of May [1866]. For the English, a
failure of the congress would be very much to their taste. But for us!
It would make us ludicrous in the sight of Europe!"

Marx was very much afraid lest the congress should be a failure, for he
knew that the movement was not yet sufficiently ripened to cope
adequately with such a public test. He debated the advisability of going
to Paris, in order to advise the comrades there, who were urging that
the congress should be held without delay, that a postponement was
essential. At the same time he was well aware that the whole future of
the International would be imperilled should it not be held. Engels
agreed with him: "It is of minor importance whether the congress passes
any good resolutions; the essential thing is that there should be no
open scandal. Besides, any demonstration of the kind would be a
discredit--as far as we are concerned. And before the whole of Europe? I
hope it could be avoided. ... Still, I would advise you on no account to
go to Paris for this reason. ... The police would take prompt action.
... The whole affair is not worth the risk. ... Better stay where you
are in Margate, getting out in the fresh air as much as you can. Who
knows how soon you will have need of all your strength?"

Ultimately, at the wish of the Swiss sections, the congress was
postponed till the autumn of 1866. Marx did not attend it, wishing to
have "no personal responsibility for its management." This proved to
have been needless discretion, for the congress was by no means a
European scandal. Very much the contrary. It was an event of European
importance. For six days it was the centre of interest in the political
world, passing weighty resolutions, especially upon social topics and
labour protection laws, concerning which Marx had penned a memorial and
carefully edited the resolutions.

While Marx thus had reason to be well pleased with the Geneva Congress
next year's congress, held at Lausanne from September 2 to September 8,
1867, aroused great anxiety in his mind. At Geneva the French
Proudhonists had sustained a defeat, gaining experience which led them
to make better preparations for Lausanne. They flooded the Lausanne
Congress with proposals and discussions, and succeeded in carrying a
number of Proudhonist resolutions. Marx was at this time wholly immersed
in finishing the first volume of _Capital_. Not only did that make it
impossible for him to attend the congress, but he had been unable to
prepare the agenda, as he had done in the case of Geneva. Commenting on
the proceedings, he wrote to Engels: "At next year's congress in
Brussels, I shall make it my business to give these jackasses of
Proudhonists their quietus. On this occasion, I have been extremely
diplomatic, not wishing to intervene personally before my book is
published, or until our organization has struck roots. Besides, in the
official report of the General Council (despite all their efforts, the
Parisian chatterers could not prevent our re-election), I shall give
them a good lashing. Meanwhile, our society has made great strides
forward. The wretched 'Star,' which wanted to ignore us altogether,
declares in a leading article that we are more important than the Peace
Congress. Schulze-Delitzsch was unable to prevent his workers' society
in Berlin from affiliating to us. The English pigdogs among the trade
unionists, for whom we were too 'advanced,' are flocking to us. ... When
the next revolution (which is perhaps nearer than it seems) comes, we
shall have this powerful engine in our hands. Compare that with the
results of the machinations of Mazzini and the rest of them during the
last thirty years! And this without any funds! Despite, too, the
intrigues of the Proudhonists in Paris, Mazzini in Italy, and the
jealous Odger, Cremer, and Potter in London, with Schulze-Delitzsch and
the Lassallists in Germany, to boot! We have good reason to be
satisfied!"

But the more the International attracted public attention, the more
alarmed was the bourgeoisie to witness the growth of a hostile power
thus developing against it. The authorities mobilized their forces and
took action: in England, on the occasion of an Irish conspiracy, with
which the International was erroneously supposed to he connected; in
France, under a law which forbade the formation of societies with more
than twenty members; in Belgium, after a dispute between miners and
mineowners in the Charleroi district, a dispute in which there had been
bloodshed. These attacks however, served mainly to strengthen the
prestige of the International. During the great strike movement which
spread across the Continent from 1866 to 1868, the bourgeoisie came to
regard the International as a dread spectre. Its influence was supposed
to be at work in every active labour movement; its hand was suspected
behind every strike, every rising, all working-class political activity.
Ferdinand Tönnies tells us that in his boyhood the International was
looked upon as the embodiment of the Red Peril. The newspapers were
filled with references to this secret power, with paragraphs about its
unlimited command of money. Marx was represented as the sinister
protagonist of a worldwide conspiracy. Most of the chatter, of course,
was gross exaggeration, the outcome of fear. This much, however, was
true, that the organization--despite its internal dissensions, despite
its urgent lack of funds, despite the apathy and the misunderstanding
and the timidity it had to encounter--steadily grew in prestige and
importance under Marx's guidance and inspiration. What Marx had said
about the Lausanne Congress, that the main thing was that it should be
held, and that what happened at the congress mattered very little,
applied still more to the International as a whole. Its value, its
importance, did not depend upon its actual doings or achievements, but
upon the mere fact of its existence.

### Schweitzer and Liebknecht

It cannot but seem strange that the General Union of German Workers,
which after Lassalle's death had become the leading labour organization
of the German proletariat, should not have been in touch with the
International and should not have been represented at any of the
congresses.

The reason was, above all, that the General Union of German Workers had,
immediately after Lassalle's death, passed under incompetent leadership,
and been devastated by a war of succession. But subsequently, when the
wing of the organization that was under the control of J. B. von
Schweitzer had become able to undertake serious and positive political
activities, there was still no attempt to collaborate with Marx. Marx
himself had an invincible dislike for this organization that had been
founded by Lassalle. His aversion to Lassalle had been transferred to
Schweitzer, and was a barrier to any sort of alliance. Furthermore,
there had been a personal quarrel between Marx and Schweitzer, the
outcome of a trifling matter. The "Sozialdemokrat," the organ of the
General Union of German Workers, edited by Schweitzer, had printed an
item of Paris correspondence furnished by Moses Hess in which doubt was
thrown on the trustworthiness of Tolain, a leading member of the
International in Paris. This was but one of the countless intrigues
characteristic of the life of the refugees. Marx ought to have been
lenient, seeing that, when he was editing the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung,"
he had given publicity to a similar slander on Bakunin, but he was not
inclined to be lenient where Schweitzer was concerned. He marshalled his
heavy artillery, not only demanding satisfaction, but making the
accusation against Tolain the excuse for abruptly and rudely breaking
off his own relations with the "Sozialdemokrat." He declared that the
trend of the paper was antipathetic to him. His doubts of Schweitzer
ripened to venomous suspicions. Writing to Engels, Marx said that he
regarded Schweitzer as "irreclaimable, and probably in secret
understanding with Bismarck." He wanted to cut adrift from Schweitzer at
any price. He went on to say: "As long as this Lassallist business has
the upper hand in Germany, the International Workingmen's Association
will make no progress there." He was going much too far, in his anger,
for Schweitzer not only withdrew the charge that had been made against
Tolain, but offered to lay before the congress of the General Union of
German Workers a resolution expressing agreement with the principles of
the International and a determination to send delegates to the Brussels
Congress. But Marx ignored this proffer of friendship. He would have
nothing more to do with Schweitzer and the Lassallist organization.
"Since we have to break with the fellow, we had better do it
immediately," he wrote to Engels. The latter, answering in the same
strain, said; "The longer we dawdle along with him, the deeper we shall
get in the mire. The sooner the better." Marx and Engels thereupon sent
the "Sozialdemokrat" a statement to the effect that they had not for a
moment failed to recognize the difficulties of the situation, and had
never asked the newspaper to put forward any demands unsuitable to the
meridian of Berlin. But they had repeatedly asked that the
"Sozialdemokrat" should use against the ministry and the feudal
absolutists a language no less bold than that which it used against the
progressives. The tactics adopted by the "Sozialdemokrat" made it
impossible for them to continue collaborating with it. Their views
concerning Prussian monarchical governmental socialism, and concerning
the attitude which ought to be assumed by the labour party towards such
humbug, had been expressed as long ago as 1847 in the "Deutsche
Brüsseler Zeitung." They were still prepared to subscribe to every word
of the declaration they had then published.

Thus without inquiry and without a shadow of proof, they implied that
the "Sozialdemokrat" was secretly working hand in hand with Bismarck,
and was endeavouring to bring about an alliance between the proletariat
and the government against the liberal bourgeoisie. In this matter, Marx
and Engels were doing a gross injustice to Schweitzer. He had never
dreamed of entering into a conspiratorial alliance with Bismarck. As
Mehring shows, one cannot find in the "Sozialdemokrat" a single line
suggesting a pact with the government against the progressives. The five
articles concerning the Bismarck ministry published by Schweitzer in the
"Sozialdemokrat," the articles upon which Marx and Engels based their
statement, had a very different complexion for one who was actually
bearing the heat and burden of the political struggle, and upon whom it
was incumbent to avail himself of chance happenings in the opposing army
and to turn these to account on behalf of the proletariat--than for one
who lived in exile far from the fighting line, and contemplated the fray
through a distorting atmosphere.

Schweitzer was a man of independent intelligence and strong character,
filled with political earnestness and inspired with a sense of
revolutionary responsibility. It may well be that Marx regarded him
(like Lassalle) as a dangerous competitor, as one who wished to assume
the political role which Marx had reserved for himself. The
determination to discredit him, makes it extremely probable that such a
sense of rivalry existed in Marx's mind, in the under levels of
consciousness at least. For not only did Marx take an erroneous view of
Schweitzer's personal character; he also went astray in his estimate of
the General Union of German Workers. Although this had now become an
imposing organization, Marx persisted in regarding it as an obscure and
eccentric sectarian movement, devoted to the advocacy of petty-bourgeois
democratic interests. Unfortunately, in this way of looking at the
matter, he was supported by Wilhelm Liebknecht.

Liebknecht, who since 1862 had been living in Berlin, had already played
a strange part in the conflict between Marx and the "Sozialdemokrat." He
was on the staff of the "Sozialdemokrat," and had actually sub-edited
the column in which the offensive paragraph about Tolain had appeared.
Instead of trying to pour oil on troubled waters, Liebknecht showed
himself completely wanting in tact and comradely feeling. He was himself
personally embroiled with Schweitzer, and this led him, not only to
ignore his duty to clear up the differences between Marx and Schweitzer,
but actually (we may suppose) to intensify the trouble by the tone of
his letters to London. For instance, we read in a letter from Marx to
Engels: "According to Liebknecht, the only reason why Schweitzer has not
been able to sell himself to Bismarck is that he would have had to do so
through the instrumentality of that old Hatzfeld woman." This shows the
evil atmosphere in which gossip and intrigue were flourishing.

Lassalle, years before, had written fiercely and contemptuously
concerning the part played by Liebknecht in the Vogt affair. In a letter
to Marx penned in January 1860, he said: "How in the world can
you--straitlaced as you rightly are in other respects, bring yourself to
have associations with any one who writes in the 'Augsburger Allgemeine
Zeitung'? You say, indeed, that they all do it, that they contribute to
all newspapers without distinction of tint, and that you would be a
solitary exception. This bad custom does not affect the matter. If they
do, they are all under the same condemnation. ... I am afraid your ties
with Liebknecht are not transient or isolated." Marx himself who had
been in close touch with Liebknecht during the latter's stay in London,
was incessantly criticizing his pupil's political activities in Berlin.
In letters to Engels, Marx says that Liebknecht is "dilatory," a
"blockhead"; that Liebknecht makes "many blunders"; "often goes astray."
In general, Marx had a poor opinion of Liebknecht's intelligence.
Nevertheless, Marx continued, with indefatigable indulgence, to back up
Liebknecht and to excuse his errors. He needed Liebknecht as a tool
against Schweitzer; and Liebknecht, wholly devoted to Marx, unruffled by
the most vehement scoldings, had no objection to being misused in this
fashion.

Subsequently, Liebknecht was expelled from Berlin. He went to Leipzig,
joined forces with Bebel, and in conjunction with the latter founded at
Eisenach in 1869 the Social Democratic Labour Party. It now became plain
that everything which Marx blamed Schweitzer for, really, on close
examination, applied to Liebknecht. The latter, though Marx's own pupil,
was enormously excelled by Schweitzer in the comprehension and
elaboration of Marx's ideas upon socialist theory and socialist
politics. Schweitzer edited his newspaper in accordance with the
principles of the _Communist Manifesto_ and the Address, and, as a
member of the North German Reichstag, sometimes asked Marx's advice upon
difficult political problems. Liebknecht, on the other hand, in the
"Demokratisches Wochenblatt," advocated a particularist and confused
brand of petty-bourgeois socialism, which perpetually conflicted with
Marxian principles. Nevertheless, he remained Marx's favourite child,
while Schweitzer was treated as whipping-boy.

"I think you must have made many a worthy man your enemy who might have
been one of your adherents," Lassalle had once said reproachfully to
Marx. Schweitzer was among the number of these "worthy men" whom unjust
suspicion and mortifying coldness drove out of the workers' camp,
although with all the powers of his intelligence and all his sympathies
he earnestly desired Marx's friendship and alliance.

Causeless suspicion has clouded Schweitzer's name even in the tomb.
Although there was never anything questionable or unsavoury about his
behaviour or his political activities, although no words or deeds of his
can be quoted that tend to show he was anything but a thoroughly honest
socialist, although there is not a blemish on his revolutionary
escutcheon, he is still currently supposed to have been dishonest, to
have been sold to the other side. Mehring undertook to plead his cause,
and Mehring's demonstration of Schweitzer's fundamental honesty would be
convincing to any impartial tribunal. Nevertheless in the labour
movement, it is generally believed that Schweitzer played false, because
such was Marx's opinion.

### Bakunin

Michael Bakunin was arrested in 1844 in Saxony after the Dresden rising,
and was condemned to death. Instead of executing him, however, the Saxon
authorities handed him over to the Austrians, by whom he was tried once
more, and again sentenced to death. Yet again he escaped the extreme
penalty, and in 1851 the Austrians handed him over to Russia. From then
until 1857 he was imprisoned in the fortress of St. Peter and St. Paul,
and was afterwards sent to Siberia. Escaping thence in 1861, he made his
way back to Europe through Japan and America. Reaching London in the end
of 1861, he got into touch with his compatriots Herzen and Ogaryoff, and
wrote articles for Herzen's "Kolokol," although he was not in sympathy
with the moderate tone of that periodical. Here is Bakunin's own account
of what he learned in London:

"While I was having a far from amusing time in German and Russian
fortresses and in Siberia, Marx and Co. were peddling, clamouring from
the housetops, publishing in English and German newspapers, the most
abominable rumours about me. They said it was untrue to declare that I
had been imprisoned in a fortress, that, on the contrary, Tsar Nicholas
had received me with open arms, had provided me with all possible
conveniences and enjoyments, that I was able to amuse myself with light
women and had an abundance of champagne to drink. This was infamous, but
it was also stupid. ... Hardly had I arrived in London, when an English
newspaper published a statement by a certain Urquhart, a turcophile and
a semi-imbecile, to the effect that the Russian government had
apparently sent me to act as a spy. I answered in a newspaper,
challenging the anonymous calumniator to name himself, and promising him
that I would answer him, not pen in hand, but with a hand without the
pen. He left matters there, and I was not troubled any more."

In the beginning of 1863, Bakunin went to Sweden, his aim being, from
that platform to stir up a revolution in Russia. He returned to London
in the end of the same year, and then went on to Italy. In August 1864,
he visited Sweden once more, and in October was back in London. Before
leaving again for Italy, he had an interview with Marx. About this he
wrote: "At that time I had a little note from Marx (it is still among my
papers), in which he asked me whether he could come to see me the next
day. I answered in the affirmative, and he came. We had an explanation.
He swore that he had never said or done anything against me; that, on
the contrary, he had always been my true friend, and had retained great
respect for me. I knew that he was lying, but I really no longer bore
any grudge against him. The renewal of the acquaintanceship interested
me moreover, in another connexion. I knew that he had taken a great part
in the foundation of the International. I had read the manifesto written
by him in the name of the provisional General Council, a manifesto which
was weighty, earnest, and profound, like everything that came from his
pen when he was not engaged in personal polemic. In a word, we parted,
outwardly, on the best of terms, although I did not return his visit."

We also have Marx's account of this meeting. Under date November 4,
1864, he wrote to Engels: "Bakunin wishes to be remembered to you. He
has left for Italy today. I saw him yesterday evening once more, for the
first time after sixteen years. I must say that I liked him very much,
much better than before. He said that after the failure in Poland he
should in future confine himself to participation in the socialist
movement. On the whole he is one of the few persons whom I find not to
have retrogressed after sixteen years, but to have developed further. I
had a talk with him also about Urquhart's denunciations."

Bakunin's resolve to devote himself henceforward to the socialist
movement exclusively, and his conviction as to the importance of the
International, made him regard it as desirable to be on good terms with
Marx once more. Of course this went rather against the grain. Between
the old-time friendship and its renewal there had been, not only the
series of calumnies circulated about Bakunin and the period of his
imprisonment and exile, but also a deplorable dispute with Marx thanks
to which Bakunin, from the beginning of his revolutionary career, had
been flecked with the suspicion of being a spy. Here is Bakunin's story
of that matter:

"In the year 1848 Marx and I had a difference of opinion, and I must say
that he was far more in the right of it than I. In Paris and Brussels he
had founded a section of German communists and had, in alliance with the
French and a few English communists, supported by his friend and
inseparable comrade Engels, founded in London the first international
association of communists of various lands. ... I myself, the fumes of
the revolutionary movement in Europe having gone to my head, had been
much more interested in the negative than in the positive side of this
revolution, had been, that is to say, much more concerned with the
overthrow of the extant than with the question of the upbuilding and
organization of what was to follow. But there was one point in which I
was right and he was wrong. As a Slav, I wanted the liberation of the
Slav race from the German yoke. I wanted this liberation to be brought
about by the revolution, that is to say by the destruction of the regime
of Russia, Austria, Prussia, and Turkey, and by the reorganization of
the peoples from below upwards through their own freedom, upon the
foundation of complete economic and social equality, and not through the
power of any authority, however revolutionary it might call itself, and
however intelligent it might in fact be.

"Already at this date the difference between our respective systems (a
difference which now severs us in a way that on my side has been very
carefully thought out) was well marked. My ideas and aspirations could
not fail to be very displeasing to Marx. First of all because they were
not his own; secondly because they ran counter to the convictions of the
authoritarian communists; and finally because, being a German patriot,
he would not admit then, any more than he does today, the right of the
Slays to free themselves from the German yoke--for still, as of old, he
thinks that the Germans have a mission to civilize the Slavs, this
meaning to Germanize them whether by kindness or by force.

"To punish me for being so bold as to aim at realizing an idea different
from and indeed actually opposed to his, Marx then revenged himself
after his own fashion. He was editor of the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung,'
published in Cologne. In one of the issues of that paper I read in the
Paris correspondence that Madame George Sand, with whom I had formerly
been acquainted, was said to have told some one it was necessary to be
cautious in dealing with Bakunin, for it was quite possible that he was
some sort of Russian agent."

According to a statement published by Marx on September 1, 1853, in the
London newspaper the "Morning Advertiser," on July 5, 1848, the "Neue
Rheinische Zeitung" had received two letters from Paris, one from the
Havas Bureau, and the other "from a political refugee"--Marx did not
wish to give his name, but was referring to Dr. Ewerbeck, the sometime
leader of the Federation of the Just. Both these letters contained an
allegation to the effect that George Sand possessed letters compromising
Bakunin, "showing that he had recently been in communication with the
Russian government."

Bakunin writes of this: "The accusation was like a tile falling from a
roof upon my head, at the very time when I was fully immersed in
revolutionary organization, and it completely paralysed my activities
for several weeks. All my German and Slav friends fought shy of me. I
was the first Russian to concern himself actively with revolutionary
work, and it is needless for me to tell you what feelings of traditional
mistrust were accustomed to arise in western minds when the words
Russian revolutionist were mentioned. In the first instance, therefore,
I wrote to Madame Sand."

Bakunin's personal peculiarities and his mode of life gave a good deal
of colour to all this gossip and suspicion. He was of aristocratic
birth, of striking appearance; his doings had caused a great deal of
talk; nobody could understand how it was he had so much money to play
about with; he had his fingers in all kinds of queer conspiratorial
pies. The Russian embassy, which kept him under close observation,
followed its usual policy of broadcasting suspicions about him, hoping
thereby to undermine his prestige in revolutionary circles. Writing in
the "Neue Oder-Zeitung," Bakunin declared that just before the
appearance of the defamatory statement in the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung,"
like rumours had been circulated in Breslau, that they had emanated from
the Russian embassy, and that the best way in which he could refute them
would be by an appeal to George Sand.

Thereupon George Sand wrote to the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung" under date
August 3, 1848: "Your correspondent's statements are utterly false, and
have not the remotest semblance of truth. I have no atom of proof of the
insinuations which you have tried to disseminate against Herr Bakunin,
whom the late monarchy banished from France. Consequently, I have never
been authorized to express the slightest doubt of the loyalty of his
character and the candour of his opinions." By this declaration Bakunin
was fully rehabilitated.

Nevertheless, suspicion continued to attach to him. Fifteen years later,
in December 1863, when he was travelling through France on the way to
Switzerland, a Basle newspaper stirred up the Polish refugees against
him by maintaining that, through his revolutionary intrigues, he had
involved many of their fellow countrymen in disaster, while himself
always remaining immune. During his stay in Italy, he was perpetually
being attacked and calumniated in like manner by numerous German
periodicals.

Marx, too, still regarded Bakunin with much suspicion, and never missed
a chance of speaking against him. With reference to Serne, a Russian
whom he believed to be an adviser of Bakunin, he said: "I wanted
information from this young man regarding Bakunin. Since, however, I do
not trust any Russian, I put my question in this way: 'What is my old
friend Bakunin (I don't know if he is still my friend) doing?'--and so
on, and so on. Serne could find nothing better to do than communicate my
letter to Bakunin, and Bakunin availed himself of the circumstance to
excuse a sentimental entrée!"

This "sentimental entrée" not only redounded to Bakunin's credit, not
only showed his good feeling and his insight, but deserved a better
reception from Marx than the biting cynicism and the derogatory
insolence with which it was encountered (cynicism and insolence which
were only masks for embarrassment). "You ask whether I am still your
friend," wrote Bakunin. "Yes, more than ever, my dear Marx, for I
understand better than ever how right you were to walk along the broad
road of the economic revolution, to invite us all to follow you, and to
denounce all those who wandered off into the byways of nationalist or
exclusively political enterprise. I am now doing what you began to do
more than twenty years ago. Since I formally and publicly said good-bye
to the bourgeois of the Berne Congress, I know no other society, no
other milieu than the world of the workers. My fatherland is now the
International, whose chief founder you have been. You see, then, dear
friend, that I am your pupil--and I am proud to be this. I think I have
said enough to make my personal position and feelings clear to you."

Bakunin honestly endeavoured to be on good terms with Marx, and to avoid
friction. But he could not entertain cordial sentiments for Marx. The
two men differed too much in mental structure, in theoretical trends,
and in fundamental attitudes towards the revolutionary problem, for this
to be possible. Bakunin loved the peasants; detested intellectualism and
abstract systems with their dogmatism and intolerance; hated the modern
State, industrialism, and centralization; had the most intense dislike
for Judaism and all its ways, which he regarded as irritable,
loquacious, unduly critical, intriguing, and exploitative. Everything
for which he had an instinctive abhorrence, everything which aroused in
him spiritual repugnance and antagonism, was for him incorporated in
Marx. He found Marx's overweening self-esteem intolerable.

"Marx loved his own person much more than he loved his friends and
apostles," wrote Bakunin in a comparison between Marx and Mazzini; "and
no friendship could hold water against the slightest wound to his
vanity. He would far more readily forgive infidelity to his
philosophical and socialist system. That he would regard as a proof of
stupidity, or at least as an indication of the mental inferiority of his
friend, and it would only amuse him. Such a friend would perhaps even be
more dear to him, since it was now obvious that he could not be a rival,
could not dispute the topmost ground with himself. But Marx will never
forgive a slight to his person. You must worship him, make an idol of
him, if he is to love you in return; you must at least fear him, if he
is to tolerate you. He likes to surround himself with pygmies, with
lackeys and flatterers. All the same, there are some remarkable men
among his intimates.

"In general, however, one may say that in the circle of Marx's intimates
there is very little brotherly frankness, but a great deal of
machination and diplomacy. There is a sort of tacit struggle, and a
compromise between the self-loves of the various persons concerned; and
where vanity is at work, there is no longer place for brotherly feeling.
Every one is on his guard, is afraid of being sacrificed, of being
annihilated. Marx's circle is a sort of mutual admiration society. Marx
is the chief distributor of honours, but is also the invariably
perfidious and malicious, the never frank and open, inciter to the
persecution of those whom he suspects, or who have had the misfortune of
failing to show all the veneration he expects.

"As soon as he has ordered a persecution, there is no limit to the
baseness and infamy of the method. Himself a Jew, he has round him in
London and in France, and above all in Germany, a number of petty, more
or less able, intriguing, mobile, speculative Jews (the sort of Jews you
can find all over the place), commercial employees, bank clerks, men of
letters, politicians, the correspondents of newspapers of the most
various shades of opinion, in a word, literary go-betweens, just as they
are financial go-betweens, one foot in the bank, the other in the
socialist movement, while their rump is in German periodical literature.
... These Jewish men of letters are adepts in the art of cowardly,
odious, and perfidious insinuations. They seldom make open accusation,
but they insinuate, saying they 'have heard--it is said--it may not be
true, but,' and then they hurl the most abominable calumnies in your
face."

Despite the destructive analysis conveyed in the foregoing passage,
Bakunin had a profound respect for Marx's intellectual abilities and
scientific efficiency. When he read Marx's _Capital_ he was amazed, and
promptly set to work upon translating it into Russian. Writing to
Herzen, he said: "For five-and-twenty years Marx has served the cause of
socialism ably, energetically, and loyally, taking the lead of every one
in this matter. I should never forgive myself if, out of personal
motives, I were to destroy or diminish Marx's beneficial influence.
Still, I may be involved in a struggle against him, not because he has
wounded me personally, but because of the State socialism he advocates."

This struggle was soon to break out. Characteristically enough, the
flames blazed up on account of a personal dispute. "At the Peace
Congress in Geneva," reports Bakunin, "the veteran communist Becker gave
me the first, and as yet the only, volume of the extremely important,
learned, profound, though very abstract work Capital. Then I made a
terrible mistake; I forgot to write to Marx in order to thank him. ... I
did not hasten to thank him, and to pay him a compliment upon his really
outstanding book. Old Philip Becker, who had known Marx for a very long
time, said to me, when he heard of this forgetfulness: 'What, you
haven't written to him yet? Marx will never forgive you!'" Although
Bakunin found it hard to believe that this personal slight, however
unpardonable a discourtesy, could be "the cause of the resumption of
hostilities," a letter from Frau Marx to Philip Becker shows that this
must actually have been the case. "Have you seen or heard anything of
Bakunin? My husband sent him, as an old Hegelian, his book--not a word
or a sign. There must be something underneath this! One cannot trust any
of these Russians; if they are not in the service of the Little Father
in Russia, then they are in Herzen's service here, which amounts to much
the same thing."

A duel between the two titans had become inevitable. It was fought in
the International, of which Bakunin had become a member a few months
before the Brussels Congress.

## Chapter 07: Achievement, Part 2

### The Alliance and the International

At the Berne Congress of the League of Peace and Freedom, Bakunin had
tried to induce the league to adopt a revolutionary programme, and to
affiliate to the International. When this attempt failed, he resigned
from the league, and, in conjunction with J. P. Becker, founded the
International Alliance of the Socialist Democracy, also known as the
Alliance of Social Revolutionaries. His aim now was to get this Alliance
accepted as part of the International; then, by degrees, to excavate and
absorb the International; until, at last, the International would be
replaced by the Alliance.

For, as he had said at the Berne Congress, he hated communism because it
implied the annihilation of freedom, and would concentrate all the
powers of society (property included) in the hands of the State. His
aim, he had said, was not communism but collectivism, the socialization
of the individual by way of free association. He also advocated
republicanism and atheism. But high above all principles, he contended,
must stand the moral principles of universal human justice.

This programme places him somewhere between Marx and Proudhon. Mehring
characterizes Bakunin's attitude very aptly when he says: "Bakunin had
advanced far beyond Proudhon, having absorbed a larger measure of
European culture; and he understood Marx much better than Proudhon had
done. But he was not so intimately acquainted with German philosophy as
Marx, nor had he made so thorough a study of the class struggles of
western European nations. Above all, his ignorance of political economy
was much more disastrous to him than ignorance of natural science had
been to Proudhon. Yet he was revolutionary through and through; and,
like Marx and Lassalle, he had the gift of making people listen to him.
Whereas, however, Marx considered that the core of the revolutionary
fighting forces would be formed by the manufacturing proletariat, by the
workers whose characteristics he had studied in England, France, and
Germany, Bakunin counted upon declassed youth, the peasant masses, and
even the tatterdemalion proletariat, for support. Marx favoured
centralism, as manifested in the contemporary organization of economic
life and of the State; Bakunin favoured federalism, which had been the
organizational principle of the pre-capitalist era. That was why Bakunin
found most of his adherents in Italy, Spain, and Russia, in countries
where capitalist development was backward. Marx's supporters, on the
other hand, were recruited from lands of advanced capitalist
development, those with an industrial proletariat. The two men
represented two successive phases of social evolution. Furthermore,
Bakunin looked upon man rather as the subject of history who, 'having
the devil in his body, spontaneously ripens for the revolution, and
merely needs to have his chains broken; but Marx regarded man rather as
the object, who must slowly be trained for action, in order that,
marshalled for class activity, he may play his part as a factor of
history. The two outlooks might have been combined, for in combination
they supply the actual picture of man in history. But in the case of
both of these champions, the necessary compromise was rendered
impossible by the orthodox rigidity of intellectual dogmatism, by
deficient elasticity of the will, and by the narrow circumstances of
space and time, so that in actual fact they became adversaries. Then,
owing to their respective temperaments, owing to the divergences in
mental structure which found expression in behaviour, their opposition
in concrete matters developed into personal enmity."

The concrete oppositions found their first expression in the
determination of the General Council to refuse the proposed affiliation
of the Alliance. This decision was inspired by Marx. Rightly or wrongly,
he regarded the Alliance as a rival of the International, and was afraid
that in the future there might be two General Councils, two Congresses,
and two Internationals. To him, this was an intolerable idea. Presumably
that was why, in this particular case, he was so rigid in his insistence
that the Alliance was not a suitable body for affiliation to the
International, although the latter had not in general been strict in its
demand for qualifications. In any case, at his instigation, the General
Council insisted that the Genevese section, which had proposed the
Alliance for affiliation, must refrain from setting up a Central
Committee of the Alliance and from holding its own congresses. Geneva
expressed its willingness to comply with these instructions, and the
Genevese section was thereupon accepted. But Marx and Engels distrusted
the Genevese, who were led by Bakunin. They felt that between them and
Bakunin there was an irreconcilable opposition, which could not be
shuffled out of the world by formalities. They believed that Bakunin
would continue to pursue his hidden aims, would try to make of the
Genevese section the centre of a secret society which would establish
itself inside the International in order to disrupt this latter. They
were anxious about the foundations of their power.

A further difficulty was the material incompatibility between the
programmes of the Alliance and the International. The Bakuninist
programme was not what Marx angrily called it: "an olla podrida of
worn-out commonplaces, thoughtless chatter; a rose-garland of empty
notions, and insipid improvisation." It was, however, based upon another
foundation than that of the mental and political characteristics of the
workers in contemporary Europe. Bakunin's programme was directed towards
a distant goal, whereas Marx was predominantly interested in the way
thither. "Marx said to himself: 'The mentality of the workers, arising
out of their economic conditions, is this or that. Ways in conformity
with the powers of these workers are to be chosen in order to establish
economic conditions which will give them enhanced powers. First of all,
the workers must be made aware of their own strength by awakening their
class consciousness. When that has been done, other things will follow
in due course.' On the other hand, the programme of the Alliance, as
Marx saw it, wanted the end before the beginning. It turned the aims of
education upside down, and thus interfered with the Marxian method of
education."

The fear that Bakunin was plotting rivalry to the International was
intensified by the fact that, living in Geneva, he had, by zealous
agitation, succeeded in winning a large number of adherents among the
homeworkers in the watchmaking industry of the Neuchâtel and Bernese
Jura. Here there already existed the beginnings of a revolutionary
movement; and some years before, in 1865, Dr. Coullery had founded in La
Chaux de Fonds a section of the International with four or five hundred
members. These highly skilled workers--whose principal leader was James
Guillaume, a teacher at the Industrial School in Le Lode, and a Hegelian
in philosophy--were federalistically inclined because they were Swiss
and were independently working proletarians; they were atheistically
inclined as a protest against the sanctimonious orthodoxy of the
Genevese; and they were revolutionary because they were in poor
circumstances and because they were affected with repressed religious
impulses. They became ardent supporters of Bakunin. He amalgamated their
groups into a federal council; founded a weekly, "Egalité," and started
a vigorous revolutionary movement. In London, this aroused the
impression that Bakunin was trying, by a devious method and working
within the International, to attain the ends which he had been unable to
reach by a direct route. At the Basle Congress of the International, on
September 5 and 6, 1869, Bakunin was no longer, as he had been in
Brussels, alone against the Marxian front, but was backed up by a
resolute phalanx of supporters.

In the proceedings at this congress, Bakunin's views concerning the
right of inheritance and the collective ownership of the land did not,
indeed, gain an unqualified victory over the views of the General
Council. It was obvious, however, that Bakunin's influence was on the
increase. This became especially plain during the discussion of the
question of direct legislation by the people (initiative and
referendum). On this matter, Bakunin reports: "At the Basle Congress
there were present for the first time delegates from Germany, Austria,
and German Switzerland in very large numbers, extremely well organized,
and members of the patriotic, unified, pangerman party, called the
Social Democratic Labour Party. Under the instigation of Marx and the
Marxists, and in obedience to a strict discipline, the German and
German-Swiss delegates presented to the Basle Congress a new political
programme which, had it been accepted, would have completely ousted the
true programme of the International, and would have made that
organization a tool in the hands of the bourgeois radicals. Their scheme
was warmly supported by all the German and English delegates of the
General Council. Fortunately, the Latin delegates were in the majority,
and the project of the Germans was rejected. Hence this wrath."

For a long time, Bakunin's opponents had been working to undermine his
position. They tried to check the growth of his influence by a flood of
suspicions and invectives. In particular, an individual named Borckheim,
a literary man of doubtful antecedents, who had been helping Marx in
various monetary affairs and as intermediary in the arrangement of
loans, inaugurated a russophobe campaign against Bakunin. The year
before (1868), in the "Demokratisches Wochenblatt" published in Leipzig
under Liebknecht's editorship, he had attacked Bakunin's personal honour
in the most odious way. At the same time Bebel, in a letter to J. P.
Becker, had written that Bakunin was "probably an agent of the Russian
government." Liebknecht, too, had circulated a report that Schweitzer
had been bought by Bismarck, and that Bakunin was in the Tsar's pay.
Moses Hess, likewise, had joined in the underground intrigues against
Bakunin by disseminating suspicion. At the Basle Congress, Bakunin was
able to bring matters to a head with Liebknecht, and to secure the
appointment of a court of arbitration to investigate the charges.
Liebknecht had no proofs to adduce, and declared that his words had been
misunderstood. The jury unanimously agreed that Liebknecht had behaved
"with criminal levity," and made him give Bakunin a written apology. The
adversaries shook hands before the congress. Bakunin made a spill out of
the apology, and lighted a cigarette with it.

Although it was natural that Bakunin should have defended himself
against calumny, suspicion is aroused by his extreme sensitiveness, and
by the violence of his reaction. Backbiting, detraction, the utterance
of suspicions, were then, as they are now, common enough in times of
ferment--especially in the revolutionary camp, which is always a focus
for the activities of spies. As we know today (although the matter was
then a profound secret), there was a weak spot and a sore one in
Bakunin's revolutionary past, something he would fain have forgotten if
he could. In 1851, when confined in the fortress of St. Peter and St.
Paul, after years of rigorous imprisonment, and when in a condition of
intense bodily weakness and profound mental depression, he had, at the
instigation of Tsar Nicholas, signed a "confession," in the hope that
this would procure his liberation from the grim dungeon. It was a
confession as to his revolutionary past, "a mixture of truth and
fiction," as he wrote to Herzen; a romantic and inaccurate document,
intended to mislead, penned in a tone of assumed humility and
hypocritical subserviency. But it gave no names, and betrayed no one. It
was, as Polonski said, a "Machiavellian masterpiece." Bakunin was
disappointed in his expectations. Nicholas, dissatisfied with the
confession, gave orders that the prisoner was to remain where he was
till further notice. When, in the end, after the death of the tsar,
Bakunin was at least partially freed by being sent to Siberia, memories
of this mysterious document haunted him, filled him with shame, anxiety,
and despair. He was continually dreading that its publication would
expose him to ridicule, hatred, and accusations of dishonourable
conduct. These fears made him irritable, unduly sensitive. The worst of
it was that the emissaries of the tsarist police, who followed him
whithersoever he went, and were always on the watch to counteract his
revolutionary machinations, threatened again and again to publish his
confession, which they had ready for circulation printed as a pamphlet.
This happened in Stockholm, in Lyons, and in Italy. Bakunin naturally
believed that some knowledge of the confession had filtered through to
his adversaries in the International, and he trembled to think of the
day when the story would be spread far and wide and his name as a
revolutionist would be tarnished for ever.

In actual fact, his opponents had heard nothing of the confession. They
continued to spread calumnies about him, none the less. The rebuke given
to Liebknecht had no more than a temporary effect. Even Marx was not
ashamed to disseminate suspicion again and again, and in the obscurity
of private correspondence to besmirch the honour of the detested rival.
In this enterprise, Marx accepted the unclean assistance of a Russian
named Utin, who to begin with, "a vain and talkative man," had forced
himself on Bakunin, subsequently, when he met with a rebuff, to
persecute the latter by spreading abroad malicious reports about him.
This same Utin, after Bakunin had removed from Geneva to Locarno, was
able by interminable underground machinations to bring about a split in
the Genevese section, and to get the editorship of "Egalité" into his
hands. Under Marx's protection, he became the go-between in promoting
the policy of the General Council of the International. On the strength
of information mainly received from Utin, Marx, on March 28, 1870,
through the instrumentality of his friend Kugelmann in Hanover, sent a
"confidential communication" to the Brunswick executive of the Eisenach
Labour Party--the party that had been founded in 1869 by Liebknecht and
Bebel as a rival of the General Union of German Workers. In this
confidential communication, Marx not only revived the disproved charges
against Bakunin, but added a new "revelation." He declared that Bakunin,
after Herzen's death, had embezzled an annual subvention of 25,000
francs, which Herzen had intended to be used for propaganda purposes by
a "friendly pseudo-socialist panslavist party in Russia." There was not
a word of truth in the story. It is mentioned only to show the depths to
which those stooped who were engaged in this disastrous quarrel among
brethren.

It is necessary to point out, however, that Bakunin never tried to pay
Marx back in the same coin. What Mehring says of Bakunin's writings,
that "we shall look in them in vain for any trace of venom towards the
General Council or towards Marx," applies with equal force to all
Bakunin's doings in this fierce campaign. Notwithstanding his
unfortunate experiences, he preserved so keen a sense of justice and so
splendid a magnanimity, that on January 28, 1872, writing to the
internationalists of the Romagna about Marx and the Marxists, he was
able to say: "Fortunately for the International there existed in London
a group of men who were extremely devoted to the great association, and
who were, in the true sense of the words, the real founders and
initiators of that body. I speak of the small group of Germans whose
leader is Karl Marx. These estimable persons regard me as an enemy, and
maltreat me as such whenever and wherever they can. They are greatly
mistaken. I am in no respect their enemy, and it gives me on the
contrary lively satisfaction when I am able to do them justice. I often
have an opportunity of doing so, for I regard them as genuinely
important and estimable persons, in respect both of intelligence and
knowledge, and also in respect of their passionate devotion to the cause
of the proletariat and of a loyalty to that cause which has withstood
every possible test--a devotion and a loyalty which have been proved by
the achievements of twenty years. Marx is the supreme economic and
socialist genius of our day. In the course of my life, I have come into
contact with a great many learned men, but I know no one else who is so
profoundly learned as he. Engels, who is now secretary for Italy and
Spain, Marx's friend and pupil, is also a man of outstanding
intelligence. As long ago as 1846 and 1848, working together, they
founded the party of the German communists, and their activities in this
direction have continued ever since. Marx edited the profound and
admirable Preamble to the Provisional Rules of the International, and
gave a body to the instinctively unanimous aspirations of the
proletariat of nearly all countries of Europe, in that, during the years
1863-1864 he conceived the idea of the International and effected its
establishment. These are great and splendid services, and it would be
very ungrateful of us if we were reluctant to acknowledge their
importance."

To the obvious question why, since these things were so, there had been
a breach between Bakunin and Marx, Bakunin, in the same epistle, gives
the following answer: "Marx is an authoritarian and centralizing
communist. He wants what we want: the complete triumph of economic and
social equality, but he wants it in the State and through the State
power, through the dictatorship of a very strong and, so to say,
despotic provisional government, that is, by the negation of liberty.
His economic ideal is the State as sole owner of the land and of all
kinds of capital, cultivating the land through well-paid agricultural
associations under the management of State engineers, and controlling
all industrial and commercial associations with State capital.

"We want the same triumph of economic and social equality through the
abolition of the State, and of all that passes by the name of law
(which, in our view, is the permanent negation of human rights). We want
the reconstruction of society, and the unification of mankind, to be
achieved, not from above downwards, by any sort of authority, or by
socialist officials, engineers, and other accredited men of
learning--but from below upwards, by the free federation of all kinds of
workers' associations liberated from the yoke of the State.

"You see that two theories could hardly be more sharply opposed to one
another than ours are. But there is another difference between us, a
purely personal one.

"Marx has two odious faults: he is vain and jealous. He detested
Proudhon, simply because Proudhon's great name and well-deserved
reputation were prejudicial to him. There is no term of abuse that Marx
has failed to apply to Proudhon. Marx is egotistical to the pitch of
insanity. He talks of 'my ideas,' and cannot understand that ideas
belong to no one in particular, but that, if we look carefully, we shall
always find that the best and greatest ideas are the product of the
instinctive labour of all. ... Marx, who was already constitutionally
inclined towards self-glorification, was definitively corrupted by the
idolization of his disciples, who have made a sort of doctrinaire pope
out of him. Nothing can be more disastrous to the mental and moral
health of a man, even though he be extremely intelligent, than to be
idolized and regarded as infallible. All this has made Marx even more
egotistical, so that he is beginning to loathe every one who will not
bow the neck before him."

Insuperable material differences and invincible personal antagonisms
combined to form the abyss which separated the life work of these two
men. Fundamentally, the severance was a forcible laceration of their
intrinsic interconnexion, and the hatred each felt for the other was a
hatred that sprang from love. That is why the severance and the hatred
were so distressing and so disastrous for both.

### The Franco-German War and the Commune

The first half of the year 1870 was characterized by perpetual quarrels,
jealous struggles, and polemical wrangles between the International and
the Alliance, especially between the opposing parties in the region of
the Jura. The climax of the bickerings occurred at the congress of the
Alliance held in La Chaux de Fonds, on April 4, 1870, at which such
violent differences of opinion became manifest within the Alliance that
it broke up, and the majority and the minority continued their
discussions in two separate congresses. The 1870 congress of the
International was to have been held in Paris. Since, however, the
Bonapartist police had inaugurated legal proceedings against the members
of the International, and was staging a great public trial, the General
Council summoned the congress for September 5th in Mainz.

But in July 1870, the Franco-German war broke out. In an address issued
by the General Council under date July 23rd, Marx expounded the position
of the International towards this war, which was described as a
consequence of the war of 1866, and as "an amended edition of the coup
d'état of December 1851." He strongly opposed the attitude of Prussia.
"On the German side, the war is a war of defence; but who put Germany to
the necessity of defending herself? Who enabled Louis Bonaparte to wage
war upon her? Prussia! It was Bismarck who conspired with that very same
Louis Bonaparte. ... After her victory, did Prussia dream one moment of
opposing a free Germany to an enslaved France? Just the contrary. While
carefully preserving all the native beauties of her old system, she
superadded all the tricks of the Second Empire. ... The Bonapartist
regime, which till then only flourished on one side of the Rhine, had
now got its counterfeit on the other. From such a state of things, what
else could result but war?" What inference was to be drawn as far as the
working class was concerned? It must be on its guard lest the defensive
character of the war should be transformed into an annexationist one.
"If the German working class allows the present war to lose its strictly
defensive character, and to degenerate into a war against the French
people, victory or defeat will prove alike disastrous."

In a second address, under date September 9th, Marx showed that Germany
had no historical claim upon Alsace-Lorraine, and did not need these
provinces for the protection of the country as a whole against France.
"If limits are to be fixed by military interests, there will be no end
to claims, because every military line is necessarily faulty, and may be
improved by an flexing some more outlying territory; and, moreover, they
can never be fixed finally and fairly, because they always must be
imposed by the conqueror upon the conquered, and consequently carry
within them the seed of fresh wars." He expressly referred to the
interests of the working class, which must be given due consideration
after the war. "The German working class have resolutely supported the
war, which it was not in their power to prevent, as a war for German
independence and the liberation of France and Europe from that
pestilential incubus, the Second Empire. It was the German workmen who,
together with the rural labourers, furnished the sinews and muscles of
heroic hosts, leaving behind their half-starved families. Decimated by
the battles abroad, they will be once more decimated by misery at home.
In their turn they are now coming forward to ask for
'guarantees'--guarantees that their immense sacrifices have not been
brought in vain, that they have conquered liberty, that the victory over
the imperialist armies will not, as in 1815, be turned into the defeat
of the German people; and as the first of these guarantees, they claim
an honourable peace for France, and the recognition of the French
republic. ... The French working class moves, therefore, under
circumstances of extreme difficulty. ... They have not to recapitulate
the past, but to build up the future. Let them calmly and resolutely
improve the opportunities of republican liberty, for the work of their
own class organization. It will gift them with fresh Herculean powers
for the regeneration of France, and for our common task--the
emancipation of labour. Upon their energies and wisdom hinges the fate
of the republic."

The establishment of the French republic did not, indeed, as yet signify
the taking over of political power by the working class, but only the
proclamation of bourgeois interests, above all in respect of the
question, who was to pay the gigantic war indemnity demanded by Prussia.
The bourgeois class was determined that the burden of the war should on
no account fall upon its shoulders, but should be shifted to those of
the proletariat. With this end in view, it came to an understanding with
the German bourgeoisie (which it had just been fighting) against the
proletariat (which had just been fighting as its ally). The negotiations
between Thiers and Bismarck meant to the French workers: "Your money or
your life!" When the Commune was proclaimed on March 18, 1871, the
Parisian proletariat, as vanguard of the French workers, presented a
bold front against the bourgeois highwaymen. It drove its adversaries to
Versailles, and engaged upon a life-or-death struggle.

On March 19, 1871, the first number of the "Journal Officiel," the organ
of the Commune, was published in Paris. Next day, in a leading article,
we read: "Amid the defeats and the treachery of the ruling class, the
proletarians of Paris have understood that the hour has struck when they
must save the situation by taking the conduct of public affairs into
their own hands. ... They have understood that it is their highest duty
and their absolute right to make themselves masters of their own fate,
and to seize the powers of government." Marx was overflowing with
enthusiasm. Writing to Kugelmann, under date April 12th, he said: "What
elasticity, what historical initiative, what capacity for self-sacrifice
in these Parisians! After six months' starvation and ruination by
internal treachery, even more than by the enemy without, they rise under
the Prussian bayonets as if there had never been a war between France
and Germany, and as if there were no enemy outside the gates of Paris.
History offers no parallel to this greatness!"

At the communal elections held in Paris on March 26, 1871, 72 socialists
were elected (out of a total membership of 92), among whom were members
of the International. Although, in subsequent elections, many more
Internationalists became members of the Commune, they did not gain a
majority. The tactics were decided by the radicals and the Blanquists.
Though there were members of the International in the most important
administrative bodies, and though these revolutionists distinguished
themselves by efficiency and by devotion to duty, the political
influence of the International was restricted to the giving of
occasional advice.

"The Commune was formed of the municipal councillors, chosen by
universal suffrage in various wards of the town, responsible and
revocable at short terms. The majority of its members were naturally
workingmen, or acknowledged representatives of the working class. The
Commune was to be a working, not a parliamentary body, executive and
legislative at the same time. Instead of continuing to be the agent of
the central government, the police was at once stripped of its political
attributes, and turned into the responsible and at all times revocable
agent of the Commune. So were the officials of all other branches of the
administration. From the members of the Commune downwards, the public
service had to be done at workmen's wages. The vested interests and the
representation allowances of the high dignitaries of State disappeared
along with the high dignitaries themselves. Public functions ceased to
be the private property of the tools of the central government. Not only
municipal administration, but the whole initiative hitherto exercised by
the State was laid into the hands of the Commune."

"The multiplicity of interpretations to which the Commune has been
subjected, and the multiplicity of interests which construed it in their
favour, show that it was a thoroughly expansive political form, while
all previous forms of government had been emphatically repressive. Its
true secret was this. It was essentially a working-class government, the
product of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating
class, the political form at last discovered under which to work out the
economical emancipation of labour."

"The working class did not expect miracles from the Commune. They have
no ready-made utopias to introduce by popular decree. They know that in
order to work out their own emancipation, and along with it that higher
form to which present society is irresistibly tending, by its own
economical agencies, they will have to pass through long struggles,
through a series of historic processes, transforming circumstances and
men. They have no ideals to realize, but to set free the elements of the
new society with which old collapsing bourgeois society itself is
pregnant. In the full consciousness of their historic mission, and with
the heroic resolve to act up to it, the working class can afford to
smile at the coarse invective of the gentlemen's gentlemen with the pen
and inkhorn, and at the didactic patronage of well-wishing bourgeois
doctrinaires, pouring forth their ignorant platitudes and sectarian
crochets in the oracular tone of scientific infallibility."

"When the Paris Commune took the management of the revolution into its
own hands; when plain workingmen for the first time dared to infringe
upon the governmental privilege of their 'natural superiors, and, under
circumstances of unexampled difficulty, performed their work modestly,
conscientiously, and efficiently--performed it at salaries the highest
of which barely amounted to one-fifth of what, according to high
scientific authority, is the minimum required for a secretary to a
certain metropolitan school board--the old world writhed in convulsions
of rage at the sight of the red flag, the symbol of the republic of
labour, floating over the Hotel de Ville."

"In every revolution there intrude, at the side of its true agents, men
of a different stamp; some of them survivors of, and devotees to, past
revolutions, without insight into the present movement, but preserving
popular influence by their known honesty and courage, or by the sheer
force of tradition; others mere bawlers, who, by dint of repeating year
after year the same set of stereotyped declamations against the
government of the day, have sneaked into the reputation of
revolutionists of the first water. After March 18th, some such men did
also turn up, and in some cases contrived to play preeminent parts. As
far as their power went, they hampered the real action of the working
class, exactly as men of that sort have hampered the full development of
every previous revolution. They are an unavoidable evil; with time they
are shaken off; but time was not allowed to the Commune."

Owing to a number of grave tactical errors, owing to the lack alike of a
sufficiently definite aim and of adequate revolutionary determination,
and owing to internal dissensions, the Commune was not equal to the
performance of its historic mission. The Versaillese gained the upper
hand. "If only the Commune had listened to my warnings," wrote Marx to
Professor Beesly. "I advised its members to fortify the northern side of
the heights of Montmartre, the Prussian side; and they still had time to
do this. I told them that otherwise they would find themselves in a
mouse-trap. I denounced Pyat, Grousset, and Vésimier. I begged them to
dispatch instantly to London all the papers which could compromise the
members of the Committee of National Defence, so that the savagery of
the enemies of the Commune might to some extent be held in check. This
would in part have frustrated the plan of the Versaillese." Instead,
during the last days of May 1871, the Commune was overthrown and its
defenders were massacred by the Parisian bourgeoisie and the Versaillese
troops.

"The civilization and justice of bourgeois order comes out in its lurid
light whenever the slaves and drudges of that order rise against their
masters. Then this civilization and justice stand forth as undisguised
savagery and lawless revenge. Each new crisis in the class struggle
between the appropriator and the producer brings out this fact more
glaringly. Even the atrocities of the bourgeois in June 1848 vanish
before the ineffable infamy of 1871."

"To find a parallel for the conduct of Thiers and his bloodhounds, we
must go back to the times of Sulla and the two triumvirates of Rome. The
same wholesale slaughter in cold blood; the same disregard, in massacre,
of age and sex, the same system of torturing prisoners; the same
proscriptions, but this time of a whole class; the same savage hunt
after concealed leaders, lest one might escape; the same denunciations
of political and private enemies; the same indifference for the butchery
of entire strangers to the feud. There is but this difference, that the
Romans had no mitrailleuses for the dispatch, in the lump, of the
proscribed, and that they had not 'the law in their hands,' nor on their
lips the cry of 'civilization.'"

Within a few days after the Commune had been drowned in the blood of the
Parisian workers, Marx laid before the General Council of the
International the draft of the Address it was to issue on _The Civil War
in France_--the address from which the foregoing extracts have been
taken. Brilliantly written, it is alive with revolutionary passion, and
gives a masterly historical sketch of the Commune. At once a report and
a criticism, simultaneously a justification and a work of propaganda, it
presents a marvellously powerful picture of this volcanic outbreak,
unique in the history of revolutions. It defends the honour of the
Commune against the shameful injustice of its adversaries. It is a
clarion call to arms against the bourgeoisie, a declaration of war whose
menace rings through the decades and through the centuries.

### End of the International

The Commune left three lessons for the European proletariat. First of
all it showed that the struggle of the working class against the
bourgeoisie must not be confined to the economic or industrial field,
but must take a political form as well. Secondly it showed that in
bourgeois national States this struggle could only be carried on upon
the platform of bourgeois politics, in parliament, the entry to which
must be secured by electoral campaigns. Thirdly it showed that the main
incidence of the political struggle had been transferred from France to
Germany, where the working class was rapidly acquiring political
impetus. Marx was quick to recognize the new features of the situation.
Writing to Kugelmann, he said: "Through the fight in Paris, the struggle
of the working class against the capitalist class and the capitalist
State has entered upon a new phase. No matter how the affair may end, a
fresh starting-point of worldwide historical importance has been won."
He was prompt, likewise, to do justice to the changed situation.

He foresaw, however, that the Bakuninists inside the International would
be a serious obstacle. The more definitely Marx became inclined to
elaborate the tactics of a law-abiding policy, in conformity with the
methods and trends of the bourgeois State, and the more he aimed at the
conquest of the State instead of at the destruction of the State, the
more must Bakunin and the Bakuninists consider that he was betraying the
revolution, and the more, therefore, would they feel impelled to attack
him. Consequently, he had made up his mind to clear the Bakuninist
opposition out of the way.

With this, end in view, instead of summoning a regular congress of the
International, he arranged for a conference to be held in London, paying
no heed to protests from Geneva, "the focus of intrigues and quarrels."
The personnel of the conference was carefully chosen and sifted. Since
the General Council was represented by thirteen members, and there were
only ten additional delegates present, Marx was in control from the
first, and was able to ensure the passing of the resolutions he wanted.
The sessions were held from September 17th to 25th, and the work was
done with "compressed energy." The General Council was given increased
power to deal with refractory organizations, its dictatorial authority
being thus notably enhanced. Then arrangements were made for the change
in tactics. Whereas in the Preamble to the Provisional Rules it had been
stated "that the economical emancipation of the working classes is
therefore the great end to which every political movement ought to be
subordinate as a means," the London Conference adopted the following
resolution: "Considering that, against this collective power of the
propertied classes, the working class cannot act as a class except by
constituting itself into a distinct political party, distinct from and
opposed to all old parties formed by the propertied classes; that this
constitution of the working class into a political party is
indispensable in order to ensure the triumph of the social revolution
and its ultimate end, the abolition of classes; that the combination of
forces which the working class has already effected by its economical
struggles ought at the same time to serve as a lever for its struggles
against the political power of the landlords and capitalists--this
Conference recalls to the members of the International that, in the
militant state of the working class, its economical movement and its
political action are indissolubly united." The passing of this
resolution implied the adoption of a definite line against Bakunin. The
instruction to Utin to collect materials against Bakunin which would
enable action to be taken against the latter, was nothing more than a
formal gesture, masking a fixed determination to oust Bakunin from the
International at all hazards.

The first result of the London Conference was to make the opposition
consolidate its forces. In congress at Sonvillier, the Swiss Bakuninists
decided to organize themselves as the Jura Federation, and to issue a
circular to all sections of the International, protesting against the
decisions of the London Conference, and demanding that a congress be
summoned. The circular was widely supported in Italy and Spain, and
aroused considerable sympathy in Belgium, France, and the United States.
In London, the relations between the General Council and the trade
unions had gradually become less intimate, and had at length been
completely broken off. Odger, Lucraft, and other trade-union leaders,
had resigned from the International. The Federal Council formed in
accordance with a decision of the London Conference was soon at
loggerheads with the General Council; and within the General Council
itself there had appeared a majority and a minority faction which before
long were at open war. Eccarius had resigned his position as
secretary-general, and had quarrelled with Marx because Marx had accused
him of conspiring with the American federalists. Jung was fiercely at
odds with Engels, who had come to live in London in 1870, and was now a
member of the General Council. Hales, finally, the new
secretary-general, being also the leader of the newly founded Federal
Council, entered into communication, without consulting the General
Council, with the Spanish Federation, which had adopted the platform of
the Alliance, and had expelled Lafargue, Marx's son-in-law. Thus the
centre and headquarters of the International was rent with internal
dissensions at the very time when it was threatened with formidable
onslaughts from without.

Thus unfavourable were the omens when the Hague Congress opened on
September 2, 1872. "The congress is a life-and-death question for the
International," Marx had written to Kugelmann. "Before I resign from the
General Council, I want at least to free the International from
disintegrating elements. Germany, therefore, must have as many
representatives as possible. Write to Hepner and tell him that I shall
be glad if he will procure for you a mandate as delegate." Thus Marx was
carefully organizing the personnel of the Hague Congress just as he had
carefully organized that of the London Conference. This was to be a
decisive battle, in which he would gain a definitive victory over
Bakunin. He wanted to rid the International of all dangerous elements.
As soon as the purge had been effected, he intended to withdraw from the
General Council.

There were sixty-seven persons at the congress. Two more had turned up,
but their credentials were rejected. This was the first congress at
which Marx was present; he came as member of the General Council, and
had, besides, three mandates (Mainz, Leipzig, and New York). Engels, in
addition to his vote as member of the General Council, had a vote for
Breslau and a vote for New York. In these circumstances it was not
difficult for Marx to control a majority, especially seeing that
Bakunin's Italian supporters had abstained from sending delegates. Marx
was sure of a victory before the fight had begun. Bakunin was not there.
The cause of the Jura Federation was represented by James Guillaume.

The congress did not get down to solid business until the fourth day.
Then the dictatorial powers of the General Council were not merely
maintained, but were considerably augmented. This was decided by 36
votes against 6, with 15 abstentions, after Marx had made a long speech
in favour of the change. Then, since Marx and Engels were afraid of
Blanquist influence in London, the seat of the General Council was
transferred from London to New York. (The French delegates, greatly
disgruntled by this, declared in a pamphlet they subsequently issued
that the International "summoned to do its duty, refused. It evaded the
revolution, and took flight across the Atlantic ocean.") As regards the
question of political action, a resolution was adopted declaring the
"organization of the proletariat as a political party" to be
"indispensable," and describing the "conquest of political power" as
"the prime duty of the proletariat." A committee was appointed, to sit
in camera, in order to inquire into the conflict with the Alliance. This
committee, after Guillaume had refused to appear before it in order to
defend the Alliance, declared that that body had been founded as a
secret organization within the International, that Bakunin had been
responsible for its foundation, and that "Citizen Bakunin has resorted
to fraudulent manoeuvres in order to possess himself of other people's
property." The committee therefore urged the congress: "(1) to expel
Citizen Bakunin from the International Workingmen's Association; (2)
likewise to expel Citizens Guillaume and Schwitzguébel." When the motion
for Bakunin's expulsion was put, it was carried by 27 votes against 7,
with 8 abstentions; and Guillaume's expulsion was carried by 25 votes
against 9, with 9 abstentions.

Marx had won the victory over his detested adversary. Not content with
breaking the political ties between himself and Bakunin, he had
emphasized his animus by securing that Bakunin should be publicly
stigmatized as an embezzler. It was said that Bakunin had failed to
repay an advance of three hundred roubles made him for the translation
of _Capital_ into Russian. Such was the rope used by Marx to hang his
enemy--Marx who had been involved in a thousand shady financial
transactions, and had lived all his life as pensioner on a friend's
bounty.

Marx was justified in promoting the adoption of a policy which, he was
convinced, could alone lead to the liberation of the proletariat. He was
right, too, in insisting that the International must free itself from
Bakunin, seeing that Bakunin was a declared opponent of this policy, and
was doing all he could to counteract it. But that Marx, in order to
secure this concrete triumph, should have stooped to personal calumny,
is a condemnation, not of Bakunin, but of Marx himself. We have here a
deplorable demonstration of the disastrous trait in his character which
made him regard all the problems of politics, the labour movement, and
the revolution, from the outlook of their bearing on his personal
credit. A council of international revolutionaries, whose main business
in life is to blow to smithereens the world of private property and
bourgeois morality, is induced by its leader to pass a vote of
reprobation and a sentence of expulsion upon one of the most brilliant,
heroic, and fascinating of revolutionists the world has ever known, on
the ground that this revolutionist has misappropriated bourgeois
property. Is it possible to point to anything more painfully absurd in
the whole story of the human race?

A victory thus secured could bear no fruit. Now that the national labour
organizations were taking shape as political parties, and were assuming
functions within the framework of the political system of the extant
State, there was no longer any justification for the existence of the
International. Subordination to the purposes of an extra-national centre
could not fail, at this juncture, to conflict with the national
independence of the labour parties, and, for the time being, to prove an
obstacle to their development. Bakunin had foreseen this. In a
contribution to the "Liberté" of Brussels, in October 1872, he wrote: "I
regard Monsieur Marx as an extremely earnest, if not always perfectly
upright revolutionist, as one who honestly desires the uplifting of the
masses, and I ask myself how he can fail to see that the establishment
of a universal, collective, or individual dictatorship, which is
designed to carry out, as it were, the work of a chief engineer of the
world revolution, regulating and guiding the insurrectional movement of
the masses in all countries much as a machine might--that, I say, the
establishment of such a dictatorship would alone suffice to paralyse and
falsify all popular movements? What man, or what group of men, however
richly endowed with genius, can venture to flatter themselves--in view
of the enormous quantity of interests, trends, and activities, which are
so different in every country, every province, every locality, every
occupation, and whose huge ensemble, united but not made homogeneous by
a great common aspiration and by certain principles which have now
entered into the consciousness of the masses, constitutes the coming
social revolution--who can flatter themselves that they can grasp and
understand this huge ensemble?"

Indeed, as time went on, the threads of political interconnexion and
revolutionary leadership which had been concentrated in the
International were passing more and more hopelessly out of Marx's hands.
The transference of the General Council to New York proved to have been
an egregious error. In London, the International remained active only as
a heap of ruins, for the mastery of which a swarm of dwarf potentates
were ceaselessly bickering. Marx barely escaped the vengeful destiny of
being expelled. At length, when the last congress began at Geneva on
September 8, 1873--a congress for which, as Becker said in a letter to
Sorge, he had "conjured up, out of the ground, as it were, thirteen
delegates" out of the thirty present--Marx had to admit, not only that
the congress was a complete fiasco, but also that the International had
collapsed.

But Marx could not bring himself to retire from the stage without
throwing a last handful of mud at Bakunin. The Hague Congress had
instructed the committee that examined the charges against Bakunin to
publish the results of the investigation. Since the committee had failed
to carry out this behest, Marx, in conjunction with Engels and Lafargue,
undertook to elaborate a report. It was published under the title _Die
Allianz der sozialistischen Demokratie und die Internationale
Arbeiter-Assoziation_ [The Alliance of the Socialist Democracy and the
International Workingmen's Association], a malicious pamphlet, in which
almost every line is a distortion, almost every allegation an injustice,
almost every argument a falsification, and almost every word an untruth.
It furnishes pitiless evidence of the way in which years of rivalry,
years of struggle poisoned by vanity, hate, and the lust for power, had
corrupted and demoralized the genius for controversy which radiates so
magnificently from Marx's earlier writings. Even Mehring, who is
invariably an indulgent judge where Marx is concerned, places this work
"at the lowest rank" among all those published by Marx and Engels.

Bakunin, an old man with one foot in the grave, suffering, disappointed,
broken, embittered, was content to meet the attack with grieved
resignation. Writing in the "Journal de Genève," he said: "This new
pamphlet is a formal denunciation, a gendarme denunciation directed
against a society known by the name of the Alliance. Urged onward by
furious hatred, Monsieur Marx has not been afraid to box his own ears,
by undertaking to expose himself before the public in the role of a
sneakish and calumniatory police agent. That is his own affair; and,
since he likes the job, let him have it. ... This has given me an
intense loathing of public life. I have had enough of it, and, after
devoting all my days to the struggle, I am weary. ... Let other and
younger persons put their hands to the work. For my own part, I no
longer feel strong enough, and perhaps also I lack the necessary
confidence to go on trying to roll the stone of Sisyphus uphill against
the universally triumphant reaction. I therefore withdraw from the
arena, and ask only one thing from my dear contemporaries--oblivion."

When Bakunin died on July 1, 1876, no trace of the Marxian International
remained.

### The Great Achievement

The painful feelings aroused in us by Marx's campaign against Bakunin,
and the moral judgments we may be inclined to pronounce on the former's
uncomradely behaviour, must not lead us astray, must not incline us to
overlook how immense an achievement was the foundation of the
International, must not blind us to the fact that the appearance of that
organization marks an epoch.

The economic situation that prevailed throughout Europe in the sixties
had brought proletarian masses into being every where, and was in itself
an incitement to the workers. Nevertheless, the voicing of a call to
arms was the outcome of Marx's genius, and the mobilization of the
awakening forces by the stimulus of international contact was a historic
deed which will always remain associated with his name. In the
perspective of history, it is of minor importance in what tone and in
what rhythm the clarion call was sounded. Only the chronicler need care
today to ascertain how much in the programmes and rules and regulations
of the first labour battalions was true or false, practicable or
impracticable. Marx, with clear vision and sound insight, discerned
along what lines and in accordance with what theoretical principles the
advance must be made; and this cannot but increase the admiration we
feel for his shrewdness and his breadth of vision. By energetically
safeguarding the proletariat against confusions, deviations, and
misleadings, he did immense service, and saved the workers from many
discouragements and disappointments. If Marx were to fulfil the task
which he believed to be his historic mission, he had to take his course
straight ahead, relentlessly and brutally, regardless of feelings and
sentiments, honour and morality, ties of friendship or affection. If, in
doing this, he had to forfeit much which is conventionally regarded as
virtuous, had to lose the right to be considered what by traditional
standards is spoken of as an estimable character, had to dispense with
the attributes of a fine humaneness--this was undoubtedly the greatest
of the many sacrifices he had to make in the cause. It was not the aim
of his endeavour to be a man of noble disposition, a man shining with
all the virtues. His business was, amid the turmoil of the moving forces
of his age, to secure the triumph of subjecting these forces to his own
intellectual guidance and control. The matter at stake was the victory
of head over heart, the establishment of the superiority of the
intellect in the configuration of life and the regulation of human
affairs.

Herein, Marx was the most typical representative of the epoch in which
he originated and acted.

The bourgeois era is ideologically characterized by a supreme
development of individualism. Previously, individuality had been
cabined, cribbed, and confined by family traditions, vestiges of
feudalism, communal ties of all kinds; but at the opening of the new era
it was definitively freed by the emancipating and isolating power of
money, so that its independence became boundless. The pure ego, absolute
individuality, was born, no longer isolated, but as a mass phenomenon.
Fichte, the typical representative of philosophical individualism, drank
champagne for the first time in his life when his little son said "I"
for the first time. The ego is the final and unconditional repudiation
of the community. Individuality becomes the sole master of the world,
and mirrors itself in the image of the divine.

But this extremity of isolation, in which all ties with fellow men are
severed, implies also the utmost peril, and therewith the utmost
insecurity. The world of the community encountered every danger and
every insecurity with the instrument of communal activity. As the
individual awakened, and cut loose from the collectivity, it was
necessary for him, since he had to maintain himself amid grave perils,
to increase and develop within his own individuality all the forces of
defence, all possible capacities for safeguarding, every kind of means
for keeping himself going. Until now, with the aid of affects, feelings,
moods, with the assistance of fantasy, suggestion, and ecstasy,
individuals had been able to achieve transient or sometimes merely
apparent community. With the definitive constitution of the individual,
however, with the emergence of unconditional isolation, these expedients
ceased to be effective. The individual, thrown back on himself, had for
his maintenance to disclose and to apply the last reserves of his
energy. He set the intellect free, and made of it the chief instrument
of his safeguarding.

Thus the bourgeois phase inaugurates itself with the appearance of a
vigorous trend towards intellectualization and rationalization. In the
world of phenomena and relations, as time goes on, the supreme question
is, what can justify itself before the tribunal of the intellect?
Religion, hitherto human experience finding expression in works, is
rationalized by Luther to a bare faith. Nature, the creation of God and
a paradise of wonders and mysteries, is disclosed by science, measured,
classified, brought under the dominion of law, and handed over to the
exploitation of technique. Society, which man has hitherto regarded as a
harmonious structure of will and work, requirement and performance,
necessity and action, is made the object of the investigating,
analysing, and theorizing human understanding; is fixed as a system,
labelled as an evolutionary phase, and rationalized in the
law-abidingness of its dynamic. Socialism, as the great hope and the
fascinating dream of a complete liberation from the most arduous and
most widely generalized needs of life, socialism which has hitherto been
regarded as the outcome of human sacrifice and labour, the result of
unselfish readiness, self-sacrificing education, noble zeal, and the
boundless development of all the spiritual powers--this socialism of the
utopists, fanciful enthusiasts, and pure fools--becomes the object of
logical demonstration, the upshot of a historical process developed in
accordance with fixed laws, something that can be fully grasped by the
intelligence, the product of a naturally and scientifically demonstrable
necessity.

Thus we proceed from Luther by way of Fichte, Adam Smith, Humboldt, and
Darwin, in a direct line to Karl Marx. In this connexion, it is worth
remembering that Marx lived in England, where economic life had already
assumed a highly developed capitalist form. It was in Britain that
political economy first came into being, as a typical science of the
capitalist age. It was there that utilitarianism wove a philosophical
mantle for capitalist interests. It was there that liberalism was born
as the political doctrine of capitalism. It was there, too, that Marx
first applied the methods of bourgeois intellectualism to the study of
social happenings. Under his treatment, socialism for the first time
ceased to be an affair of faith, hope, fantasy, the dream imagination;
ceased to be a construction of the arbitrary creative will of man. His
rationalist investigation supplied glimpses into the movements of
history and the structure of social phenomena, just as the anatomist's
scalpel was doing into the functions of the body, just as the formula of
the mathematician was doing into the mosaic of numbers, the microscope
of the biologist into the cell-structure of the tissues, the analysis of
the chemist into the mysteries of substance. Feelings, emotional
heart-beats, spiritual stirrings, and ethical postulates no longer have
anything to do with the case. The realm of fantasy is excluded. Ordinary
humanity is no longer current. Just as in the world of commodities
nothing counts but cash payment, so in the world of social forms and
relations nothing counts but the exactly demonstrable, the
scientifically proved, and in the world of the ideologies nothing counts
but the concept as a coin minted by the intellect. In this way socialism
becomes the last link in a chain of proof, all of whose links are strung
together in accordance with the laws of logic; becomes the Z of an
alphabet beginning with A; becomes the precipitate of a process of
fermentation which proceeds in accordance with an ascertained formula;
becomes the unknown x of a problem which can be mathematically worked
out. Socialism is in this way lifted from the lowlands of mysticism,
utopism, millenarianism, and a simple-minded faith in salvation, into
the sphere of science. It quits the realm of religion, sectarian magic,
charlatanry, and social quackery, to be consecrated by the approval of
the intellect, to be legitimized academically. Taking its place in the
domain of exact knowledge, it is ranged upon the same level as the
natural sciences.

Such was the immense achievement of Marx--to have effected this
scientific ennoblement of socialism! To that task he devoted the
greatest number of his years, the ripest of his energies, and the utmost
of his diligence. To the sphere of immediate practice, to the
International, he gave only part of his attention and energy during less
than a decade, whereas to the performance of his task in the domain of
theory he addressed himself with the self-sacrifice and the
indefatigability of a worker bee for nearly forty years.

The International had fulfilled its role as vehicle of the labour
movement within a very short time of its foundation.

Socialist theory, on the other hand, as the spiritual ferment of the
movement, had only just begun to get to work when the masses were first
set in motion. Since then, operating powerfully and unrestingly down to
the present hour, it has helped the proletariat to climb to a point at
which the workers have become the decisive factor of history.

Marx's theory, known for short as Marxism, takes indisputable precedence
of all other socialist theories, and has had a decisive influence upon
the life and struggles of the modern proletariat. It is today almost the
only determinative trend of the proletarian class, almost the only one
that is achieving realization in a revolutionary direction.

The driving force of this trend is the materialist interpretation of
history.

### The Materialist Interpretation of History

The _Communist Manifesto_ contained the first draft of scientific
socialism--sketchy, it is true, but precise. Studying this draft, we can
realize how far the plan to write a great politico-economic work on the
capitalist method of production had already matured. A partial
contribution to the carrying out of this design was made by Marx in the
lectures on _Wage Labour and Capital_ which he delivered to the Workers'
Educational Society in Brussels. During the decade that followed, his
work was continually being interrupted by indisposition or other
unfavourable circumstances, and not until 1858 was he able to proceed
further with the elaboration of his materials. In 1859 he was able to
publish his _Kritik der politischen Ökonomie_.

For the moment, our only interest in this book is in the preface, where
Marx, in a survey of the evolution of his scientific thought, presents
the first connected account of his method of materialistic
interpretation of history.

"My study of the Hegelian philosophy of right led me to understand that
legal relations and forms of State are not to be comprehended out of
themselves, nor yet out of the so-called general evolution of the human
mind, but are, rather, rooted in the material conditions of life, whose
totality Hegel, following the example of English and French
eighteenth-century writers, subsumed under the name of 'civil society';
but that the anatomy of civil society was to be sought in political
economy. ... The general result at which I arrived, the result which,
once achieved, served as guiding principle of my studies, may be
formulated as follows. In the social production which human beings carry
on, they enter into definite relations which are determined, that is to
say, independent of their will--productive relations which correspond to
a definite evolutionary phase of the material forces of production. The
totality of these productive relations forms the economic structure of
society, the real basis upon which a legal and political superstructure
develops and to which definite forms of social consciousness correspond.
The mode of production of material life determines the general character
of the social, political, and intellectual processes of life. It is not
the consciousness of human beings that determines their existence, but,
conversely, it is their social existence that determines their
consciousness. At a certain stage of development, the material
productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing
productive relations, or (to express the matter in legal terminology)
with the property relations within which they have hitherto moved. These
relations, which have previously been developmental forms of the
productive forces, now become metamorphosed into fetters upon
production. A period of social revolutions then begins. Concomitantly
with the change in the economic foundation, the whole gigantic
superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed. When we contemplate
such transformations, we must always distinguish: on the one hand,
between the material changes in the economic conditions of production,
changes which can be watched and recorded with all the precision proper
to natural science; and, on the other, the legal, political, religious,
artistic, or philosophical forms (in a word, the ideological forms) in
which human beings become aware of this conflict and fight it to an
issue. Just as little as we form an opinion of an individual in
accordance with what he thinks of himself, just so little can we
appraise a revolutionary epoch in accordance with its own consciousness
of itself; for we have to explain this consciousness as the outcome of
the contradictions of material life, of the extant conflict between
social productive forces and productive relations. No type of social
structure ever perishes, until there have been developed all the
productive forces for which it has room; and new and higher forces of
production never appear upon the scene, until the material conditions of
existence requisite for their development have matured within the womb
of the old society. That is why mankind never sets itself any tasks
which it is not able to perform; for, when we look closely into the
matter, we shall always find that the demand for the new enterprise only
arises when the material conditions of existence are ripe for its
successful performance--or at any rate have begun to ripen. In broad
outline we can describe the Asiatic, the classical, the feudal, and the
modern (capitalist) forms of production, as progressive epochs in the
economic development of society. Bourgeois relations of production are
the last of the antagonistic forms of the social process of
production--antagonistic, not in the sense of individual antagonism, but
in the sense of an antagonism proceeding out of the social conditions in
the individual's life; nevertheless the productive forces developing
within the womb of bourgeois society create simultaneously the material
conditions for the solution of this antagonism. Consequently, with this
formation of society, the primitive history of human society comes to an
end."

The foregoing sentences embody a classical statement of the fundamentals
of the materialist interpretation of history. The idealist view,
according to which the processes of history are the outcome of the
unsearchable purposes of God, the expression of the activities of an
objective world-spirit, or the achievements of heroic, almost
superhuman, divinely endowed personalities, had thus been superseded and
discarded.

The change in outlooks was connected with the great transformation that
had been taking place in social life. In a world where all things were
assuming the form of commodities, and where all the phenomena of the
mental and spiritual life were acquiring circumstantiality, it was
becoming less and less possible for "the idea" to maintain its credit as
the motive force of history. When (as was now obvious in England),
behind the theses of philosophy, the postulates of ethics, and the
doctrines of politics, the material interests of the bourgeoisie could
be plainly seen at work, it had become natural to look upon economic
interests as the general determinants of all happenings, all changes in
the world of thought, and all the phases of history.

Day by day, Marx's experiences in the environing world taught him to how
preponderating a degree economic factors condition the lives and
activities of human beings. He was acquainted, too, with the writings of
Saint-Simon and Adam Smith, whose theories bordered on that of the
materialist interpretation of history. Soon, therefore, it became clear
to him that economics were the "motive force" of history, in this sense,
that the development of economic life brought about changes in the
institutions of society, the forms of the State, social structures,
ideologies, and ideals, these latter following the transformations of
the former. The changes which human beings effect in the ways by which
they satisfy their material needs are attended by changes in social
forms, legal institutions, the principles of State, scientific systems,
moral ideas, artistic ideals. To simplify matters into a vivid formula,
the social and ideological superstructure of any epoch is upbuilded upon
the economic foundation of the time.

This foundation is in part supplied ready-made to men, as climate, the
fertility of the soil, water supply, the treasures of the earth. Another
part of the foundation consists of the traditional technique with the
aid of which human beings get to work upon the gifts and the productive
forces of nature in order to turn these to human account. But for this
it is necessary that human beings should make a further contribution:
their more or less developed powers of work, their formative capacities,
their mentality, their language, their powers of mental representation,
their mind. Natural forces and human forces contribute to the joint
effect, and the concrete expression of both combined comprises the
relations of production. The general significance of production, as
achieved in the cauldron of productive relations by means of the forces
of production, is the control of the world in the interests of human
beings, and the safeguarding of mankind against the hostile powers which
threaten its existence. The forces of production and the relations of
production are in a perpetual interplay of mutual dependence, each
determining the other. The forces of production are not dead matter, and
the relations of production are not a rigid framework. Their life flames
up, their forms are transmuted, their content is fertilized, as they
unceasingly act on one another in the dialectical process.

The fulfillers, the executors, of this process are human beings.
Furthermore, human beings fulfil the process, not as lifeless machines,
but as creatures animated with living consciousness.

Consciousness receives its directives from the necessities of the
process. In turn, however, it reacts formatively and purposefully upon
the process. Thus the ideological life of mankind becomes an image of
mobile reality; and reflexes from the ideological content of human
consciousness find their way back into reality. Religion, science,
morality, politics, legislation, education, and art, receive their
content and their form from the procreative power of the material
conditions and the economic necessities of their time. They make
pictures, sketch systems, fix values, establish postulates; and they
introduce ideas into the consciousness of men. Then, this mental world,
itself primarily a consequence, becomes in its turn a cause. From it
there radiates a modifying, a formative, an ordering energy, which plays
its joint part within the sphere of men's lives--that sphere in which
men are perpetually trying to safeguard their position.

The materialist interpretation or conception of history has never
consisted wholly and exclusively of the gross and commonplace view that
hunger alone, eagerness to satisfy the material needs of the stomach, is
the driving force of history. But the materialist conception of history
certainly arises out of the elementary, recognition that human beings
(as Engels said in his address at Marx's funeral) "must have food and
drink, clothing and shelter, first of all, before they can interest
themselves in politics, science, art, religion, and the like."

The supporters of the materialist interpretation of history have never
been so one-sided as to declare that economic forces are the only forces
that make history. What they have always, and most emphatically,
contended is that, among the factors of history, economic forces have
the last word.

The initiators of the materialist interpretation of history never
advocated that crudely mechanical form of materialism, according to
which the motive force of history is exclusively derived from the dead
materiality of things, so that there can be no place in the world of
happenings for the functions of the mind. On the contrary, Marx
vigorously opposed the misleading half-heartedness and the metaphysical
spurious enlightenment of so-called naturalism--as we see, in especial,
in the _Theses on Feuerbach_. He always insisted that, not lifeless
things, but living met are the sustainers of the evolutionary process.

Those who advocated the materialist interpretation of history never
denied the influence of the mind, never ignored the power of ideas,
never under-estimated the importance of the mental or spiritual factor
in the course of history. On the contrary, when recognizing that history
is made by human beings, they recognized in these human beings the
importance of all human attributes, including, therefore, mind,
intelligence, consciousness, and ideas. What they were up in arms
against was the notion that the phenomena of a purely mental world, as
set apart by German ideologists in the form of an "absolute idea," a
"moral ego," or something of the kind, should be regarded primarily and
abstractly as the essential factor of historical evolution. In their
view, neither, the idea nor matter was "in the beginning." For them, all
life was an inseparable and eternally mobile interweaving and mutual
conditioning of force and matter, combined into an integral unity. And
the human being who constituted the core of this living whole was for
them a social human being, one who had countless interrelations with his
fellows.

For the socialists of the days before Marx, socialism was not an
evolutionary product, was not the outcome of a historico-dialectical
process, but was the realization of an ethical demand, was something
that had an aesthetic, a humanitarian, a philanthropic aim, was a scheme
constructed in some one's brain. As starting-point for their socialism
they needed an ethic, a philosophy, a philanthropy, a psychology, or an
aesthetic; but they did not need history, did not need any specific way
of contemplating history. For them it was enough to know that there was
poverty, and that poverty was due to exploitation. For them, therefore,
the theory of political economy as stated by Ricardo was amply
sufficient. Ricardo showed that capitalism is based upon exploitation,
and consequently upon injustice. With shrewd insight, he already
perceived in the capitalist system the potential elements of serious
conflicts, and he even looked forward to the ultimate collapse of the
system. Nevertheless, he did not dream of trying to do away with that
system. Still farther from his sphere of thought was the assumption that
the abolition of capitalism would occur as the outcome of an internal
and inevitable economic development acting in conjunction with the class
struggle.

To Marx the problem presented itself in a very different way. The
materialist interpretation of history showed that the forms of society
and the State, social institutions, human behaviour and human ideas, as
these manifest themselves in the structural environment characteristic
of a particular epoch, are dependent upon the economic relations
peculiar to that epoch, and find therein the conditions of their
realization. It was therefore incumbent on Marx to show that socialism
was a logical outcome of socio-economic development. For this purpose,
he had to study economics, the economics of is own day, the economics of
industrial capitalism, in whose womb socialism was developing. His
inquiries must be directed to discovering whether, out of the evolution
of capitalism, there would organically and necessarily arise the
economic basis and therewith the necessary conditions which would make
the existence of socialism possible, indeed inevitable. He must
reconstitute socialism by means of history and economics; must replace
ethico-aesthetic socialism by historico-economic socialism.

## Chapter 08: Achievement, Part 3

### Das Kapital

The _Kritik der politischen Ökonomie_ was published in 1859, the year in
which Darwin's _Origin of Species_ first appeared. It was only a prelude
to the great work which Marx had had on the stocks for years, and whose
final elaboration he was continually postponing. In the preface to the
_Kritik_, he writes: "I regard the system of bourgeois economics in this
succession: capital, landed property, wage labour; State, foreign trade,
world market. Under the first three heads I study the economic vital
conditions of the three great classes into which modern civil society is
separated; the interconnexion of the three other heads is obvious. ...
The whole material lies before me in the form of monographs which I
penned at widely separated periods for the clarification of my own
ideas, not for the press. Circumstances have prevented my elaborating
them into a connected whole in accordance with the original plan."

When the _Kritik der politischen Ökonomie_ had been published, the
author, examining his own work, speedily became aware that the method of
presentation could be improved, and he therefore decided to incorporate
the contents of the _Kritik_, after due elaboration, in his new work
_Das Kapital_. Thus the _Critique_ forms the first section of _Capital_.
Here, however, we have not a mere repetition, for the contents have been
thoroughly reconsidered. In the preface to the first edition of
_Capital_, Marx writes: "As far as the nature of the subject matter
rendered it possible, many points that were merely alluded to in the
earlier work have been more comprehensively treated in the present one,
whereas certain matters treated in detail there find no more than
cursory mention here."

The labours on the preparation of _Capital_ had gone forward very
slowly. The vast abundance of the material concerning the history of
political economy which Marx had at his disposal in the British Museum
Reading Room had been a hindrance rather than a help. Frequent
interruptions by illness had occurred. His titanic activities on behalf
of the International had taken up much of his time. Then there had been
the endless money troubles, with all the vexation and waste of time they
involved, to interfere with the maintenance of a frame of mind suitable
for study and literary composition. Writing to Kugelmann in November
1864, Marx said: "I believe that next year, at last, my work on
_Capital_ (sixty sheets) will be ready for the press." He was mistaken.
In a letter to Engels, eight months later, we read: "As regards my work,
I will tell you how things really are. There are still three chapters to
write, in order to make the theoretical part (the first three books)
ready. Then there is still the fourth book to write, the historical and
literary one, which will be for me, comparatively speaking, the easiest
part, since all the main problems have been solved in the first three
books, so that this last one is more of the nature of a recapitulation
in a historical form. But I cannot make up my mind to part with any of
it until I have the whole in my hands. Whatever defects they may have,
it is the merit of my writings that they form an artistic whole, and
that is only attainable through my method of never sending them to press
until they are completed."

By January 1, 1866, Marx had got so far on with the work that he was
able to begin making a fair copy. He felt that he must "finish it off
quickly, for the thing has become a perfect nightmare to me." On January
15th, he wrote to Kugelmann: "As regards my book, I am now spending
twelve hours a day making a fair copy. I expect to bring the manuscript
myself to Hamburg in March, and shall then have a chance of seeing you."
On February 13th, he wrote to Engels: "As regards the 'damned book,'
this is how the matter stands. It was finished in the end of December.
The discussion of land-rent alone, the penultimate chapter, forms, in
the present drafting, one book. I went to the Museum in the daytime, and
wrote at night." Thus also had the whole year of 1866 been spent, in
hard and uninterrupted work, notwithstanding money troubles, boils, and
quarrels in the International. He could not finish the job to his
satisfaction. As early as August 1865, Engels had written: "The day the
manuscript goes to press, I shall get gloriously drunk!" But he had to
wait, to go on waiting, for the birth was a difficult one, almost a
torment.

At length, in March 1867, came the long desired day. "I had made up my
mind," wrote Marx to his friend, "that you should not hear from me again
until I could announce to you that my book was ready, as it now is." To
which Engels rejoined with a shout of delight: "Hurrah! I could not
repress this exclamation when at length I read in black and white that
the first volume is ready, and that you are about to start for Hamburg
with it."

Yet there were difficulties about this voyage to Hamburg in order to
hand over the manuscript to the publisher, Otto Meissner. It was not
only that Marx was once more suffering from boils; he was short of
money. "I must first of all," he wrote to Engels, "get my clothes and
watch out of pawn. Nor can I leave my family in their present need, for
they have not a penny, and our creditors are daily becoming more
vociferous." As usual, Engels came to his aid: "That sinews of war may
not be lacking, I am sending you seven five-pound notes, £35 in all. ...
I hope the carbuncles are pretty well by now, and that the journey will
set you up once more altogether." With the manuscript and money, and
free from illness, Marx was able at long last to set out.

On April 12th he reached Hamburg, went to see Meissner ("a good chap,
with a Saxon accent"), and was able, "after a brief discussion, to
arrange everything." It was agreed that the type-setting should be begun
at once, Marx expressing his readiness to correct the proofs while still
in Germany: "We clinked glasses, and he declared himself 'delighted' to
have made my esteemed acquaintance." From Hamburg, Marx went to Hanover,
being hospitably received there by Kugelmann, a noted gynaecologist, "a
splendid, self-sacrificing, and thoroughly convinced" man. Marx stayed
with Kugelmann until the end of May.

Here he received from Engels a letter from which valuable conclusions
may be drawn. The writer pours out his heart concerning the troubles he
has had about Marx during all these years. The torments and birth-throes
which the book had caused, had, towards the last, reached the verge of
the intolerable. "It has always seemed to me as if this damned book at
which you have been toiling so long was the root cause of your troubles,
and that you never would or could get over them until the incubus was
shaken off. This eternally unfinished job crushed you to the earth
bodily, mentally, and financially; and I can perfectly well understand
that, having shaken off the nightmare, you feel quite another being,
especially since the world, now that you are coming into contact with it
again, looks to you a less melancholy place than of yore."

Marx, ever curt and repressed where matters of feeling were concerned,
was content to answer: "Without you I should never have been able to
bring the work to an end, and I assure you that it has always been a
heavy load on my conscience that mainly on my account you should have
had to waste your splendid energies and allow them to rust in a
commercial career, and, over and above this, have had to share all my
petty miseries."

On August 16, 1867, when the proof of the last of the forty-nine sheets
had been corrected, Marx drew a breath of relief, and, at two o'clock in
the morning, sat down to write to his friend in Manchester a few cordial
words: "I have you, and you alone, to thank that this was possible.
Without your self-sacrifice on my behalf, I could not possibly have
undertaken the tremendous labour necessary for the three volumes. I
embrace you, full of thanks."

Marx had every reason, both for the sigh of relief, and for expressing
his gratitude to Engels. For, while what he wrote to Kugelmann is
probably true, that never was any work brought into being under such
difficult conditions as _Capital_; it is equally true that never, under
the most difficult conditions, did a friendship show itself more
genuine, deeper, and more devoted, than the friendship of Engels for
Marx.

### First Volume

The full title of the book is _Capital, A Criticism of Political
Economy_. This implies that it was planned as an investigation, as an
analysis, in the field of social science. "The subject of study in the
present work," says Marx in the preface, "is the capitalist method of
production, and the relations of production and exchange appropriate to
that method." The second volume would deal with the process of the
circulation of capital, and with the various forms assumed by capital in
the course of its development; the concluding volume, the third, would
be concerned with the history of capitalist theory. Thus the general
topic of the whole work was to be capitalism.

When we speak of capitalism, we are referring to the epoch of economic
history and social evolution in which the whole of life has become
predominantly economic life, and in which all things, ideas, and
feelings have been transformed into commodities. The analysis of the
capitalist economic system must therefore begin with an analysis of the
commodity. Since in Marx's day England was the classical land of
capitalism, it was from that country that he took all the examples he
used to illustrate his theory. But "the land which is more developed
industrially shows to the land which is less developed nothing but the
picture of what will be the latter's future." In Germany, the capitalist
method of production did not ripen "until its antagonistic character had
already manifested itself noisily in France and England by struggles
that had become historical."

_Capital_ begins by telling us that "the wealth of societies in which
the capitalist method of production prevails, takes the form of 'an
immense accumulation of commodities,' wherein individual commodities are
the elementary units. Our investigation must therefore begin with an
analysis of the commodity."

A commodity is something possessed of qualities which enable it to
satisfy human wants, and something which, before it passes into
consumption in order to satisfy these wants, has been subjected to an
exchange. It is therefore made with an eye to exchange. It has already
come into existence in pre-capitalist epochs. What characterizes the
capitalist world is the exclusive predominance of a commodity economy.

In order to be capable of being exchanged in the market, the commodity
must have an exchange-value. This exchange-value has a specific
quantity, in contradistinction to use-value, which is one of the natural
qualities of the commodity, determines its capacity for use, and
manifests itself as a quality. Political economy is solely concerned
with exchange-value. This latter expresses the social relation in which
commodities stand one to another, and it is measured by the amount of
average social labour which is represented in the commodity. The measure
of the labour is the labour time, conceived as average social labour
time independent of individual and exceptional circumstances.

In practice, no absolute determination of the exchange-value manifested
in a commodity is possible. For the needs of economic life, a relative
determination by comparison suffices. In early days, two different
commodities presenting themselves in the market are compared one with
another as regards exchange-value on the basis of an estimate of the
labour time which experience has shown to be necessary to produce one
and the other. In due course, however, all the commodities in the market
come to have their values expressed in terms of one particular
commodity, which is used permanently as the measure of value. This
commodity, which ultimately serves all other commodities for the drawing
of conclusions as to their normal worth, is termed money. A minted coin
functions as a symbol for a fixed number of hours of social labour, in
which the value of every commodity is reflected. Value, originating in
the process of production, appears in the money form as price, differing
a little from time to time owing to the oscillations of the market.

The commodity enters the market labelled with a price. Its material
individuality and quality form only the stimulus to exchange. With the
social estimate of their value, commodities have no concern whatever.
The commodity has become an abstraction. Once it has left the hand of
the producer and has forfeited its peculiarity as a real object, it has
ceased to be a product and to be controlled by man. It has acquired a
"ghostly objectivity," and leads a life peculiar to itself. "At the
first glance, a commodity seems a commonplace sort of thing, one easily
understood. Analysis shows, however, that it is a very queer thing
indeed, full of metaphysical subtleties and theological whimsies." Cut
adrift from the will of man, it ranges itself in mysterious ranks,
acquires or renounces capacity for exchange, acts in accordance with
laws of its own as player upon a phantom stage. In the market reports,
cotton "rises," copper "falls," maize is "lively," coal is "slack,"
wheat is "jumpy," and mineral oil "shows tendencies." The things have
acquired an independent life, and exhibit human gestures. Human beings,
meanwhile, subordinate themselves to the things, allow the things to
dictate human actions, become servants of the world of commodities. The
commodity, though made by human hands, has become an idol, a fetish,
which holds sway over its human makers. Marx speaks of the fetishistic
character attaching to commodities. "This fetishistic character of the
world of commodities is the outcome of the peculiar social quality of
the labour which produces commodities. ... It is only the specific
social relation between men which here assumes the phantasmagorial form
of a relation between things."

The fetishistic character likewise influences the whole atmosphere of
capitalist economy. The fixing of prices, competition, the course of the
market, the value of money, and so on, constitute mysterious phenomena
in the world of commodities, phenomena which the capitalist regards with
the same uncomprehending impotence as that with which the savage in the
African forests regards the caprices of an idol. Money, in especial,
"the reflexion of the relations of all other commodities clinging to one
single commodity," acquires dominion over men, exercising the tyrannical
power of a demon, usurping authority over social and economic life.
Money becomes a god.

Money is exchanged for commodities of equal value. Men, too, can be
bought for money. Nay more, money is able to buy parts of human beings,
able to recruit the manifestation of human vital functions. Thus it is
that, for instance, human labour power appears in the market and offers
itself for sale as a commodity. The owner of this commodity labour power
is a human being who has, besides labour power, a stomach, and he must
from time to time put food into his stomach unless he is to die of
hunger. In order to acquire the things with which he can satisfy his
hunger, in order to cover his nakedness, in order to keep himself alive,
he must, wherever a commodity economy prevails, have money, for none of
the necessaries of life are purchasable as commodities except for money.
Consequently, as his only possible means of self-preservation, he must
sell his labour power.

The buyer of the commodity labour power, acting in accordance with the
customary regulations of exchange, pays a price which corresponds more
or less to its value. This value, like all exchanges-values, is
determined by the average cost of production at the time and place where
the commodity is sold. The average cost of production of labour power
depends upon the expenditure upon food, clothing, shelter, etc.,
requisite to produce human labour power day by day and to keep it in a
fit condition. That is what determines the price of labour power, and
the price of labour power is what we call wages.

If there are persons who own nothing but their labour power, and have no
other means of livelihood than what they receive for the sale of their
labour power, this is an outcome of historical evolution, as is vividly
set forth in the _Communist Manifesto_. Such persons make their first
appearance as a social category in the capitalist era. They are known as
proletarians.

The proletarian is a free man. No longer tied to the soil as in the days
of feudal serfdom, not restricted by any prescriptions of station or
conventions of origin, freed from all the ties of the guilds, he is his
own master, can freely dispose of his own person, his labour power, his
skill.

But if he does not succeed in selling his labour power as a commodity,
he has only one option, to starve. He is blessed with the gift of
freedom; but, should he try to use that freedom for any other purpose
than to sell his labour power, he is condemned to irretrievable
starvation.

Inasmuch as labour power attaches to man as a quality inseparable from
the individual, since it cannot be isolated from him, or utilized apart
from him, the man as a whole, having sold his labour power, passes into
the possession of the purchaser. Not, of course, with his stomach, his
hunger and thirst, his need for rest, his individual wishes and claims,
but only in respect of his labour power. For the purchaser, he is not a
human being with a soul, feelings, individuality, happiness and
unhappiness; he is not God's image or the crown of creation; he is not
even of like kind with the purchaser. For the purchaser, the man who has
sold him labour power is nothing but labour power; nothing but arms,
hands, fingers, capable of work; nothing but muscles, eyes, voice;
nothing but capacity for labour, faculty for production.

The owner of money, who has bought labour power, becomes the effective
owner of the labour power as soon as, in virtue of the process of
production, he has been able to detach it from the worker. By placing
the worker in a factory or workshop, and by setting the man to work
there upon iron, wood, clay, yarn, or what you will, in such a way that
commodities are produced, the owner effects the liberation of labour
power from the worker and its crystallization as commodity value. The
labour power has been absorbed by the raw material, has been consumed,
and reappears in conjunction with the raw material as a commodity.

In the course of the labour process, thanks to the continued expenditure
of labour power on raw material, there comes into existence a quantity
of commodity value which ere long is equal to the quantity of money
value which the supplier of labour power receives as the price of his
labour power in the form of wages. There comes a moment when the owner
of labour power and the owner of money are quits. It would seem obvious,
on the face of it, that at this point, when service and equivalent
balance one another, their relation must be broken off.

Nevertheless, the owner of money, the buyer of the commodity labour
power, is a capitalist. He is using his money in order to increase it in
amount. He wants to get more out of the productive process than he has
put into it. Money must breed money. The money which, when thus set in
motion, has the quality of promoting its own increase, is known as
capital.

If he is to gain his end, the capitalist must invest his money in two
different ways. First of all he has to provide the material requisites
of production, must spend money on the purchase of raw materials,
machinery, tools, the erection and equipment of workshops, and so on.
Money invested in these things has not the power of spontaneous growth,
and is therefore termed constant capital.

If production is to begin, human labour power must come into contact
with constant capital. The capitalist buys labour power in the labour
market, investing therein part of his capital. Thereupon labour power,
brought into contact with raw materials, machinery, tools, etc.,
develops the mysterious capacity for expending itself in such a way that
in the process of its own consumption it reproduces its own value. But
it can do more than this, can produce value over and above. Inasmuch as
the quantity of capital invested in labour power varies thus in amount,
it is known as variable capital.

The capitalist is not content that labour power should create only as
much commodity value as corresponds to the amount of capital value
invested in wages. He wants a surplus. In order to get this, he compels
the worker to go on expending labour power for a longer time than is
necessary to pay back the wages. He prolongs the process of creating
value into a period when it effects the enhancement of value. Thus the
surplus is added to the equivalent for wages. Surplus labour time
provides surplus value. Surplus value has come into existence. Capital
has attained its end.

If the worker were fully aware of the nature of this process, he would
perhaps put himself in a posture of defence against the capitalist when
he reaches the point at which the production of surplus value begins,
for he would feel that at this point the capitalist has begun to
overreach him. Being a seller of a commodity, who wishes to exchange his
commodity for an equivalent, he would see that at this point he is being
forced into the position of a debtor who has to pay back value received
with interest superadded. Since more is being demanded from him than he
has been given, he will, in so far as he understands the process, regard
the exchange as an unjust one, and recognize that he is being exploited.

But if he were to enter a protest, his protest would be of little avail.
Wherever he may turn, he will find himself faced by capitalists who will
only buy his commodity, labour power, on similar terms. In the
capitalist world, labour power is only saleable upon such conditions. If
the worker does not like the conditions, and will not accept them, he
must refrain from the sale of his labour power. There is no constraint.
He is not forced to sell it. Except for this--that if he does not sell
it, he must starve! To avoid starvation, therefore, he takes the only
other option, and accepts the conditions. His course of action is
dictated by the circumstance that he is under the yoke of a particular
commodity; is subject to the laws regulating the sale of his own
commodity, labour power; is a slave to its fetishistic character.

Besides, the worker is in truth making a mistake when he believes
himself to be cheated and overreached by the capitalist. The capitalist
has honestly paid him the full value of his commodity, labour power. The
capitalist did not decide the value of labour power. That value was
determined by the cost of producing labour power as a commodity, with
the result that the price of labour power in the labour market, the
price which the capitalist pays as wages, corresponds, on the average,
to the value of the labour power. The wages paid the worker by the
capitalist for a day's work enable the worker and his family to live for
a whole day. In return for these wages, the worker must place himself at
the capitalist's disposal in the process of production for a whole
working day.

If, in the course of the labour process, it becomes apparent that the
worker is able, by his activities, to repay his wages (in the form of
commodity values) in a shorter time than a whole working day, this
phenomenon is the outcome of the peculiar character of the commodity,
labour power. That commodity, like all other commodities, is capable of
being consumed; but it differs from all other commodities in this
respect, that, in the course of being consumed, it creates more value
than it itself represents. Not only does it reproduce its own value, but
creates surplus value in addition.

Marx was not the original discoverer of this peculiar faculty in the
commodity, labour power. Observation and experience had disclosed the
wonder centuries before. At a certain stage in the development of
productive technique, labour becomes competent to produce a surplus
beyond what is required for the consumption of the worker. As soon as
this stage was reached, there was a motive for the deliberate
utilization of labour power in order to produce a surplus; and,
ultimately, the desire to obtain this surplus became the urge and the
precondition for the inauguration of the capitalist system. The
capitalist turned to account, and still turns to account, the peculiar
characteristic of the commodity, labour power. He monopolizes its
advantages. Capitalist production means production in order to secure
surplus value. The primary and proper function of production, namely to
supply human beings with the necessaries and the amenities of life, has
passed into the background. "Capital, therefore, is not only what Adam
Smith calls it, the command over labour. Fundamentally, it is the
command of unpaid labour. All surplus value, whatever the form into
which it may subsequently become crystallized--as profit, land-rent,
interest, etc.--is, substantially, the materialization of unpaid labour
time. The secret of the self-expansion of capital finds its explanation
in this, that capital has at its disposal a definite quantity of other
people's unpaid labour."

As compared with the worker, the capitalist is in the fortunate position
of being stronger. Inasmuch as the worker is compelled, under the menace
of starvation, to sell his labour power, the capitalist can impose the
condition that he will only buy on terms advantageous to himself. The
capitalist is able to gain surplus value because he is in a superior
economic position. Thus the problem of the exploitation of the worker by
the capitalist cannot be fought out in a hand-to-hand struggle between
the one and the other. It is not a personal matter at all, and
exploitation is not the outcome of the injustice of any particular
capitalist. The problem is a social one, dependent upon the
peculiarities of the capitalist system as a whole. The question of
exploitation, therefore, is not a question of morality, or justice, or
humanity; it is simply and solely a question of power, and here, indeed,
a question of compulsion. The capitalist, like the worker, is subject to
the compulsion of the capitalist system.

The superior power wielded by the capitalist finds expression, first of
all, in the length of the working day. The more the working day is
prolonged after the period at which the creation of the value of the
labour power has come to an end, the longer will be the period during
which capital is being increased, the greater will be the surplus labour
and the surplus value. This surplus value becomes fluid as soon as the
newly created commodity is sold in the market. It then returns into the
capitalist's pocket in the money form, and is known as profit.

But the working day has a natural limit, since a human being's capacity
for suffering exploitation has a limit. Even though it may be the
capitalist's ideal to keep the worker employed for twenty-four hours
every day, it is not to his interest to wear out the worker prematurely,
and thus to deprive himself of the requisite further supply of labour
power. Consequently, the working day must be sufficiently short to
enable the worker to recuperate his forces during the hours of leisure,
and to bring up children until they shall become likewise fit for
labour. Surplus value produced by means of prolongation of the working
day is termed absolute surplus value. Its production constitutes the
general foundation of the capitalist system.

Whereas, however, the length of the working day has limits, the
capitalist's hunger for surplus value is unlimited; and even if the
prolongation of the working day cannot be effected directly, it can be
effected indirectly. "In order to increase the period of surplus labour,
the period of necessary labour is shortened by means which enable the
equivalent of the wage of labour to be produced in a shorter time. ...
The production of relative surplus value revolutionizes out and out the
technical processes of labour and the way in which society is subdivided
into groups." With every improvement in tools and machinery, and with
increasing efficiency in the organization of the work of production, the
capitalist is given new possibilities of indirectly lengthening the
working day, and thus indirectly increasing surplus value.

When the evolution of production has attained a certain level, the
increase of surplus value becomes a purely technical problem. The
interest of the capitalist class in the advance of science, research,
and technique; capitalist enthusiasm for discoveries, inventions, and
the triumph of human genius--disclose themselves, in the last analysis,
as expressions of satisfaction at the appearance of new possibilities of
indirectly increasing the rate of surplus value and the sum total of
profit.

Thus it is a persistent trend of capitalist development to bring about a
relative increase in constant capital and a relative decrease in
variable capital. But this change in the internal composition of capital
has disastrous results. Inasmuch as profit is created by variable
capital alone, a persistent fall in the rate of profit is an inevitable
consequence. The rate of exploitation of labour increases, the total
number of workers increases, the absolute mass of surplus value
increases. "These are not mere possibilities; they are (apart from
transient oscillations) inevitable upon the basis of capitalist
production." None the less, with each advance in technique, the relative
rate of profit falls; the business of exploitation becomes, for the
capitalist, continually a less profitable one in relation to the total
outlay. Thus we have the absurd result that, the greater the absolute
outlay, the less the relative yield. In this way capital gradually cuts
off its own sources of supply. It increases by gnawing at its own roots.
It perishes more hopelessly at these roots, the more luxuriantly it is
flourishing above ground.

As an outcome of these inherent contradictions, capitalism must
inevitably perish. A point must infallibly be reached at which the total
quantity of profit at the lowered rate will be required for the
accumulation of constant capital, and a point therefore at which
production will have ceased to pay the capitalist. The point will have
been reached at which capital will have become an absurdity because it
will no longer provide profit for the capitalists. Marx says: "The
capitalist method of production encounters a limit in the development of
the forces of production, a limit which has nothing to do with the
production of wealth as such; and this peculiar limit bears witness to
the fleeting character of the capitalist method of production."

The endeavour to increase the productivity of human labour is a
necessary sequel to the existence of relative surplus value.

"By an increase in the productivity of labour, we mean a change in the
labour process whereby the quantity of social labour time necessary for
the production of a commodity is diminished, so that a smaller quantity
of labour power becomes enabled to produce a greater quantity of
use-value."

The capitalist method of production begins with co-operation. "Alike
historically and conceptually, the starting-point of capitalist
production is where a large number of workers are aggregated at one time
and in one place (or, if you like, upon the same field of labour), under
the command of one capitalist, for the production of one and the same
kind of commodity." Each member of the co-operation is a fully adequate
and independent producer. The whole labour process is effected by each
member individually. It might seem, then, as if cooperation were nothing
more than the simple addition of individual labour functions. But this
is not the case. "Just as the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry
or the defensive power of a regiment of infantry is very different from
the sum of the powers for offence and defence which the individual
cavalryman or infantryman can develop in isolation, so is the sum of the
mechanical energies which unassociated workers can develop very
different from the social potential which comes into being when many
hands are simultaneously engaged upon the same undivided operation."
What has happened is, not merely that a new productive power, the power
of a mass, has come into operation, but also that the productive power
of the individual member of the co-operation has been intensified. For,
"apart from the new energy created by the fusion of many energies into
one united energy, it usually happens in productive work that the very
existence of social contact arouses emulation and induces a certain
stimulation of the animal spirits, whereby the efficiency of each
individual worker is promoted; with the result that a working day of 144
hours comprising the conjoint 12-hour working days of a dozen persons
who co-operate, yields a much larger aggregate product than the total
product of 12 workers each of whom works 12 hours in isolation, or than
the total product of a solitary worker who works for a total of 144
hours during 12 days in succession. The reason is that man is by nature,
if not (as Aristotle says) a political animal, at any rate a social one.
... When a worker co-operates systematically with other workers, he
transcends his individual limitations and develops the capabilities that
belong to him as member of a species.

Co-operation speedily involves the necessity for guidance. The
capitalist assumes this function of guidance. In course of time, his
command in the field of production becomes as indispensable as the
command of the general in the battlefield. "Capitalist guidance and
control do not present themselves exclusively as a function arising out
of the very nature of the social labour process and appertaining to that
process; they present themselves also as a function whose purpose it is
to exploit a social labour process, one that is the outcome of the
inevitable antagonism between the exploiter and the living raw material
he exploits. ... The capitalist is not a capitalist because he is a
commander of industry; he becomes a commander of industry because he is
a capitalist. Command in industry is an attribute of capital; just as,
in the days of feudalism, command in war and a seat on the judges' bench
were attributes of landed property."

So far, simple co-operation. The next step in the development of the
forms of production leads to a cleavage of the process of production,
which has hitherto been unified in the hands of the individual worker.
The division of labour ensues. Manufacture originates--manufacture in
the original sense of that term, as it was used before the days of
power-driven machinery and large-scale production.

In some forms of manufacture, the workers who complete a product from
start to finish are all assembled in one work place under the command of
one capitalist, but are organized in groups each of which is engaged
upon a particular phase of the elaboration. In other forms of
manufacture, the workers who are united under the command of a single
capitalist carry out only one or only some of the stages in the
elaboration of a completed product. In either case, manufacture is a
method of production in which the worker has ceased to be one who
completes a whole commodity from start to finish. The handicraftsman has
become a detail worker, one who is perpetually repeating a partial
operation in the labour process.

The pauses that used to occur while the handicraftsman was changing from
the use of one tool to the use of another have been discontinued. The
pores in the labour day have been filled out with productive labour
power. The process of production has been compacted, has been
intensified, has been made more productive.

The detail worker is confined to the performance of a partial operation.
Therewith he acquires the utmost dexterity in the handling of his tool.
The perpetual repetition of the same narrow function develops his skill
in the performance of that function to the highest degree.

Experience gained in the performance of each detail operation gives
pointers for the perfection of the tools used in its performance. The
intensification of manual dexterity leads to the extremest possible
differentiation of the instruments of labour. "The manufacturing period
simplifies, improves, and multiplies the implements of labour by
adapting them to the exclusive and peculiar functions of the detail
worker."

The next step is the combination of tools, the combination of the
technical aids to labour, for the purpose of speedier and more purposive
functioning. Therein we find the material presuppositions for the
origination of the machine. Whereas the specific machinery of the
manufacturing period is the generalized worker who is a combination of a
number of detail workers, is an added and multiplied human being; the
machinery of the subsequent period is a highly elaborated and purposive
combination of tools, a putting together of mechanical apparatus and
instruments designed to carry on a unified productive function, a worker
of steel and iron. Whereas the manufacturing system proper culminates as
"an economic artifice" upon the broad basis of urban handicraft and
rural home industry, the machine does away with handicraft "as the
regulative principle of social production."

With the entry of machinery into the field, capitalist development
begins its victorious career. The industrial revolution is inaugurated.

The worker manipulating an isolated tool is replaced by a mechanism
representing a mass of workers. His incompleteness, which consists,
above all, in his incapacity for the incessant repetition of precisely
similar movements, is made good by the perfectionment of a mechanical
apparatus which, driven by natural forces, is able to repeat a
particular movement millions upon millions of times with a precision far
exceeding the limits of human capacity. "A system of machinery (whether,
like weaving, it be one in which there is a mere co-operation among
working machines of the same kind; or, like spinning, a combination of
machines of different kinds) becomes a huge automaton as soon as it is
driven by a self-acting prime motor. ... An organized system of working
machines which are one and all set in motion by the transmitting
mechanism from a central automaton, constitutes the fully developed form
of machinofacture. In place of the individual machine, we now have a
mechanical monster whose body fills the whole factory, and whose demon
power, hidden from our sight at first because of the measured and almost
ceremonious character of the movement of his giant limbs, discloses
itself at length in the vast and furious whirl of his numberless working
organs."

One industry after another is revolutionized. At length large-scale
industry gains control over its own characteristic means of production,
the machine, and produces machinery by machinery. The forces of steam
are superadded, lifting machinery into the sphere of cyclopean wonders.
"The mechanical lathe is a titanic reproduction of the ordinary
foot-lathe; the planing machine is an iron carpenter who works upon iron
with the same tool used by the living carpenter when he planes wood; the
implement which cuts veneers in the London shipbuilding yards is a
gigantic razor; the tool of the shearing machine, which cuts iron as
easily as a tailor cuts cloth with his shears, is an enormous pair of
scissors; and the steamhammer works with a head just like that of an
ordinary hammer, but such a heavy one that Thor himself could not wield
it."

As a highly elaborated tool which has become independent of the worker,
the machine enters into competition with the worker. The instrument of
labour, enormously excelling the worker in its power of production, lays
the worker low. The worker, who was formerly lord and master of the tool
obedient to his hand, now becomes a servant of the machine, its
appendage, a screw, a crank, in its mechanism. It makes him superfluous,
forces down his value, becomes the most powerful of weapons for the
repression of the periodical labour revolts against the autocracy of
capital. By making quick returns on the capital invested in it essential
to the capitalist, machinery enforces a prolongation of the working day.
At the same time, thanks to improved construction and accelerated work,
machinery becomes an objectified and systematically utilized means of
extorting more labour in a given period of time--a means, that is to
say, for the progressive intensification of labour. "In so far as
machinery does away with the need for any considerable expenditure of
muscular power, it becomes a means for the utilization of workers with
comparatively little strength, and those whose bodily growth is immature
but whose limbs are all the more supple. The labour of women and
children was, therefore, the first word in the capitalist utilization of
machinery. ... In former days, the worker used to sell his own labour
power, being ostensibly, in this respect, a free person. Now he sells
his wife and his children. He becomes a slavetrader."

All the advantages of machinery accrue to the capitalist. In a shorter
time, and at less expenditure of labour power, he obtains a larger
quantity of commodities, and therewith a larger quantity of surplus
value. Furthermore, with the aid of machinery and large-scale industry,
he is continually destroying manufacture, handicraft, and home work,
thus securing new markets, and forcing his way into an increasingly
large number of branches of production. Thus he secures a progressively
increasing share in the totality of production, and ultimately becomes
the lord of the commodity market. "The revolution in the social methods
of carrying on industry, a revolution which necessarily follows upon the
revolution in the means of production, expresses itself in a medley of
transitional forms." Factory legislation has to intervene for the
regulation of the activities of labour. But "the compulsory regulation
of the working day in respect of its length, its pauses, the hours at
which it begins and ends, the system of relays for children, the
prohibition of the employment of children below a certain age, and so
on--necessitates, on the one hand, an increased use of machinery and the
replacement of human muscles by steam-power as a motive force. On the
other hand, in order to gain in space what has been lost in time, there
occurs an extension in the domain of the jointly used means of
production, the furnaces, the buildings, etc. In a word, there ensues a
greater concentration of the means of production, and a correspondingly
greater aggregation of workpeople."

In the domain of agriculture, likewise, machinery has a revolutionary
influence, inasmuch as it destroys the bulwark of the old society, the
peasant, and substitutes for him the wage worker. The countryside is
assimilated to the town; traditions are swept away by reforms; lazy
adhesion to irrational customary methods is replaced by the purposive
technological application of science. "In agriculture, as in
manufacture, the capitalist transformation of the process of production
signifies, at the same time, the martyrdom of the producer; the
instrument of labour becomes the means of subjugating, exploiting, and
impoverishing the worker; the social combination and organization of the
labour process, functions as an elaborate method for crushing the
worker's individual vitality, freedom, and independence."

In his _Principles of Political Economy_, John Stuart Mill writes: "It
is questionable, if all the mechanical inventions yet made have
lightened the day's toil of any human being." There is no question,
however, about this, that the technical inventions incorporated in
machinery have transformed the process of production into a perennial
source of wealth, and have made the capitalist the sole beneficiary of
this wealth.

Capital produces profit. That is its purpose; that is its function. But
profit is competent, in its turn, to produce capital. This closes the
circle, and the circulation begins afresh.

The process which effects this is called, at first reproduction, and
subsequently accumulation.

Simple reproduction is a mere repetition of the process of production
upon the same footing. The worker receives as wages no longer, as at the
outset of the process of production, a sum advanced by the capitalist,
but part of the value he has himself created. He himself has reproduced
the requisite variable capital. The remainder of the value, namely the
profit, accrues to the capitalist, who consumes it. In these
circumstances, under these conditions, production is repeated over and
over again upon the existent foundation.

The worker, however, produces not merely his wages, but also himself.
Inasmuch as he eats, drinks, and sleeps, he sees to it that his labour
power shall be replaced from day to day, shall reappear in the labour
market day after day. For the reproduction of capital it is
indispensable that labour power should be continually renewed, should be
eternalized. From the outlook of the process of reproduction, everything
which the worker does for his own maintenance and for the maintenance of
his class is reproduction.

If, however, production is to do something more than mark time, if it is
to be an advance, if it is to be an evolution, constant capital must be
reproduced as well as variable capital and labour power. Simple
reproduction must develop into accumulation.

By accumulation is meant the retransformation of part of the acquired
surplus value into capital, so that an expansion of the primary basis of
production may occur. "At present we are disregarding whatever portion
of the surplus value is consumed by the capitalist. Nor, for the moment,
are we interested in the question whether the additional capital is
tacked on to the original capital, or is applied separately to an
independent process of expansion. It does not matter to us whether the
capitalist who has accumulated it makes use of it, or whether he hands
it over to others. What we have to bear in mind is that, side by side
with the newly formed implements of capital, the original capital
continues to reproduce itself and to produce surplus value; and that the
same is true of every portion of accumulated capital in relation to the
additional capital it engenders."

Just as simple reproduction is continually reproducing the capital
relation, so accumulation is continually reproducing this capital
relation upon an extended scale; more capitalists or greater capitalists
at one pole, more wage workers at the other. The accumulation of capital
involves an increase in the proletariat.

In the general course of accumulation, a point is reached at which the
development of the productivity of associated labour becomes the most
powerful lever of accumulation. The organic composition of capital is
revolutionized. Constant capital increases at the expense of variable
capital, for it is the aim and the result of machinery to make human
hands superfluous. Thanks to the increasing productivity of labour, the
quantity of the means of production grows more quickly than the quantity
of labour power incorporated in them. The need for labour power lags
farther and farther behind the advance of accumulation. "The continual
retransformation of surplus value into capital displays itself as a
steady growth of the cap ital engaged in the process of production.
This, in turn, becomes the foundation of an increase in the scale of
production, and of the accompanying methods of increasing the
productivity of labour and of bringing about an accelerated production
of surplus value. If, therefore, a certain amount of accumulation
manifests itself to be a necessary condition of the specifically
capitalist method of production, the latter conversely causes an
accelerated accumulation of capital. A specifically capitalist method of
production therefore develops as the accumulation of capital develops;
and the accumulation of capital develops as the specifically capitalist
method of production develops. Both these economic factors, in virtue of
their reciprocal relationships, furnish the impetus for that change in
the technical composition of capital thanks to which the variable
constituent grows continually smaller in comparison with the constant."

This process has several consequences. The first of these is the
concentration of capital. Since every accumulation becomes the means for
new accumulation, accumulation, as it increases the quantity of wealth
functioning as capital, increases its concentration in the hands of
individual capitalists. The authority of capital over labour becomes
condensed in nodal points, which undergo enormous enlargement. "At the
same time, portions break away from the original capitals." These new
formations tend to interfere with the growth and the dominion of the old
capitals. But the tendency towards disintegration is counteracted by a
tendency towards integration. Thanks to mutual attraction, already
constituted capitals undergo concentration into a higher form; their
individual independence is abrogated; lesser capitalists are
expropriated by greater capitalists, many small capitals are transformed
into a few great capitals. "Capital aggregates into great masses in one
hand because, elsewhere, it is taken out of many hands. Here we have
genuine centralization in contradistinction to accumulation and
concentration."

Competition is the motive force which determines all these movements,
formations, aggregations. For the conquest of new markets, prices must
be lowered, and prices can only be lowered if the productivity of labour
is increased by perfected technique. Hence the urge towards the
introduction of new machinery, more extensive plant, improved methods of
production. Hence the levying of larger and ever larger aggregates of
capital; the absorption of small enterprises by large ones; the
development of productive foci into colossal structures and giant
enterprises with the most highly elaborated technique, the best possible
machinery, the most economical management.

"The lesser capitals, therefore, crowd into spheres of production which
large-scale industry has not yet fully annexed, has conquered only here
and there. In these fields, competition rages in direct proportion to
the number and in inverse proportion to the magnitude of the competing
capitals. ... With the growth of capitalist production there comes into
being an entirely new power, that of the credit system. To begin with,
the credit system appears furtively, as it were, in the form of a modest
helper of accumulation, drawing into the hands of individual or
associated capitalists the monetary resources scattered over the surface
of a society, and doing this by means of invisible threads. Ere long,
however, it becomes a new and formidable weapon in the competitive
struggle; and in the end it manifests itself as a gigantic social
mechanism for the centralization of capital. ... With the magnitude of
social capital already functioning, and the degree of its increase, with
the extension of the scale of production and the increase in the number
of workers set in motion, with the development in the productivity of
their labour, with the extended flow of all the sources of wealth, there
is also an extension of the scale on which a greater attraction of
workers by capital is associated with a greater repulsion of them.
Therewith, there is an increasing rapidity in the change in the organic
composition of capital and in its technical form; and more and more
spheres of production become involved in this change, now
simultaneously, and now alternately."

In connexion therewith there arises an excess of labour power, an excess
relatively to the capacity of capital for applying labour to promote its
own increase; there is formed an industrial reserve army which, in this
unhappy posture of affairs, stations itself outside the factory gates,
undercuts wages, attacks strikers in the rear, paralyses the workers'
class struggle, and (consisting of persons whose existence is
perpetually insecure, and who are always in danger of falling down into
the tatterdemalion proletariat) is perpetually being used by the
capitalist class against the working class as a whole.

The capitalist system moves in the following circle. The anarchy of
commodity production leads to competition. In the struggle of
competition, the producer of the cheapest commodities wins the battle.
Maximum cheapness is achieved by maximum productivity, and this is
brought about by having the most efficient machinery and installations.
For this, large aggregates of capital are requisite. Hence increasing
accumulation upon a larger and ever larger scale. But the more extensive
the machinery, the less extensive (relatively) the quantity of workers,
and the smaller, therefore, the proportion of variable capital. Since,
however, variable capital is the only constituent of capital which
creates value, the rate of surplus value, though it may increase
absolutely, is continually declining relatively. The larger, therefore,
is the number of workers "set at liberty" by capital, and thus deprived
of wages. Thereby, the power of purchase and of consumption is
increasingly reduced in relation to the enormous quantity of commodities
with which the market is flooded. If the unemployed are to be made
capable of consumption, they must be given occupation in new or expanded
branches of production. But for this, capital is needed, and capital can
only be supplied by accumulation. To render accumulation possible, the
rate of surplus value must be increased. To increase the rate of surplus
value, the value of labour power must be reduced by cheapening
commodities. But, in order to make commodities cheaper, productivity
must be increased yet more, technique must be further improved, the
installations must be yet further rationalized. For this, accumulation
is indispensable. And so on, and so on. There is no issue from the
vicious circle.

From time to time there ensues a pause in the mad circular dance, a
pause brought about by the occurrence of an economic crisis. Purchasing
power falls to a minimum. The storehouses are overfilled. The market
cannot take up any more goods. The channels along which commodities
ordinarily flow are blocked. No orders come to the factories. These work
short time, or close down; workers are dismissed wholesale; production
is discontinued; unemployment is rife, bread riots occur. After a while,
the accumulated supplies are gradually used up, the storehouses slowly
empty themselves, demand begins once more, there is a general stimulus
to production, the crisis is overcome, things are on the up-grade, and
at length production is at full swing once more. So it goes on until the
next crisis begins. This cycle usually occupies about ten years.
Throughout the nineteenth century, decade after decade, economic life
was convulsed by these cyclical returns of glut and stagnation.
Entangled in the mechanism of the system, and dominated by the
mysterious fetishism of commodities (which is stronger than the human
will), the bourgeoisie bows before the dictates of a necessity whose
ways to it are unsearchable because the bourgeoisie itself is not merely
the object and the Victim of this necessity, but also its favourer and
beneficiary.

But the proletariat, burdened with all the costs, disadvantages, and
terrors of the system, seeks to defend itself, and, as soon as it has
learned where to place the crow-bar which will overthrow that system, it
deliberately marshals its ranks for the great struggle.

When money is transformed into capital, when capital produces surplus
value, and when surplus value once more becomes capital, this is a
movement which occurs upon the extant basis of the capitalist method of
production starting-point of that method of production?

Marx answers the question in the chapter entitled "Primary
Accumulation." He writes: "In political economy this primary
accumulation plays much the same part that is played by original sin in
theology. The origin of sin is supposed to be explained by a folk-tale.
In like manner we are told, as regards primary accumulation, that in
times long past there were two sorts of people: some of them, the chosen
few, were industrious, intelligent, and, above all, thrifty; the others,
lazy rascals, wasted their substance in riotous living. But there is a
difference. The theological legend of the Fall tells us this much, at
least, why man has been condemned to eat his bread in the sweat of his
face. On the other hand, the economic history of the Fall reveals to us
why there are persons who need do nothing of the kind. No matter! It is
from this economic Fall that dates the poverty of the masses, who, for
all time, however hard they may work, have nothing to sell but
themselves; and thence, likewise, dates the wealth of the few, which
continually grows, although the few have long since ceased to work."

Such is the legend; such the idyll. The reality is very different. In
the real world, the last word lies with force.

The process which creates the capital relation is nothing other than the
"divorce of the worker from ownership of the conditions of labour," a
process which, on the one hand, transforms the social means of life and
production into capital, and, on the other hand, transforms the
immediate producers into wage workers. Primary accumulation severs the
producer from the means of production. It occurs at the end of the
feudalist epoch, with the cessation of adscription to the soil, of
serfdom, of guild coercion. The serf and the handicraftsman are freed.
But simultaneously the economic ground is cut from under their feet, and
they are deprived of the guarantees which the ancient feudal
institutions furnished for their existence. "In the history of primary
accumulation we must regard as epoch-making all revolutions that acted
as stepping-stones for the capitalist class in course of formation.
Above all, this applies to those moments when great masses of human
beings were suddenly and forcibly torn away from the means of
subsistence, and hurled into the labour market as masterless
proletarians. The expropriation of the agricultural producers, the
peasants, their severance from the soil, was the basis of the whole
process. In different countries, the history of this expropriation
assumed different forms, running through its various phases in different
orders of succession, and at different historical periods. Only in
England can it be said to have had a typical development."

These "free" proletarians, freed by the dissolution of the companies of
feudal retainers, these ex-peasants, driven off the land by forcible
expropriation, are absorbed into the rising manufactures. But they are
absorbed in part only, for their numbers increase more rapidly than the
process of production can incorporate them into its framework. Besides,
those who have thus suddenly been uprooted from their traditional
surroundings find it difficult to adapt themselves with equal suddenness
to the discipline of the new conditions. Many of the masterless men
become beggars, vagabonds, robbers, and for a long period are the terror
of western Europe. Ultimately, in accordance with a newly inaugurated
and barbarous legal code, they are flogged, branded, racked, and, in the
end, are handed over like beasts of burden for use in the "Houses of
Terror," the manufactories and the factories.

The same economic and political evolution which brings about the
formation of a landless, occupationless proletariat with no means of
subsistence, favours the appearance of capitalist farmers and industrial
capitalists. Unquestionably, too, guild masters, independent artisans,
and even wage workers, are sometimes able, in one way or another, to
become small capitalists, and, by gradually extending the scale on which
they exploit wage labour, in conjunction with a corresponding
accumulation of capital, some of these become capitalists on the grand
scale. "During the childhood of capitalist production, what happened was
often parallel to what had happened during the childhood of the
mediaeval town system, when the question which of two fugitive serfs was
to become a master and which a servant was mainly decided by which had
run away before the other. But the snail's pace of this method could not
keep up with the needs of the new world-market which had come into
existence thanks to the great discoveries at the close of the fifteenth
century." As anticipatory forms of modern capital, there arose in the
Middle Ages trading capital and usurers' capital. This money capital
effects the opening up of the world, and discloses the sources of vast
wealth. "The discoveries of gold and silver in America; the extirpation
of the indigens in some instances, their enslavement or their entombment
in the mines in others; the beginnings of the conquest and looting of
the East Indies; the transformation of Africa into a precinct for the
supply of the negroes who were the raw material of the slave
trade--these were the incidents that characterized the rosy dawn of the
era of capitalist production. These were the idyllic processes that
formed the chief factors of primary accumulation. Hard upon their heels
came the commercial war between the European nations, fought over the
whole surface of the globe. It was opened when the Netherlands broke
away from Spain; it assumed gigantic proportions in England's
anti-Jacobin war; and it found a recent sequel in the opium wars against
China."

In the annals of mankind, the history of capitalism is written in
letters of blood and fire. Its development has left a broad trail of
sweat, blood, and tears. W. Howitt writes: "The barbarities and
desperate outrages of the so-called Christian race, throughout every
region of the world, and upon every people they have been able to
subdue, are not to be paralleled by those of any other race, however
fierce, however untaught, and however reckless of mercy and of shame, in
any age of the earth." Quoting this in _Capital_, Marx adds: "The
history of the colonial administration of Holland, the model capitalist
nation during the seventeenth century, is, according to Thomas Stamford
Raffles, sometime lieutenant-governor of Java, 'one of the most
extraordinary relations of treachery, bribery, massacre, and meanness.'"
Marx goes on to say: "The treatment of the aborigines was, naturally,
worst of all in the plantations which were intended to serve only for
export trade, such as the West Indies; and in rich and well-populated
countries, such as Mexico and Hindustan, which were delivered over to
plunder."

Commercial supremacy led to industrial dominance. The colonial system
"was a 'strange god' who had mounted the altar cheek by jowl with the
old gods of Europe, and who, one fine day, with a shove and a kick,
swept them all into the dustbin." Profit-making was now proclaimed to be
the final aim of mankind. The system of public credit, of national
debts, developed into an instrument for the capitalist seizure and
subjugation of whole territories and States. "With the wave of an
enchanter's wand, the 'funds' endowed barren money with the power of
reproduction, thus transforming it into capital, and this without the
risk and the trouble inseparable from its investment in industrial
undertakings and even from putting it out upon usury." In addition, the
system of national debt "has given rise to joint-stock companies, to
dealings in negotiable securities of all kinds, to stock-jobbing--in a
word, to gambling on the stock exchange and to the modern bankocracy.
... The colonial system, national debt, the heavy burden of taxation,
protection, commercial wars, and so on--these offspring of the
manufacturing period properly so-called--grew luxuriantly during the
childhood of large-scale industry. ... With the development of
capitalist production in the manufacturing period, the public opinion of
Europe had lost the last vestiges of shame and conscience. ... The
cotton industry, while introducing child slavery into England, gave at
the same time an impetus towards the transformation of the slave system
of the United States, which had hitherto been a more or less patriarchal
one, into a commercial system of exploitation. Speaking generally, the
veiled slavery of the European wage earners became the pedestal of
unqualified slavery in the New World. ... As Augier said, 'money comes
into the world with a birthmark on the cheek'; it is no less true that
capital comes into the world soiled with mire from top to toe, and
oozing blood from every pore.

"What does the primary accumulation of capital, its historical origin,
amount to? In so far as it is not the direct transformation of slaves
and serfs into wage earners (a mere change of form), it signifies
nothing other than the expropriation of the immediate producers, that is
to say the making an end of private property based upon the labour of
its owner.

Self-earned private property, the private property that may be looked
upon as grounded on a coalescence of the isolated, individual, and
independent worker, with his working conditions, is supplanted by
capitalist private property, which is maintained by the exploitation of
others' labour, but of labour which, in a formal sense, is free.

"As soon as this process of transformation has sufficiently
disintegrated the old society, has decomposed it through and through; as
soon as the workers have been metamorphosed into proletarians, and their
working conditions into capital; as soon as the capitalist method of
production can stand upon its own feet--then the further socialization
of labour and the further transformation of the land and of the other
means of production into socially utilized (that is to say, communal)
means of production, which implies the further expropriation of private
owners, takes on a new form. What has now to be expropriated, is no
longer the labourer working on his own account, but the capitalist who
exploits many labourers.

"This expropriation is brought about by the operation of the immanent
laws of capitalist production, by the centralization of capital. One
capitalist lays a number of his fellow capitalists low. Hand-in-hand
with such centralization, concomitantly with the expropriation of many
capitalists by a few, the co-operative form of the labour process
develops to an ever-increasing degree; therewith we find a growing
tendency towards the purposive application of science to the improvement
of technique; the land is more methodically cultivated; the instruments
of labour tend to assume forms which are only utilizable by combined
effort; the means of production are economized through being turned to
account only by joint, by social labour. All the peoples of the world
are enmeshed in the net of the world market, and therefore the
capitalist regime tends more and more to assume an international
character. While there is thus a progressive diminution in the number of
the capitalist magnates (who usurp and monopolize all the advantages of
this transformative process), there occurs a corresponding increase in
the mass of poverty, oppression, enslavement, degeneration, and
exploitation; but at the same time there is a steady intensification of
the wrath of the working class--a class which grows ever more numerous,
and is disciplined, unified, and organized by the very mechanism of the
capitalist method of production. Capitalist monopoly becomes a fetter
upon the method of production which has flourished with it and under it.
The centralization of the means of production and the socialization of
labour reach a point where they prove incompatible with their capitalist
husk. This bursts asunder. The knell of capitalist private property
sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.

"The capitalist method of appropriation proceeding out of the capitalist
method of production, and consequently capitalist private property, is
the first negation of individual private property based upon individual
labour. But, with the inexorability of a law of nature, capitalist
production begets its own negation. It is a negation of a negation. This
second negation does not re-establish private property; but it does
re-establish individual property upon the basis of the acquisitions of
the capitalist era; i.e. on co-operation and the common ownership of the
land and of the means of production (which labour itself produces)."

## Chapter 09: Achievement, Part 4

### Second and Third Volumes

In the first volume of _Capital_, which ends with a prophetic glimpse
through the gates of the coming social order, Marx disclosed the
economic fundamentals of contemporary society.

He solved the problem of the origin of profit. He had not solved that
problem after the manner of the petty-bourgeois defenders of capitalism,
who use science for the justification and safeguarding of selfish
interests, and look upon profit as something which rightly accrues to
the capitalist in return for services rendered. Nor did he answer it
after the manner of the utopian socialists, to whom the capitalist
system had seemed to be the outcome of human baseness, and who had
denounced profit as being derived from theft and cheating. Marx dealt
with the matter in a new way, one peculiar to himself. For him, the
purchase of the commodity, labour power, by the capitalist was a
legitimate exchange of values; the creation of surplus value by surplus
labour was the logical consequence of an objective system; and the
appropriation of this surplus value by the capitalists followed as a
matter of course in accordance with the internal laws regulating a class
society. Pursuing this train of scientific reasoning, he was inspired by
it neither with love for capitalism, as were the bourgeois economists,
nor with hatred for capitalism, as were the utopists. He merely drew the
inference, clearly and coldly, that for the abolition of the
exploitation of man by man a fundamental change in the system was
essential. To him, such a change seemed to be an inevitable consequence
of the laws of historical evolution. He expected the completion of this
evolution to be effected by the working class, growing conscious of its
situation as a class, and trained to pursue its aims as a class.

The first volume of _Capital_ examines and analyses capitalism within
the field of the process of production. That process goes on in the
workshop or other place where work is carried on. The worker comes to
the workshop as bearer of the commodity, labour power. He receives a
wage, and begins to produce. Commodities proceed out of his hands. We
cannot tell, simply from looking at these structures of iron, wood,
earthenware, leather, etc., to what extent they represent newly created
values, and at what point in them the process of expanding value has
begun. We know, however, that surplus value is included in their value;
that, freshly made and still damp with the sweat of the worker who has
made them, they have hidden away within them a wealth which lives only
for the capitalist. This unearned surplus value accruing to the
capitalist will become profit, will assume the money form, and will, as
jingling coins, find its way into the pocket of the beneficiary. But the
transformation of surplus value into cash cannot take place in the
workshop. For that a change of venue is requisite. Surplus value does
not become profit until the commodity is sold, and therefore it can only
become profit in the market, in the shop, or on the exchange.

Thither we are taken in the second volume of _Capital_, which discusses
the process of the circulation of capital in three sections,
respectively entitled: "The Metamorphoses of Capital and their Cycles";
"The Turn-Over of Capital"; "The Reproduction and Circulation of the
Aggregate Social Capital."

In the market, the fetishistic power of commodities affects the
capitalist differently from in the workshop. Whereas production is
characterized by the discipline of an artificially constructed order, in
the market the most perplexing anarchy prevails. There, commodities
escape from the hands of their creator, engage in the maddest dance.
They assume prices according to fancies of their own; make journeys;
change owners; collect themselves into heaps, or scatter themselves to
all the winds of heaven; store themselves away in warehouses, to rot
there sometimes and thus fail to achieve their purpose; or speed from
person to person, from town to town, to be consumed in the predestined
way. Forming a fantastic world of their own, they lead therein an
autocratic life, independent of the will of the producer.

If a man is not to lose his senses amid such a riot, and if, above all,
he is not to lose his money, he must learn how to take his bearings in
this process of the circulation of commodities. He must be able as a
capitalist to find a buyer for his wares at the proper time; must
provide himself at the proper time with the raw materials needed for the
production of more commodities; must supply himself with adequate funds
for the hiring of workers; and, in the eternal circulation of
commodities and money, must never miss an opportunity, never allow
himself to be got the better of by his competitors. In a realm where
time and place are perpetually uncertain, he must be always on the watch
to do the right thing at the right time and in the right place. He must
forecast the needs of the market, must estimate the purchasing power of
the consumers, must calculate the extent of demand. There is no guide
book he can consult, for the economics of the market are anarchical. The
market is a city without a plan. Nevertheless, the individual capitalist
must work according to plan, unless he is to go down in the struggle. He
cannot come to an understanding with others, for he must not disclose
his intentions, his business secrets, to his rivals. Nevertheless, he
must conduct himself as if he were acting on the basis of an
understanding with his rivals, as if he and they were solidarized in the
interests of the capitalist economy. It is not within his power to
establish order in the chaos. Yet, under pain of destruction, he must
see to it that everything shall "click," that no failure in the market
shall rob him of what he has gained in the workshop. For the profit
created as surplus value in the workshop does not come to life until the
market is reached and the commodity is sold. Only in the market does
that which hitherto has been a mere abstract calculation, become a
concrete gain. Only in the market is a man repaid for being a
capitalist, for engaging in capitalist enterprise.

The business awaiting the capitalist in the market is difficult,
laborious, and risky. It demands from him the utmost efficiency and
perspicacity, great resourcefulness, marked sagacity. He must have fine
hearing and a thick skin; must be simultaneously cautious and
venturesome, a swashbuckler and a calculator, careless and careful. He
must develop all the qualities of an experienced man of business.

None the less, the individual, however talented he may be, remains
exposed to the uncalculable vicissitudes of the market. Consequently,
large-scale collective safeguarding must replace small-scale individual
safeguarding. The capitalists, who are independent of one another, and
indeed hostile to one another, have to combine in the one matter which
for them is of central importance--in the matter of money. They engage
in mutual aid by establishing banks; help one another out by the joint
provision of credit; amalgamate their individual interests into a unity
by measures conceived in the general capitalist interest.

Thenceforward the main process of circulation can be better subjected to
examination in all its phases. In a sense, the chaotic interplay of
phenomena and movements is regulated to this extent, that the basic
pillars of the capitalist economy (the continuance of commodity
production, the creation of surplus value, the supply of subsistence to
the working class, and the enrichment of the bourgeoisie) are secured.
Thus a primary provision is made for progressive accumulation, for the
evolution of capitalism into mightier and ever mightier forms, and for
the perpetuation of the system.

Of course the multiplicity of the processes of capitalism as a whole
involves a like multiplicity of the functions which have to be
performed, and of the forces requisite for their performance. The
category of capitalists loses its earlier simplicity. The capitalist,
nowadays, is not only a producer of commodities; he is also a seller of
commodities, a middleman, a merchant, a banker, a landowner, a purveyor
of raw materials. He appears in many shapes. Now, as from the first, in
so far as he is a producer of commodities he is a producer of surplus
value. But, as economic life has grown more complicated, he has
delegated his functions to various persons. They all take part, in one
way or another, in the production of commodities, the exploitation of
the wage workers, the sale of commodities, the provision of capital, the
continuance of the capitalist process, and the origination of profit.
They all help to ensure that capital shall make profit. They present
their respective claims, demand their appropriate shares in the spoil.
They insist upon being satisfied. Profit has to be divided among a pack
of hungry wolves.

But what share in the spoils is this or that individual to get? How is
it to be measured? Who decides? How is the distribution so regulated
that no one shall go short? The answer is that the world of commodities
regulates these things for itself. The mechanism of the capitalist
system is so contrived that, out of the interplay of its forces,
factors, and trends, the satisfaction of all the before-mentioned claims
spontaneously ensues. The settlement occurs without plan or set scheme,
without rules and regulations, simply as the effect of the immanent
logic of commodities, and the immanent justice of their exchange, which
themselves formulate the principle in accordance wherewith each gets his
share.

It is here that the fetishistic character of commodities manifests its
supreme triumph, and it is to this matter that Marx devotes the third
volume of _Capital_.

There he finds the answer to a riddle over which the professional
economists had previously puzzled their heads in vain. He unravels the
mystery of the fact that the capitals invested in different branches of
production, although they "work" under the most widely varying
conditions, nevertheless, at any particular time and within the
boundaries of any particular country, secure much the same gains,
produce an average rate of profit. This average rate of profit arises
because the differences between the profits cancel one another when the
commodities are being sold in the market. The minus which results when
certain kinds of commodities are sold at less than their value is
compensated by the plus when certain other kinds of commodities are sold
above their value. Thus there arises an average in which all variations
are levelled. The individual capitalist does not pouch the profit made
by him in individual production, but only the proportional share that
accrues to him out of the general spoil. "As far as profit is concerned,
the various capitalists play the part of mere shareholders in a
joint-stock company, whose shares in the profit are a percentage
allotted proportionally to their holdings; and thus these shares differ
from capitalist to capitalist only in proportion to the amount of the
capital which each has invested in the joint undertaking." As if endowed
with magical powers, as if dominated by elemental forces, the world of
commodities regulates its affairs in accordance with its own will and in
pursuance of its own laws, regulates the course of the processes and the
balancing of the profits in a way that is independent of individual
intelligence and with a certainty which is far beyond the power of human
functioning. Only the firmament of heaven, where the stars move on their
courses for all eternity independent of the human will, offers a
parallel to the mystery of the capitalist economy.

But just as the science of astronomy has disclosed the working of the
heavens, has described the paths of the stars, has learned how to
predict cosmic catastrophes, and has thus revealed to us the secrets of
the firmament, so Marx has thrown light upon the darkness of economic
happenings, has discovered the laws of the world of commodities, has
disclosed the mechanisms of the winning of profits, and has thereby
resolved the mysterious predestination of man to wealth or poverty into
the calculable consequences of a mutable system. He has shown that
interest, land-rent, revenues of all kinds, every form of capitalist
gain, are essentially nothing more than profit under a masquerade.

Of the three volumes of _Capital_, the first is the most
straightforward, the most compact, the most impressive, and the most
important. Though it be true that the second volume supplements the
analysis of capitalism in ways that are of very great significance, and
though it be true that from the scientific standpoint the third volume
must be regarded as the completion of the Marxian criticism of political
economy, it is unquestionable that the main features of Marx's
scientific achievement are contained in the first volume.

It answers the two central problems with which socialism and the labour
movement are concerned: the origin of surplus value; and the
socialization of the process of production. Only when we have learned
how surplus value originates, can we scientifically explain how the
proletariat is exploited. Only when we have understood the socialization
of the labour process, can we scientifically demonstrate the
fundamentals of the socialist revolution. The solution of the former
problem reveals to the worker the nature of the capitalist present; the
solution of the second problem discloses to him the way to the socialist
future.

Therewith the main need of the labour movement, as far as theory is
concerned, has been satisfied. Regarded from the outlook of the class
struggle, these two problems are of more primary and more basic
importance than any others, however interesting and noteworthy others
may be in respect of detail.

That explains why in socialist circles, among the intellectuals and the
leaders as well as among the rank and file, a knowledge of Marx's
_Capital_ is usually confined to the first volume. This first volume is
continually being discussed, has been popularized, is utilized day by
day for propaganda purposes; the second and third volumes gather dust on
the shelves of libraries. Bernard Shaw, the semi-socialist Fabian, was
right when he made fun of Hyndman, the thoroughgoing socialist, because
the latter, though he was acquainted only with the first volume of
_Capital_, claimed the title of thoroughgoing Marxist. Nevertheless,
Hyndman was likewise right when he pleaded in excuse that the whole
labour movement, its greatest leaders not excepted, knew nothing of the
third volume of _Capital_, and yet carried on the class struggle in the
Marxian sense. In actual fact, a knowledge of the first volume was fully
adequate for that phase of the class struggle which now lies behind us.

But with every step we take beyond this phase, the second and third
volumes gain in importance. The visage of Marxism changes as the times
change. As against the vulgar Marxist of the old school, who bases his
theoretical trend exclusively upon the first volume of _Capital_ and
upon a crudely mechanistic historical materialism, the modern Marxist,
recognizing that Marxism is like all else subject to evolution, is often
tempted to echo Marx by saying: "For my part, I am not a Marxist!"

### The Evening and the End

Fate grudged Marx the privilege of sending the second and third volumes
of _Capital_ to the press. Death struck the pen from his hand. His great
design of producing a standard treatise on economics remained
unfulfilled. Engels, his executor in scientific matters, saw to it that
at least _Capital_ should be finished. Taking over the editorship of the
manuscripts left by Marx, he prepared them for the press, publishing the
second volume of _Capital_ in 1885, and the third volume in 1894. From
1870 onwards, the friendship between Marx and Engels was yet further
cemented by proximity of residence. Engels had retired from his position
in the firm of Ermen and Engels, had left Manchester, and had settled
down in London. Under date November 29, 1868, he wrote to Marx: "1. How
much money will you need to pay all your debts, so that you can make a
clean start? 2. Can you get along with £350 a year for your ordinary
needs (excluding extraordinary expenditure upon illness and other
unforeseen happenings); get along so that you will not need to run into
debt any more? If that sum will not suffice, let me know just what you
will require. All this on the assumption that the old debts are first of
all paid off. My negotiations with Gottfried Ermen have taken such a
turn that he wishes to buy me out when my contract expires on June 30th;
that is to say he offers me a sum of money if I pledge myself not to
start a competitive business within the next five years, and allow him
to carry on the firm. That is the very point to which I wished to bring
him. ... The sum he offers me will enable me to pay you £350 a year for
the next five or six years, certainly, and in special circumstances a
little more." Marx answered by return of post: "I am quite overcome by
your extreme kindness. My wife and I have gone into the figures
together, and we find that the amount of the debts is much larger than I
had supposed, £210 (of which about £75 are for the pawnshop and
interest)." On July 1, 1869, Engels, with an hurrah, said farewell to
"sweet commerce," became a "free man," made a "clean sweep" of Marx's
debts, and a year later removed to London, settling down close to Marx.

In the Marx household, meanwhile, there had been many changes. Suitors
had come for the two elder daughters, Jenny and Laura. In August 1866,
Marx had written to Engels: "Since yesterday, Laura is half pledged to
Monsieur Lafargue, my creole medical student. She has been treating him
much like the others, but the emotional excesses characteristic of
creoles, a certain fear on her part that the young man (he is
twenty-five years old) would do himself a hurt, and so on, perhaps some
predilection for him, cold as ever in Laura's case (he is a handsome,
intelligent, and vigorously developed fellow), have led, more or less,
to a compromise. The young man attached himself to me at the outset, but
soon transferred the attraction from the old man to the daughter.
Economically speaking, he is moderately well off, being the only child
of a sometime planter. He has been sent down from Paris University for
two years on account of the Liége Congress, but intends to pass his
examination in Strasburg." Marx asked for precise particulars as to the
property question from the would-be son-in-law's parents, and, when
these particulars proved satisfactory, categorically declared that
"there must be no question of a marriage" until young Lafargue had
passed all his examinations. "Yesterday I told our creole that unless he
can calm his manners down to the English standard, Laura will
unceremoniously dismiss him. He must make this perfectly clear to
himself, or the whole thing will be broken off. He is a thoroughly good
fellow, but a spoiled child, and too much a child of nature." Lafargue
passed his examination, and married his Laura. Having settled down to
practise in Paris, he took part in the struggles of the Commune, became
a refugee when the Commune was suppressed, and returned to London. He
abandoned his medical career on the ground that this "could not be
carried on without quackery," and started in business as a photographer,
at which he made barely enough to live upon.

Jenny, too, had a wooer. This was Charles Longuet, editor of a
periodical run by the socialist students of Paris. He was sent to London
in 1866 as a delegate of the French section of the International, which
was in opposition to the General Council. Shortly afterwards, Longuet
became a member of the General Council. During the Paris Commune, he was
editor of the official organ of the Commune, and a member of the Council
of the Commune. In 1873, he married Jenny, and eventually went back with
her to Paris.

Of the three daughters, the only one now left at home was Tussy, or
Eleanor. She was courted by Lissagaray, the historian of the Commune,
who in 1871 had taken refuge in London; but Marx disapproved of the
would-be son-in-law. Subsequently Tussy entered into a free union with
Edward Aveling, was very unhappy with him, and after a time committed
suicide. Bernard Shaw took Aveling as the model for Dubedat in _The
Doctor's Dilemma_.

Many years later, Laura Lafargue and her husband committed suicide in
Paris, to escape the disagreeables of old age. Jean Longuet, a son of
Charles Longuet, leader of the left wing of the French social democracy,
is the only living descendant of Marx who plays an active part in public
life.

When the household had been reduced by the marriages of Jenny and Laura,
Marx removed to 41 Maitland Park Road, Haverstock Hill. Here he spent
the closing years of his life, which were "a slow death." From 1873
onwards, he suffered terribly from headache, which often unfitted him
for work. His long-standing liver trouble had also recurred. Engels
summoned his old friend and doctor Gumpert from Manchester, and Gumpert
ordered a cure in Karlsbad. With Engels' financial help, Marx was able
to visit Karlsbad in 1874, 1875, and 1876, and derived much benefit. In
1877, he took a course of the waters at Neuenahr. The liver trouble was
now better, but chronic stomach disorder, in association with headache,
sleeplessness, nervous exhaustion, and incapacity for work, were
ailments that defied medical skill. A stay at the seaside brought no
more than temporary improvement. His health grew worse from year to
year.

There is good ground for the supposition that his unsatisfactory general
condition was as much dependent upon psychical as upon physical causes.
His illness was characterized by profound depression, both bodily and
mental. The collapse of the International had seemed to him tantamount
to a failure of his life work, although his reason told him that the
break-up of the organization had been the outcome of objective
necessities, just as its foundation had been. Furthermore, he had hoped
that _Capital_ would have a signal success, and the reality lagged far
behind his expectations. The book was to have proved a lever which would
lift the world out of its old rut; but the world went rolling along in
that rut just as before, and as if the book had never been written. For
years, _Capital_ was ignored; and when "these tactics were no longer
accordant with the conditions of the time," it was mauled
uncomprehendingly by "the mealy-mouthed babblers of German vulgar
economics." Even such a man as Freiligrath could find nothing better to
say than that "on the Rhine many merchants and factory owners will
display great enthusiasm for the book." In view of such widespread lack
of understanding, it was a poor consolation to Marx to find "one reader
who really understood Capital," Joseph Dietzgen, a man of proletarian
origin, making his livelihood in Russia as a tanner.

There were additional reasons for Marx's depression. In Germany a
vigorous social-democratic movement had developed; but it went its own
way, fought its battles and formulated its tasks, without troubling to
ask his advice, and without expecting his sanction for its evolution.
True, Liebknecht kept up a regular correspondence with Marx and Engels,
asking counsel and help upon difficult political problems, and paying
due respect to the oracle in London. But Liebknecht was not the German
party, which in important matters was apt to disregard his wishes, and
to follow its own bent. Thus it came to pass that Liebknecht often
incurred Marx's wrath. In letters exchanged between Marx and Engels we
find much angry and even contemptuous criticism of him and his doings.
For these differences and disharmonies there was a deep-seated cause.
Marx, who had now been living in England for several decades, had lost
touch with Germany, and no longer possessed an intimate understanding of
the peculiarities of the German situation. He saw everything German in a
distorted perspective, with the inevitable result that many of his
judgments were erroneous, and much of the advice he tendered from London
was injudicious or impracticable. These discrepancies became conspicuous
when the Lassallists and the Eisenachers, weary of perpetual wrangling,
and yielding to the pressure of circumstances, came together at Gotha in
1875, and founded the united Social Democratic Party. Marx strenuously
opposed this step, subjected the programme of unification to a fiercely
destructive criticism, and, in a letter to Liebknecht, tried to give the
course of events the turn he desired. Liebknecht did the best thing he
could when he kept the letter in his pocket; but Marx was affronted,
felt himself shut out and robbed of his influence, was wounded in his
most sensitive spot, his vanity.

His relations with the French socialists were no happier. Not even his
sons-in-law would march in accordance with his orders, although the
orders were sent often enough. Though they remained cordial in private
relations, they took the liberty of going their own way. "Longuet is the
last Proudhonist," writes Marx to Engels in 1882; "and Lafargue is the
last Bakuninist! To the devil with them both!"

Most painful of all to Marx was the state of affairs in England. He had
lived and worked there for thirty years, but not a single grain of the
seed he had cast upon this ground had sprouted. There was, indeed, a
labour movement, but it took no notice of Marx or his teaching. Personal
relations with the leaders of the movement had been broken off; with
acrimony, as a rule. Nowhere was Marx held so completely at arms' length
as here.

The sense of being forsaken, the spiritual isolation, made his illness
more and more intolerable; and, on the other hand, the progressive
deterioration in his bodily condition made his mood more and more
irritable. After 1878, Marx was no longer able to do any useful
scientific work. He could not finish anything. His self-confidence had
been shattered.

At about this time, Frau Marx began to fall ill. Her life had been a
hard one, and now the end was coming, slowly and terribly, from cancer.
Making a last heroic effort, she fulfilled a long felt wish in the
summer of 1881, by going to Paris to visit her daughters there. When she
returned, Marx was laid up with bronchitis and pleurisy. Tussy and
Lenchen Demuth had devoted themselves to the care of the invalid, and
had had the pleasure of seeing him on his feet once more. Writing to a
friend, Tussy says: "Mother was in bed in the big front room, and Mohr
in the back room. These two, whose lives had been so closely
intertwined, could no longer be together. Mohr got over his illness. I
shall never forget the morning when he felt strong enough to go into
mother's room. It was as if they had been quite young again--she a
loving girl and he a loving youth, entering upon life together, instead
of an old man ravaged by illness, and a dying old woman, taking leave of
one another for ever."

Frau Marx died on December 2, 1881. When Engels entered the house, he
said: "Mohr is dead too." How true this was was shown by the rapid ebb
which now set in in Marx's forces. Writing to Sorge in December, Marx
said: "I have come out of the last illness doubly crippled, morally by
the death of my wife, physically because it has left a thickening of the
diaphragm and great irritability of the bronchial tubes." Engels did
everything in his power to promote a cure. Under medical orders Marx
visited the Isle of Wight. Then, in March and April 1882, he went to
Algiers, where the weather was unkind, being rainy and cold. May he
spent in Cannes, Nice, and Monte Carlo. In June and July, he was with
his daughter Jenny at Argenteuil near Paris; and he stayed during August
with Laura at Vevey on the Lake of Geneva. In the end of September he
got back to London, obviously much better, and in the mood for work. To
avoid the London fogs, he went again to the Isle of Wight, but here once
more the weather was unfavourable, and brought about a bad relapse.

On January 12, 1883, Marx's favourite daughter Jenny, Madame Longuet,
died suddenly. This was an overwhelming blow, and his own condition
promptly grew worse, so that he was dangerously ill when he returned to
London. The end came on March 14th. Writing to Sorge, late on the
following evening, Engels said: "For the last six weeks, every morning
as I turned the corner into the street, I was in terror lest I should
see the blinds down. Yesterday afternoon (the afternoon was the best
time to visit him) when I arrived at 2:30 I found every one in tears,
for it seemed that the end was at hand. I asked what had happened, and
tried to make them look at the hopeful side. He had only had a slight
haemorrhage, but there had been a grave collapse. Our good old Lenchen,
who has looked after him as assiduously as any mother ever cared for a
sick child, went upstairs, and came back to tell me that he was in a
doze, but I might go up. I found him lying there, asleep indeed, but in
the sleep from which there is no waking. He was pulseless and had ceased
to breathe. During the two minutes of Lenchen's absence he had quietly
and painlessly passed away." Already the day before, Engels had written
to Liebknecht: "I find it almost impossible to realize that this man of
genius has ceased to fertilize the proletarian movement of two worlds
with his mighty thoughts. What we all of us are, we are through him;
what the contemporary movement is, it is thanks to his activity in the
fields of theory and practice. Without him, we should still be wandering
in a maze of confusion."

On March 17th, Marx was buried in Highgate cemetery. The funeral was a
simple affair, the only persons present being Engels, Lessner,
Liebknecht, Longuet, Lafargue, and one or two other friends. Engels
delivered a funeral oration, which may be given at full length, for it
contains an admirable summary of Marx's life work.

"On March 14th, at a quarter to three in the afternoon, the greatest of
living thinkers ceased to think. He had been left alone for barely two
minutes; but when we entered his room we found that, seated in his
chair, he had quietly gone to sleep--for ever.

"The loss which his death has inflicted upon the fighting proletariat in
Europe and America, and upon the science of history, is immeasurable.
The gaps that will be made by the death of this titan will soon be felt.

"Just as Darwin discovered the law of evolution in organic nature, so
Marx discovered the law of evolution in human history. He discovered the
simple fact (heretofore hidden beneath ideological excrescences) that
human beings must have food and drink, clothing and shelter, first of
all, before they can interest themselves in politics, science, art,
religion, and the like. This implies that the production of the
immediately requisite material means of subsistence, and therewith the
extant economic developmental phase of a nation or an epoch, constitute
the foundation upon which the State institutions, the legal outlooks,
the artistic and even the religious ideas, of those concerned, have been
built up. It implies that these latter must be explained out of the
former, whereas usually the former have been explained as issuing from
the latter.

"Nor was this all. Marx likewise discovered the special law of motion
proper to the contemporary capitalist method of production and to the
bourgeois society which that method of production has brought into
being. The discovery of surplus value suddenly threw light here, whereas
all previous investigators (socialist critics no less than bourgeois
economists) had been groping in the dark.

"Two such discoveries might suffice for one man's lifetime. Fortunate is
he who is privileged to make even one discovery so outstanding. But in
every field he studied (the fields were many, and the studies were
exhaustive), Marx made independent discoveries--even in mathematics.

"I have pictured the man of science. But the man of science was still
only half the man. For Marx, science was a motive force of history, was
a revolutionary force. Whilst he took a pure delight in a purely
theoretical discovery, in one which had not and perhaps never would have
a practical application, he experienced a joy of a very different kind
when he was concerned with a discovery which would forthwith exert a
revolutionary influence on industry, on historical evolution in general.
For instance, he paid close attention to the advances of electrical
science, and, of late years, to the discoveries of Marcel Deprez.

"For, before all else, Marx was a revolutionist. To collaborate in one
way or another in the overthrow of capitalist society and of the State
institutions created by that society; to collaborate in the freeing of
the modern proletariat, which he was the first to inspire with a
consciousness of its needs, with a knowledge of the conditions requisite
for its emancipation--this was his true mission in life. Fighting was
his natural element. Few men ever fought with so much passion, tenacity,
and success. His work on the 'Rheinische Zeitung' in 1842, on the
Parisian 'Vorwärts' in 1844, on the 'Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung' in
1847, on the 'Neue Rheinische Zeitung' in 1848 and 1849, on the 'New
York Tribune' from 1852 to 1861; a great number of pamphlets;
multifarious activities in Paris, Brussels, and London; finally, as
crown of his labours, the foundation of the International Workingmen's
Association: there you have his record. Had Marx done nothing but found
the International, that was an achievement of which he might well have
been proud.

"Because he was an active revolutionist, Marx was the best hated and
most calumniated man of his time. He was shown the door by various
governments, republican as well as absolute. Bourgeois, ultra-democrats
as well as conservatives, vied with one another in spreading libels
about him. He brushed these aside like cobwebs, ignored them, only
troubled to answer them when he positively had to. Yet he has gone down
to his death honoured, loved, and mourned by millions of revolutionary
workers all over the world, in Europe and Asia as far eastward as the
Siberian mines, and in America as far westward as California. I can
boldly assert that, while he may still have many adversaries, he has now
hardly one personal enemy.

"His name and his works will live on through the centuries."

The inscription on the tomb reads as follows:

Jenny von Westphalen
The Beloved Wife of
Karl Marx
Born 12. February 1814
Died 2. December 1881
And Karl Marx
Born May 5. 1818; Died March 14. 1883
And Harry Longuet
Their Grandson
Born July 4. 1878; Died March 20. 1883
And Helene Demuth
Born January 1. 1823; Died November 4. 1890.

## Chapter 10: Appraisement

### The Man

If the materialist interpretation of history be, in very truth, the best
interpretation of the processes of history, it must hold good, not only
with regard to the masses who are the executors of these processes, but
also with regard to the individuals who embody this execution.

The application of the materialist interpretation of history to the
masses, as the executors of historical processes, is the task of
sociology.

Its application to individuals is the concern of psychology.

The substance of the materialist conception or interpretation of history
is as follows. Society (or, within a class society, the dominant class)
forms the social order out of the natural forces of production and the
extant relations of production. The structure of this material
foundation is reflected in the ideological superstructure. The
foundation and the superstructure have a dialectical reciprocal
interaction. Decisive for the character of the social order is the need
for safeguarding society, or for safeguarding its dominant stratum.

If we translate into psychological terms these principles of the method
of historical materialism, we get the following. Man forms his character
out of his organic constitution and his social and family position. The
biological and social interests that promote his safeguarding find
expression (unconsciously) in aims. The main trends of his behaviour
arise with reference to these aims. Opinions, conceptions, ideas,
manifest themselves as forms of expression of the individual's aim to
safeguard his own existence. Decisive for each one of us in the
formation of character and in the development of trends of behaviour is,
in the individualistic epoch, the urge to self-expression as an
individuality, an urge dictated by the circumstances of life. When, in
the light of these guiding principles, we contemplate the man
Marx--contemplate him solely as a man, apart from his work--our
attention is riveted by three characteristics:

First, his persistent ill-health, from which we infer that there was
constitutional weakness or organic defect.

Secondly, his Jewish origin, which he felt as a social stigma.

Thirdly, his position as a first-born child.

Each of these traits, a biological, a social, and a family trait, seems,
at the first glance, isolated from the others. There is nothing obvious
to show that they are interconnected. Still less do we see any obvious
reason for supposing that, as constituents of a whole, they can be
reduced to a common denominator.

Nevertheless, the method of the materialist interpretation of history
constrains us to connect them and unify them.

If we set out from the view that every organism is, in a general sense,
unified through its adaptation to the natural conditions of existence,
we shall perceive that all its constituents develop, coalesce, and
mutually further one another, as if they were animated by a unitary
purpose, and controlled by that purpose. From the purely biological
standpoint, we can say that this fundamental aim in the case of a living
organism is self-preservation, the maintenance of its life.

The human organism is distinguished from the organism of other living
creatures by this, that in man the biological aims are complicated by
social aims, which do not necessarily coincide with the biological
aims--for human sociology, in contradistinction to that of the animal
kingdom, has a tradition, has a history. Each generation of human beings
takes over the social content handed down from previous generations, and
has to elaborate this in the interest of its own maintenance.
Furthermore, social evolution runs a speedier course than biological,
and often runs a different course.

The organism of the individual human being is in a still more difficult
position. The individual is threatened, not only by the dangers of the
natural environment and by the dangers of society, but also by dangers
proceeding from other individuals. The aim of self-preservation is not
always in conformity with the aim of species-preservation, or of
society-preservation. Conflicts ensue.

The general aim of life is to pass from insecurity to security. Phrasing
this concretely, we get, in the biological domain, the aim to live long
and remain healthy. In the sociological domain, we get in addition the
aim to win a place in society, and thus to be enabled to fulfil the
tasks of occupation, marriage, and comradeship.

True, society is not a unity, for it consists of stratified classes, of
an upper stratum and a lower. Its sociological structure determines a
psychological valuation. The personal aim in life thus becomes an aim,
an individual urge, to avoid being outrun by others in the race of life,
an urge to achieve validity in one way or another. Subjectively, this
urge finds expression in the sense of individuality.

The lower the self-esteem, and the stronger therefore the feeling of
insecurity, the stronger is the urge to intensify the sense of
individuality, and the stronger therewith is the urge to secure
compensation for the perils of the dangerous situation of inferiority.
Appraised from the social standpoint, a comparative inadequacy for life,
whatever its kind, is always felt as inferiority. This sense of
inferiority generates an impulse towards exaggeration of the sense of
individuality. The process presents itself as a compensatory endeavour
to re-establish the lost mental balance; and it finds its counterpart in
the physical sphere, where organic defect is compensated by increased
organic activity.

It is a psychological characteristic of the capitalist epoch that, by
proletarianization and individualization, it has robbed the great masses
of the population of their traditional securities, and has made a sense
of insecurity a generalized psychological trait. Inasmuch as the sense
of insecurity is felt almost exclusively in comparison with a neighbour
whose position is secure or is believed to be secure, the sense of
inferiority has become a universal psychical feature of contemporary
man.

This general sense of inferiority may, under special conditions, be
excessively stimulated, and may then be so intensified as to dominate
the individual's mind, and to enlist all the mental faculties in its
service. That is especially apt to happen in the case of those who
suffer from a weak constitution, from organic defects, from grave social
disadvantages, an unfavourable family position, and a bad preparation
for life owing to a defective education. It is the typical outcome of a
bad start in life, or of an inadequate equipment for life's struggle.

Should a strong sense of inferiority be intensified by the failure of
attempts at compensation, or should fresh factors of insecurity come
into play, the attempts towards compensation will be excessive, and
compensation will take the form of overcompensation. The individual's
aim will no longer merely be security, validity; the aim will be to
prove oneself worth more than others, superior to others, superhuman,
godlike.

Thenceforward the individual's mental life will range from the
intensified sense of inferiority as starting-point, towards the
intensified ideal of individuality as aim. Consciously in part,
unconsciously for the most part, but always in a unified fashion, the
manifestations of the personality range between these two poles. From
the time when he becomes aware of his own ego, down to the day of his
death, all the individual's doings, all his wishes, all his thoughts and
feelings, all his judgments--however contradictory and enigmatic they
may seem--move along this line from below upwards. Everything is coerced
into the service of the ideal of individuality: the body, sex life, the
intelligence, logic, memory, experience. Purposively and in unitary
fashion, thought and feeling and action express this struggle away from
the sense of inferiority and towards an intensified sense of
individuality. We discern numerous manifestations of behaviour whose
significance can only be understood with reference to this aim. The sum
of these methods of behaviour is what we speak of as character. In his
character traits, the man is building paths which, as he believes, will
lead him most swiftly and safely to the heights towards which he
aspires. With unconscious purposiveness, he "makes" experiences, stores
up tendentious memories, formulates judgments. In each new period of
life he finds confirmation of his previous opinions concerning himself,
of his previous outlooks on the world and on life. He is perpetually
repeating the same round of luck and ill-luck; is having again and again
like experiences with women, colleagues, and friends; is always
reiterating the same impressions and judgments. What seems to be a
change is, as a rule, only a change of form, the new man being merely
the old one under new conditions. Those, therefore, who are not deceived
by the ostensible contradictions of the surface, can discern in every
individuality a unified and circumscribed image, in which all the
movements of the mind are dictated by a central aim, are controlled by a
unified tendency; and in which each function plays its appropriate part.
Biological and social aims become building material incorporated into
the individual psychological aims. The whole man stands before us as a
circumscribed unity.

Unified and unambiguous, too, is the use which the man makes of the
means he finds to his hand in his bodily constitution, his social
position, his situation within the family. Placed by birth in special
circumstances which are not of his own choosing and which it is not
within his power to alter, he must accommodate himself to the extant. He
does accommodate himself, in accordance with his life plan. He turns a
constitutional weakness, an organic defect, to his own uses; he learns
how to take advantage of his social position; he is able to avail
himself of his family situation. Every shortcoming, every disadvantage,
becomes, under his (unconscious) manipulation, a means for promoting his
advance towards his aim. This aim is always the achievement of
superiority. If he is unable to reach the desired height by the
application of the means at his disposal, he uses them as extenuating
circumstances, to exonerate himself and to free himself from
responsibility.

If, in the light of these considerations, we turn to examine the
personality of Marx, we see the before-mentioned biological, social, and
family traits in a new and instructive light. But the traits in question
are only the elements, the first crude constituents, of a psychological
analysis--with which we have to content ourselves, since we lack more
detailed materials as regards the life of Marx. Obviously, they do not
suffice for an exhaustive analysis. Many of the gaps in our observation
will have to be filled in artificially; a schematic construction will
have to supplement the defects of observation. Nevertheless, we can get
a great deal farther than was possible by earlier psychological methods.
Even if we do not achieve definitive knowledge, in this respect
psychological analysis is no more inadequate than the other sciences,
for science has to leave many ultimate problems open.

While quite young, Marx began to suffer from liver trouble, which was
considered a family disease, and which Marx believed himself to have
inherited. Throughout life, he suffered from a secret fear of cancer of
the liver, which was supposed to be the doom of members of his family.
Probably his liver trouble was closely connected with a general weakness
of the digestive apparatus, a disorder of the whole gastro-intestinal
tract; for, in addition to the ordinary symptoms of liver trouble, he
suffered also from various morbid conditions, such as loss of appetite,
constipation, gastric and intestinal catarrh, hemorrhoids, furunculosis,
etc., which are to be regarded as manifestations and accompaniments of
grave disturbances of metabolism. Essentially, he suffered from
metabolic disorders.

This biological condition is of great importance. Obviously, so grave a
disturbance of so vital a function could not fail to take effect on
Marx's psyche in the form of a strong sense of insecurity and
inadequacy. Beyond question, this was the chief cause of his sense of
inferiority.

To this was superadded a social factor, his Jewish descent. In the early
part of the present book I showed how great were the social, legal, and
political disadvantages from which the Jews suffered in Germany before
the time of the March revolution, and how the Jews of Rhineland in
especial were despised and persecuted. Marx felt that as a Jew he had
been given a bad start in life, one which would seriously handicap his
prospects of advancement. No doubt the conversion of the family to
Protestantism had done something to make up for this, but his racial
origin could not be washed away by the waters of baptism. No one could
ever forget that Marx had been born a Jew, for not only was his facial
type markedly Hebraic, but his whole aspect shouted a Semitic origin.
Baptized or unbaptized, Marx remained a Jew, recognizable as such at the
first glance, and burdened therefore with all the odium attaching to his
race. One may presume that from early childhood he had been on the
defensive, earnestly endeavouring, by means of intelligence and
industry, to compensate for the disadvantages of birth. Even if his
Jewish origin proved no drawback to Marx, or only entailed obstacles
which it was easy for him to overcome, he may none the less have felt
his descent to entail upon him a social stigma, which must have aroused
in him a sense of inferiority. For actual inferiority is not needed to
arouse the sense of it; mere suspicions, assumptions, imaginations, and
exaggerations suffice to induce this mental state. Very striking is the
unusual acerbity with which, when he is discussing the Jewish problem,
Marx attacks "the empirical essence of Judaism." He writes: "What is the
mundane basis of Judaism? Practical needs; self-interest. What is the
mundane cult of the Jews? Huckstering. What is the Jews' mundane god?
Money." Marx denounces the Jews as prototypes of the commercial spirit
and of a monetary economy; he makes Judaism the symbol of bloodsucking
capitalism. The reader cannot escape the feeling that he is
ostentatiously showing his opposition to Judaism, is demonstratively
severing himself from his own race, and by emphasizing his
anti-capitalist tendencies is declaring himself before all the world not
to be a Jew. But one who takes so much trouble to declare that he is not
a Jew must have reason for being afraid of being regarded as a Jew. I
think there can be no doubt that this social factor of Marx's Jewish
origin intensified his sense of inferiority, and must have increased his
urge towards compensatory achievements.

Finally, it is probable that his family position reinforced the same
trend. Marx was a firstborn child, an only son, and the hope of the
family. Since intellectual achievements were part of the family
tradition, great hopes were entertained of his talents in this
direction, especially seeing that he was a precocious and remarkably
clever boy. Certainly at school his success justified high expectations.
He was regarded as a wonder-child. At seventeen he was ripe for a
university career.

But high gifts entail high obligations. Above all is this the case when
they are associated with responsibility for the revival of a lost
prestige. Still more exacting are the demands made of one who has shown
precocious talent. When there has been an unusually rapid advance up to
the age of seventeen, everyone expects this advance to be sustained at
the same speed. These febrile anticipations are entertained by the
person most concerned, and act upon him with the painful stimulation of
a whip. Besides, Karl Marx's father earnestly hoped that his son would
enter one of the learned professions, and the father's authority seems
to have had a great influence upon the son's education.

All the greater was the disappointment when, after the brilliant start,
young Marx seemed at a standstill. During the first year of his life at
the university, there appeared to be a relaxation in his forces, and a
lull in his ambition. Serious disputes ensued between him and his
father, so that at one time there was a risk that his university career
would be broken off. That disaster was avoided, but Marx's apparent
failure at a time when his family was looking to him for success had
shaken his self-confidence. A condition of anxiety, doubt, and confusion
supervened. He began to be afraid that he would never fulfil these great
expectations. He shirked his lectures, avoided examinations,
procrastinated the choice of a profession--these being typical
manifestations of profound discouragement. His ambition intensified his
sense of responsibility so much that he was almost incapable of regular
work.

To summarize, we may say that the three characteristic features of
Marx's individuality--poor health, Jewish origin, and the fact that he
was firstborn--interact, and combine to produce an intensified sense of
inferiority.

The resulting compensation begins with the formulation of an aim. The
lower the self-esteem, the higher the aim. The position of a child, with
the difficulties and needs attendant on that position, is retained as
foundation. Throughout life, Marx remains the young student, who is
afraid of disappointing others through the inadequacy of his
achievement, and therefore sets himself aim beyond aim, piles task upon
task. He cannot escape the voices calling after him: "You must show what
you can do! Must climb! Must have a brilliant career! Must do something
extraordinary! Must be the first!" This will-to-conquest and this
urge-to-superiority dominate all the phases of his existence as worker
and fighter. Indefatigably he trains his understanding, schools his
memory, sharpens his wits. He is diligent to excess. Like Saint-Simon,
who made his valet exhort him every morning, so Marx exhorts himself,
day after day, in the tones of an ambition that masquerades as a sense
of duty: "Get up! You have great things to perform! You have a world to
win!" Thus is the aim formulated. He must do something extraordinary,
unique; he must be the only one of his kind; he must assume the highest
responsibilities. The urge to be godlike forms his plans in life, and
guides all his activities.

But whatever aims a man may set himself, in his endeavours to attain
them he is restricted to the use of the means with which he is endowed.
He must work with the tools at his disposal. What were these, in Marx's
case? A sickly frame, Jewish descent, and the position of firstborn. If
he wishes to attain greatness, it must be by the use of these
instruments. He must press them into the service of his compensatory
endeavours.

Persons with digestive disorders, with troubles of the stomach, the
bowels and the liver, are well-known to be prone to disorder of the
affective life. They are depressed, capricious, spiteful, discontented
creatures; they lack a proper contact with the environing world; they
are full of suspicions; they are unable to enter into sympathetic
relations with others; they are isolated, embittered, always on edge,
ever ready to scratch. It seems as if the bodily difficulties,
inhibitions, and convulsions, had been transferred into the mental
sphere. In very truth, the organic material substratum secures
expression in the psychical superstructure. In the latter, as in the
former, there are the same disturbances, the same irregularities, the
same anomalies of function. The orderly succession of income and output
has been disarranged. Either the output of thought substance is checked,
this leading to a sort of spiritual constipation; or else there is a
lack of spiritual income, and then the mind is starved. On the other
hand there may be an immoderate absorption of spiritual sustenance,
leading to a kind of mental distension; or there may be an extravagant
expenditure, followed by mental exhaustion. Always there is a lack of
due measure; always there is what may be called a disorder of mental
metabolism. The example of the child recurs here, the child that eats
too little or too much, that is over-dainty or gluttonous. In later life
these become persons who never acquire a sound relation towards the
important vital function of nutrition; they become misers or
spendthrifts, are stingy or extravagant, are pedants, croesuses, etc.

Marx suffered typically from this sort of disorder of spiritual
metabolism. Always capricious, depressed, spiteful, he behaved like one
affected with indigestion, tortured by flatulence, or racked by biliary
colic. He was a hypochondriac, and, like all hypochondriacs, made too
much of his bodily troubles. Just as he had a poor relation to his food,
ate little, irregularly, and with little appetite, stimulating his
desire with mixed pickles, spices, vinegar, caviare, and the like; so he
had a bad relation to his work and to his fellow men. Bad eaters are bad
workers and bad comrades. They either do not eat at all or they overfill
their stomachs; they either idle or overwork; they either shun their
fellow men or make friends with Tom, Dick, and Harry. They are always in
extremes. Neither their stomach, nor their brain, nor their spirit, can
endure such sudden antitheses. Just as in youth Marx did not engage upon
the regular study of something which might have proved a means of
livelihood, so later he was incapable of regular intellectual work which
would have nourished the whole man. He had no profession, no office, no
regular occupation, no dependable means of livelihood. Everything was
improvised, capricious, the sport of chance. Instead of attending
lectures in his student days, and thus preparing himself for a
professional career, he filled his mental stomach with philosophical and
literary mixed pickles. He lacked discipline, a sense of order, a
feeling for a proper relation between income and expenditure. Now, for
months at a time, he would not write a line; then he would hurl himself
at his work like a titan. By day and by night he devoured whole
libraries, heaped up mountains of extracts, filled thick manuscript
books, left behind him piles of half finished writings. Yet in all this
work he had as little pleasure as he had at his meals; he groaned,
cursed, deplored his fate, described himself as a slave of the
intelligence, martyrized his family. Often, when his household was
urgently in need of the fees he might have earned, he left it to Engels
to write the necessary newspaper articles, while himself luxuriating in
the ancient classics, poring over the most precious treasures of the
libraries, devouring costly literature like caviare, or giving himself
up with delight to the entirely unremunerative study of the higher
mathematics. He could never get enough of these intellectual dainties,
just as he could never eat enough caviare and mixed pickles to satisfy
him. But regular work bored him, conventional occupation put him out of
humour. Without a penny in his pocket, and with his shirt pawned, he
surveyed the world with a lordly air. He detested social intercourse
upon equal terms. He only cared to clink glasses with persons who
praised and admired him. He took refuge in cynicism from any profounder
manifestation of feeling. He was one who knew nothing of the joys of
convivial intercourse; was a solitary, an eremite. Proneness to solitude
and to severance from the community is apt to be intensified in persons
suffering from disorders of metabolism, for they are inclined to regard
their troubles (since these concern the digestive and excretory organs)
as unclean and disgusting. They are apt to react with a mania for
cleanliness, a fanaticism for tidiness, pedantry. Their personal ideal
is: to be the cleanest, the most immaculate, the noblest and most
sublime person in the world. From such therefore is recruited the army
of moralists, of the apostles of good behaviour, of the heroes of
virtue, of the revealers of a new ethic or of an ideal mode of life. The
aspiration towards an especial purity of character, towards absolute
immaculacy, towards perfect purity of motives, towards sublimity of
philosophy, has in most cases such an origin. Paradoxical as it may
seem, moral and aesthetic rigorism springs out of the bowel.

Marx was one of those persons who are overpowered by a perpetual urge
towards the highest, the purest, the most ideal. It was not merely his
ambition to be the most famous among those who have studied socialist
literature, and the most learned of all the critics of economic science;
he also wanted to be the most efficient revolutionist, and pre-eminent
among the advocates of revolution. He wanted to expound the purest
theory, to establish the most complete system of communism. As a
preliminary to the demonstration of this superiority, he must prove that
the socialist theories of all his predecessors were worthless, false,
contemptible, or ludicrous. He had to show that the socialism of the
utopists was a crazy-quilt of outworn and questionable ideas. That
Proudhon was a suspect intruder into the realm of socialist thought.
That Lassalle, Bakunin, and Schweitzer were tainted with bourgeois
ideology, and had probably sold themselves to the enemy. He, Marx alone,
was in possession of the true doctrine. His was the crystal-clear
knowledge; his was the philosopher's stone; his the immaculate
conception of socialism; his the divine truth. With contemptuous wrath,
with bitter mockery and profound hostility, he rejected all other
opinions, fought against all other convictions, than his own, persecuted
all ideas that had not originated in his own brain. For him, there was
no wisdom except his own, no socialism other than the socialism he
proclaimed, no true gospel outside the limits of his own doctrine. His
work was the essence of intellectual purity and scientific integrity.
His system was Allah, and he was its prophet.

In marked contrast with the lofty pedestal on which Marx thus placed
himself in the world of theory, was the position he occupied as soon as
it ceased to be a question of great ideas and abstract problems, and
became a question of petty realities and the concrete tasks of life. In
that world of concrete reality, Marx failed no less utterly than he
triumphed in the realm of abstract intelligence. His failure was as
pitiful in the one as his success was magnificent in the other.
Essentially, however, there is no opposition between these two
phenomena.

Persons affected with metabolic disorders, those who cannot regulate
their digestive functions properly, almost always show themselves to be
persons who are likewise unable to control the functioning of their
economic life. In that field, too, they are unable to achieve a due
balance between income and expenditure. They do not know how to put two
and two together, even when, like Marx, they are adepts in the higher
mathematics. They cannot keep petty accounts. They are thoroughly bad
housekeepers. They are penny wise and pound foolish. They earn badly and
spend badly. Their economic sense is either non-existent, or else it is
hypertrophied. They suffer from a disorder of economic metabolism.

In the present volume, countless instances have been given to show how
hopelessly ineffectual Marx was in the domain of domestic economy.
Throughout life, he was hard up. He was ridiculously ineffectual in his
endeavours to cope with the economic needs of his household and his
family; and his incapacity in monetary matters involved him in an
endless series of struggles and catastrophes. He was always in debt; was
incessantly being dunned by creditors, persecuted by usurers, drained by
bloodsuckers. Half his household goods were always at the pawnshop. His
budget defied all attempts to set it in order. His bankruptcy was
chronic. The thousands upon thousands which Engels handed over to him,
melted away in his fingers like snow.

This state of affairs was not the outcome of any moral lapses, nor yet
of a tragical destiny. It was simply the consequence of a grave
disturbance of function, of a disorder of metabolism, which affected the
man's whole system, working itself out in the economic field as well as
in the bodily and mental fields. Financial crises visited Marx's
household with the same inevitable frequency as that with which boils
troubled his body; and disputes with friends and foes were as common
among his experiences as were financial distresses. When we look closely
into the matter, we see that all alike were symptoms of one and the same
trouble, manifesting itself in three separate departments of
life--equally painful, equally burdensome, equally tormenting in them
all. But even a whimsical and malicious disorder of metabolism has a
positive side as well as a negative one, this confirming the old
experience that a man's greatest weakness is at the same time his
greatest strength.

Inferiority seeks compensation. The sense of inferiority, stimulated
ever and again by recurrent ill-success, failure, and defeat, gives no
rest until the minus has been compensated by a plus. If the minus be an
inherited defect, the plus becomes a matter of personal achievement.
Thus only was it that Demosthenes the stammerer could become the
greatest orator of antiquity, that the deaf Beethoven proved the most
famous of all musicians, that the hideous Michelangelo was able to hand
down to posterity the most marvellous of all depictions of human beauty.

In like manner the sufferer from gastric trouble, the sufferer from
metabolic disorder, feels a perpetual urge to compensate the negative of
his physical condition by some positive achievement. Making a virtue of
necessity, he wins victory out of defeat. It depends only on his courage
how far he can secure compensation. In the endeavour to compensate for
gastro-intestinal inferiority, one will become a famous caterer or chef;
another will become a specialist in diseases of the digestive system; a
third will discover some nutritive salt, will invent some special method
of dietetics; a fourth will be a vegetarian propagandist, will advocate
the use of unfired food, and so on. Always the compensatory aim arises
out of the perspective of the actual inferiority. Already in childhood
we can note how the ideas and wishes as to a future occupation are
determined by unconscious feelings of inferiority. Always the hidden aim
is to make good for an inherited defect by a surplus of achievement.
Whether the achievement takes the form of something which counts in the
concrete world, or only takes the form of a neurotic expedient, is a
question of individual courage.

Marx sought for spiritual compensation in the realm of ideas. His
compensatory endeavour made him the founder of an economic theory, the
creator of a new economic system. His aim was the widest possible. He
became the saviour of humanity at large, and built for eternity.

The man who had a poor appetite and a difficult digestion propounded a
plan for the reorganization of the economic structure of society whose
result was to be that every one was to have plenty to eat and an
adequate supply of all the conveniences of life. The man who had always
been short of money, perpetually in debt, announced and fought for the
establishment of a world order in which everyone was to have a
sufficient share in the world's goods. The man who was a master of
unsociability, and was incapable of true friendship, issued as a
watchword that all men were to be brothers. The man who did not know how
to spend a shilling wisely, elaborated in his own mind the most profound
of all the theories of money; and created imaginatively the splendid
thought edifice of a revolutionized economic system, established upon
new and communal foundations.

As compensation for his sense of inferiority, he made it his life work
to be the scientific founder of an economic and social order in which
all were to be able to do what he could not do, and all were to have
what he lacked.

In point of character, Marx differs in no essential respects from the
men of his day and our own. They are all neurotic; they all suffer from
a sense of inferiority, strive towards superiority, show themselves
vain, ambitious; eager for success, greedy of power.

But Marx, though he does not differ from others in essentials, differs
in the matter of degree. He differs alike in respect of the unusual
intensity of his sense of inferiority, and in respect of the unusually
high quality of his means of compensation. Thus he presents us with a
classical example of the way in which the utmost subjective need
releases in a man the most tremendous energies, develops them on a
titanic scale, equips them with splendid creative faculties, sets them
to work in the womb of the social process, where they ripen to historic
deeds, and whence they are born into the light of day. The individual
human being evokes the energies and achieves the work. He becomes the
fulfiller of a function under stress of subjective necessity, as an
outcome of the coercion of his personal needs and demands.

When the work thus performed is one of supreme worth to society, one
which society recognizes as of supreme importance to its own
safeguarding, society qualifies it as a work of genius.

### His Work

If a man does not succeed in compensating his sense of inferiority by
actual achievements, he contents himself, in the end, with the semblance
of achievement.

Since, however, his increased impulse to self-assertion makes him feel
the admission of incapacity or ill-success to be a defeat and a
disgrace, he seeks for some expedient whereby he can evade
responsibility for failure. His favourite method, in such circumstances,
will be to have recourse to an illness which will relieve him of his
burden. It is not only that illness will make others kindly and
considerate towards him. Furthermore, in the general view, illness is
the work of an objective and mysterious power to which man succumbs
through the decrees of fate. In especial, such a view is an outcome of
the doctrine (no longer scientifically tenable, but still widely held),
according to which illnesses and anomalies are handed down automatically
from generation to generation, so that the persons who suffer from them
are the subjects of an inevitable doom. This outlook is an aid to one
who wishes to regard his illness as an excuse for failure in life.

One who adopts such an expedient will have little difficulty in
discovering somewhere in his organism a weakness, however insignificant,
a defect, however trifling, which he can press into the service. By a
process of training, deliberately though perhaps unconsciously pursued,
he is able in course of time to develop this convenient lack or defect
into the illness which will serve his turn. With increasing adroitness,
he finds it possible to arrange that the morbid manifestations shall
always occur when they suit his purpose. The purpose is, of course, to
explain failure as the outcome of the overwhelming power of the illness.
With long practice and special skill, such a person is able to make of
his illness a charter which will excuse him from all further effort. Now
he has gained his end. He will no longer be expected to prove his
mettle, and will therefore be safeguarded against any further defeat.
His illness has become a harbour of refuge.

For this advantage, the patient is willing to pay the price in the form
of pains, renouncements, material expenditure, troublesome methods of
treatment. To be freed from daily demands upon his efficiency, and from
the consequent daily prospect of dishonourable defeat, is worth more to
him than what he has to pay in the form of the inconveniences of his
malady. Besides, now that he is an invalid, he has gained advantages
that were unknown to him when he was in good health; he has become the
centre of a circle of devoted attendants, and is richer for interesting
experiences. He is a person of worth, now that he is among the sufferers
who are sympathized with, protected, and cared for. Above all, he has
risen in his own esteem, for the perennial excuse, "If I were not ill
..." enables him to fancy himself "otherwise" capable of boundless
achievements, destined for unrivalled successes. In these circumstances,
he will have enough self-conceit to regard his most trifling
achievements as heroic deeds.

Physicians and psychologists give the name of "neurotics" to persons of
this kind, persons who by such expedients escape the tasks of life, and
are able to content themselves with the semblance of achievement.
Behaviour which aims at an escape from the duties, the tasks, the
functions of life, without renouncing the claims made on life, and
unaccompanied by any recognition that such behaviour is anti-social and
anti-evolutionary, is known as "neurosis." There are today very few
persons wholly free from neurotic traits. Neurosis is a universal
contemporary characteristic.

Unquestionably Marx was a neurotic. For every one familiar with neurotic
symptoms, the neurotic traits in his clinical history are unmistakable.
His supposed affliction with a congenital disorder of the liver
obviously served him as a sort of lightning-conductor, as a pretext for
escaping from difficult situations. Experience has abundantly shown that
autosuggestion is competent to induce severe cardiac spasms, bilious
attacks, asthmatic or epileptic paroxysms, haemorrhages, simulated
burns, paralyses, etc. It is easy enough, therefore, especially when we
may suppose a pre-existent genuine organic weakness or disorder of
function, to develop a first-class liver trouble or metabolic disorder
whenever it is wanted. I am not talking of deception, of deliberate
fraud. Modern psychiatry has shown that psychological factors are at
work in many illnesses; and the day may well come when a number of
mysterious and incurable maladies now regarded as hereditary will be
revealed as unconscious artifacts, the masks for discouragement. In the
case of Marx's illness, the characteristics are so obviously those of a
cleverly operated unconscious mechanism, that there can be no doubt of
its neurotic character. He believed that he was perpetually dogged by
disaster, was continually afflicted with inefficient collaborators, was
prevented from performing his duties as breadwinner, was disappointed
again and again by untrustworthy friends, and was perpetually being
entangled in conflicts and quarrels. In his own view, of course, his
ailments were the basic cause of his troubles.

Yet however much Marx had recourse to neurotic tricks and expedients,
when in search of extenuating circumstances, he never, mentally
speaking, surrendered wholly and permanently to neurosis--and this is
the decisive matter.

Even though Marx failed to solve the problem of earning a livelihood, he
was never a man to shrink from hard work. On the contrary, his industry
and his powers of work arouse our amazement.

Although he made a poor showing as breadwinner, he was otherwise a happy
and successful husband, a tender father, was able on into old age to
delight his charming and clever wife, and to retain her affection.

Though he was at feud with all the world, he never forfeited the
friendship of Engels, who was worth hundreds of other friends, and was
not a man to give his friendship to the first comer.

A sense of inferiority like that of Marx, intensified by various
factors, may certainly induce neurotic behaviour, may lead in the end to
neurotic flight from the world, but it does not compel one who suffers
from it to sacrifice himself wholly to neurosis. Whether and how far a
man gives way to the tendency to run away from life, yields to the inner
urge to escape into a masked passivity--depends upon the amount of
community feeling with which he is endowed, the amount of community
feeling he is able to transform into a courageous facing of realities,
into positive activities.

Marx had recourse to the neurotic protective mechanisms whenever he
stood alone, whenever he was delivered over to his own weaknesses
without the support of a community: as breadwinner, as the writer of
articles for periodicals, as controversialist, as the defender of
personal ideas and theses. From dread lest he should be put to the test,
he was unable to show any community feeling in these private matters.
But as soon as he was engaged in, a wider field, he was as if
transformed. Then community feeling surged up in him from the depths.
Just as Antaeus developed a giant's strength as soon as he touched the
earth, so Marx, as soon as he felt the ground of the community under his
feet, was endowed with the power of courageously ignoring all the
uncertainties, doubts, pusillanimities, and cowardices, which would
otherwise have hindered his advance. Here what seemed more was really
less, for the imaginary great community demanded from him less courage
than did the actual small community. Nevertheless, on the ground of that
greater community, his powers ripened, his courage grew, his work throve
to become a historic deed. His monumental greatness was the outcome of
the overwhelming powers of a spiritual community-sense.

When Marx entered the political arena, the German bourgeoisie was
striving to secure social recognition, and to get possession of the
powers of the State. It needed superabundant energies to cope with the
situation into which its development had brought it. In order to
mobilize all available forces and to throw these into the fighting
front, it represented its struggle for power as a struggle for power on
the part of the people in general, and represented its ideal as a
universally valid human ideal. The consequence was that every one
capable of enthusiasm for the ideals of progress and liberty, became an
enthusiast for the ideals of bourgeois progress and bourgeois liberty.
The amalgamation of all individual wills into one great communal will
gained the victory.

But within the womb of the bourgeoisie, the proletariat had been
engendered. As long as it was still attached by the navel string of its
petty-bourgeois and peasant origin, it identified its interests with
those of the bourgeoisie. For that reason, it accepted the war aims of
bourgeois emancipation and bourgeois revolution, fought for the
bourgeoisie on the barricades, and took the bourgeois proclamations of
humanist ideals at their face value. But directly the victory had been
won, a gulf opened between the rights and living conditions of the
bourgeoisie and the rights and living conditions of the proletariat. The
bourgeoisie, having safely reached port, dropped its humanitarian aims,
and turned to attack the proletariat.

The conditions under which this took place were the most unfavourable
for the proletariat that can be imagined. It had just been sacrificing
blood and life and strength for the purposes of the bourgeoisie. It was
still bleeding from a thousand wounds; it was weakened and exhausted; it
was staggering along confusedly in a situation which it did not yet
fully understand. This was the moment at which its sometime friends
treacherously attacked it. Panic-stricken and despairing, the
proletarians flung themselves on the ground, submitting to their evil
fate. For a decade, they showed no understanding of history, displayed
no sign of a political consciousness. But the decade passed. Overcoming
their despair, shaking off their lassitude, the masses rose to their
feet, looked this way and that, revived the demand for liberty and
humanitarian aims which had been abandoned by the bourgeoisie, and
hoisted the flag for renewed struggles. But the bourgeoisie of the
sixties was not the bourgeoisie of the forties. The ten years after 1848
had been turned to good account for the economic and social
strengthening of the bourgeois position. The bourgeoisie had become
great, rich, and powerful; was in possession of excellent means for
defending its position; and was determined to crush unmercifully any
attempt at advance made by the proletariat. The pressure exercised by
the bourgeoisie on the proletariat was overwhelming. The proletariat,
powerless economically and socially, with no culture of its own,
depressed by the failure of the revolution and the experience of the
counter-revolution, delivered over to the onslaughts of an adversary
possessed of enormously superior force, was profoundly discouraged.

Here, upon the plane of class life, was a neurotic situation analogous
to that described above on the plane of individual life. In the course
of historical evolution, the proletariat found itself faced with a great
task, its very existence depending upon the proper performance of that
task. It suffered from anxiety, it did not feel equal to the demands of
the time. It attempted to evade these demands, to take refuge in
political indifferentism, in the semblance of achievement, in neurotic
behaviour. At the historic moment, its failure seemed imminent.

Nothing but an act which would bring encouragement would save the
imperilled cause of the proletariat. A treatment that would overcome the
sense of inferiority, a method of education that would re-establish
self-confidence and revive self-esteem, was essential. The proletariat
needed an elixir that would restore hope, needed a miraculous energy
that could only be inspired by a great conviction, needed a
quasi-fanatical obsession. Then came Marx, and supplied this magic
potion. His community sense had led him, with instinctive logic, to
espouse the cause of the proletariat. He saw that the conditions of
proletarian impotence were the outcome of the structure of bourgeois
society, and he drew the inference that the causes of this impotence
could only be removed by changing the structure of society. With this
end in view, he annulled the individualist concept of personality,
replacing it by the collective concept of class--a concept which he
originated. He deprived individual struggles for individual power of
meaning and justification, putting in their place the notion of the
community and the struggle on behalf of the collective power of the
proletarian class. He made the class struggle a law of historical
evolution, and depicted socialism as the necessary and logical outcome
of that struggle.

By expounding in a scientific system his views on the foundations and
connexions, the laws and the consequences, of social evolution, and by
incorporating that system into his writings, he secured compensation for
the torments of his subjective sense of inferiority. By placing his
writings and his doctrine at the disposal of the proletariat, he
provided this class with the means for compensating its social sense of
inferiority through the practical application of the knowledge thus
gained--once more, then, by achievement.

At a particular point in historical evolution at which a class, owing to
psychical inhibitions and to the stagnation of its energies, is
prevented from fulfilling the mission allotted to it by history and
urgently needing fulfilment, it becomes a life-or-death question for
society to overcome the obstacles that are hindering the course of
evolution. For this an energy, a strength, is needed far exceeding the
customary. There is requisite a superhuman achievement, a heroic deed.
Only one who is subjectively aware of so profound an inferiority that
nothing but a titanic achievement, a heroic deed, will restore his
spiritual equipoise--only such a one is competent for such a task. But
such a one is competent when the comprehensiveness and the quality of
the means at his disposal are rightly accordant to the strength of his
urge.

Thus a vitally important service is done to society or to one of its
social classes. Thereby, society, or the class, is saved from
destruction. For this reason, the person who performs such a task
receives the highest honour, inasmuch as he becomes known as a genius.

Genius is something more than quality, form, achievement, work. Above
all, genius is a social category. It expresses a definite relation
between society and an individual. That relation exists when an
individual supreme achievement is effected in a phase of social
development wherein this particular achievement is supremely important
in the interests of social safeguarding. In the genius, the line of the
compensatory achievement of an individual intersects with the line of
the compensatory need of society or of a class.

Appraised from the outlook of the proletariat, Marx was a genius. What
was his achievement, as regards the vital needs of the proletarian
class? By his teaching, when the proletariat was in a phase of extreme
discouragement, he inspired it with the uttermost courage. "Historical
evolution is on your side," he shouted to the proletariat. "Capitalism,
brought into being by the laws of historical evolution, will be
destroyed by the inexorable working of these same laws. The bourgeoisie,
the business manager of the capitalist system, appeared on the stage of
history with that system, and must make its exit when that system walks
off the stage. You, proletarians, keep capitalism going by your labour,
and maintain the whole of bourgeois society by the fruits of your
industry. But socialism will be a necessary organic outcome of
capitalism, the essence of the latter being implied in the essence of
the former. With the end of capitalism, comes the beginning of socialism
as a logical consequence. You proletarians, as a class, being the
incorporators of the forces and tendencies which will do away with
capitalism, must necessarily make an end of the bourgeoisie. You merely
need, as a class, to fulfil the evolution which your mission calls on
you to fulfil. All you need is to will! History makes this as easy as
possible for you. You need not hatch out any new ideas, make any plans,
discover a future State. You need not 'dogmatically anticipate the
world.' You need merely put your hands to the task which is awaiting
you. The means by which you will do it are to be found in the unceasing,
purposive, consistent fighting of the class struggle, whose crown will
be the victory of the social revolution."

"Evolution is on your side!" With this word of power, the proletariat
was awakened from its lethargy, was delivered from its sense of
inferiority.

"You need only will!" With this magic potion, it was raised to its feet
and set a-going. Its paralysing anxiety had been overcome, its
uncertainties had been shaken off, its lack of faith had been conquered
by self-confidence.

Socialism, till then an aim of religious ardour, a wonderland of
fanciful hopes, an artifact of the imagination, had now been
scientifically demonstrated as the ripe fruit of evolution, which would
fall into the laps of those who shook the tree. Marx's teaching came in
black and white to give the proletariat the certainty that socialism
would be realized.

This gospel, not the outcome of blind faith, but based upon a keen use
of the intelligence, and upon the most rational logic, could not fail to
provide the proletariat with an unprecedented dynamic impetus. It
animated the workers to throw off their chains, filled them with a hope
enabling them to unlock all the doors between them and the future.

If we consider Marx and his work from such a standpoint, we perceive
that the historical greatness of the phenomenon which now passes by the
name of Marxism depends neither on the man nor on his work. It depends,
rather, on the fact that Marx, at the critical moment of history,
bestowed his teaching on the proletariat as the vehicle of an upward
movement which had become historically indispensable.

Thus envisaged and thus appraised, it does not matter whether we regard
Marxism as an eternal truth, or as a temporarily valid guiding fiction:
whether the system is consequential and coherent in all its details; or
whether it contains gaps, contradictions, and untenable theses: whether
the theory of the imminent collapse of capitalism complies with the
demands of scientific method, or has merely the restricted value of a
fascinating apotheosis. What Marxism had to effect (the shaking of the
proletariat out of its historical namelessness, the compacting of it
into a political power, the making of it into a conscious factor of
historical evolution, the placing of it on the stage of history as the
author of and the actor in its own drama), all these things Marxism has
achieved. If, over and above this, as the facts show, Marxism was and is
logically sound, then Marxism has done even more than history could have
demanded of it.

Only those who are content to look at the surface of things can believe
(though the view is widely entertained today) that the logicalness and
validity of Marxism have been undermined by the most recent happenings
of history.

Marxism, being primarily called upon to stir up the proletarian masses,
to make them collect their forces, and to lead them on to the
battlefield, must necessarily display itself at the outset in a guise
which would encourage optimism; in a guise which, by representing
historical evolution as the guarantee of the liberation of mankind,
would make the workers believe in their own mission. To gain headway, it
must relentlessly clear out of the path all rationalistic and utopian
systems of socialism, and must inexorably proceed on its own course.
Today, when its first work is finished, Marxism begins to assume a new
aspect. In our own time, not merely can Marxism occasionally recur to
the systems of the utopists and the rationalists; it is directly forced
in this direction by the practical demands of the day, by the growing
claims for positive achievements in the class struggle. Vulgar Marxism,
the Marxism of the crowd, the Marxism of those who regard the mechanism
of things as the essential factor of evolution, must yield place to a
transformed Marxism, to a profounder Marxism, to the Marxism of those
who look upon the activities of human beings as the main factors of
evolution.

Therewith our appraisement of Marx's personality has likewise been
profoundly modified. Whereas persons of the last generation, in view of
the opposing nature of their interests, reflected in their ideology,
looked upon Marx either as a criminal disturber of the peace and a
devil, or else as a saint and as an infallible pope--those of our own
generation can admit him to have been a man equipped both with human
weaknesses and with human strengths, both with human vices and with
human virtues. We are, indeed, compelled to regard him thus, unless we
would refuse to apply the materialist interpretation of history to
individuals as well as to general processes. Modern psychology, as used
in the present work to throw light upon the character and the behaviour
of a human being, is nothing other than the application of the method of
historical materialism to the study of the human mind.

Marx had to be an obstinate, pig-headed, intolerant thinker and
investigator; had to regard other people's opinions with suspicion; had
to be hostile towards every alien trend; had to be cantankerous,
dictatorial, fanatically obsessed with the rightness of his own
convictions, fiercely opposed to any deviations from, any falsifications
of, his ideas. He had to concentrate his genius, his understanding, his
creative energy, for decade after decade, upon this one point, upon this
one scientific task; had to neglect his calling, his family, his
livelihood, his friends. He had to be whipped on by overweening
ambition, blinded by intolerable selfishness, goaded day and night by a
torturing sense of inferiority--that he might be equipped for his
formidable achievements. The main thing was the work which had to be
done; the qualities of the doer mattered little. Or, rather, the doer of
the work which had to be done, had to be spurred to his task by an
impetus such as could only be furnished by the neurosis from which Marx
suffered! Today we have different problems to solve, and they must be
solved by highly qualified persons who have freed themselves from
neurosis; must be solved by champions of the class struggle who approach
the undertaking with a keen sense of responsibility, an awakened
consciousness, and a strongly developed community feeling.

To each age its own problems! Had Marx, as a neurotic, been content with
the semblance of achievement, his work would have crepitated in the
void, and he himself would have been a figure tragical in its futility.
As things were, however, he performed a supreme task in the history of
his own time and of subsequent times. That is why the class which he
thus helped to become conscious of its own life and of the future which
history holds in store for it, honours him as its greatest genius.
