---
title: The Left Wing
author: Rutgers, S.J.
date: 1916
description: The following is a collection of seven articles the Dutch communist and comrade of Gorter and Pannekoek wrote for International Socialist Review, the journal of the revolutionary wing of the Socialist Party of America. The first part, "The Battle Cry of a New International," is not by title an installment of the "The Left Wing" series, but was regarded as such by the editors.
...

## The Battle Cry of a New International (May 1916)

There is a dawn of hope; there is new life among the ruins of Europe;
there is the actual beginning of a new International! There is only a
beginning and it is concealed by the hatred of the old party leaders,
but it is living and it is growing. It stands for the new facts on the
old fundamentals. Its revolutionary spirit takes its force from the
solid ground of economic facts in the never-resting class struggle.

The first meeting of French, German, English and comrades from other
belligerent and neutral nations during the war, at Zimmerwald in
Switzerland, was a promise, was the beginning of a new understanding.
But the resolution adopted by the majority of this Zimmerwalder
Conference proved to be a compromise, was confusing by its statement
that the right of self-determination of peoples must be the
indestructible foundation of national relations. And what was still
worse, the accepted resolution did not indicate a definite method of
fighting, did not come to a clear understanding that our only hope is in
a series of mass actions on the industrial as well as on the political
field.

In compromising with those who did not even recognize that a split in
the old parties is inevitable and necessary, that a reorganization
of the old International with the old leaders, who surrendered to the
enemy when their resistance was needed most, is impossible, the
Zimmerwalder Conference lost its practical influence. It was a first
symbol, a hopeful effort, a historical event, if you like, but not a
BANNER around which to gather the defeated and scattered troops to
inspire enthusiasm for a new fight.

The results soon proved its failure. The minority group from Germany, as
represented at Zimmerwald by Ledebour and Hoffman, to whose influence
much of the compromising was due, made a declaration in the German
Parliament, which showed better than discussions could do, the failure
of the Zimmerwalder compromise. Altho they voted against the war
credits, as promised in Zimmerwald, they declared at the same time, that
in this war, because there were no rebellious soldiers in Germany, the
German military forces gained a most favorable position, etc. This, of
course, means, that French and Russian Socialists should have to support
their governments; it means Nationalism instead of International
Solidarity.

This illustrates the inadequacy of the _majority_ resolution of
Zimmerwald and it teaches us, for the hundredth time, the lesson that
compromise is a bad policy for Socialists.

### The minority

There, however, was a minority at Zimmerwald who made their own
resolution, which was voted down by the majority because it meant a
split in the old parties, a new International, and a new revolutionary
fighting tactic.

This minority kept together also after the Conference, publishing
International pamphlets (International Flugblatter (I.F.), address:
Fritz Flaxten, 23 Rotachstr. Zurich, Switzerland), and its policy is
embodied in the minority resolution as presented to the Zimmerwalder
Conference and officially approved by groups in most of the European
countries (see below). There soon will meet another Conference in which
there will be no compromising and in which no doubt a fighting
resolution will be adopted: the resolution of the left wing of the
Zimmerwalder Conference.

In each country, and we may expect also in the United States, there will
be a group supporting this policy, fighting for it Internationally. And
our INTERNATIONAL REVIEW, which always took the part of uncompromising
class struggle and of revolutionary mass action, will no doubt be in the
front line, will no doubt become the rallying point for those, who, not
satisfied with theoretical discussions only, will prepare for a
practical fight against the new form of Imperialistic Capitalism,
together with those of our European comrades who remained International
Socialists in the storms of an intensified class struggle.

The minority resolution of the so-called Left Wing of the Zimmerwald
Conference has already been accepted and signed by the following groups:
A delegate from the revolutionary Socialists in Germany, representing
the group of "International Socialists of Germany"; a delegate from the
revolutionary Socialists in Switzerland; the Central Committee of the
Socialist party in Russia; the Executive Committee of the Socialist
democrats of Russian Poland and Lithuania; the Central Committee of the
Social Democrats in Lettland; Ungdomsforbund der Schwedischen and
Norwegian social-democrats.

The Social-Democratic minority party in Holland (S.D.P.) also accepted
this program as a basis for co-operation at a second International
Conference.

The Resolution reads as follows:

>The world war, now ruining Europe, is an imperialistic war, waged for
>the political and economic exploitation of the world to get hold of
>markets, raw materials and spheres of investment, etc. It is a product
>of capitalist development, which, at the same time that the world
>management becomes international, leaves in existence the national
>capitalist states, with their conflicting interests.
>
>When the bourgeoisie and the governments try to mask this character of
>the world war, by presenting it as a war, forced upon the nations for
>national independence, the [sic] means deceiving the proletariat,
>because this war is waged for the very purpose of subjugating foreign
>people and foreign countries.
>
>As fraudulent is the legend about a defense of democracy in this war,
>for Imperialism means the unscrupulous supremacy of Big Capital and
>political reaction.
>
>The overcoming of Imperialism is only possible by doing away with the
>antithesis, from which it originated, which means Socialist
>Organization of the Capitalist Society, for which objective conditions
>are ripe.
>
>At the beginning of the war the majority of the labor leaders failed to
>apply this only possible tactic against imperialism. Overwhelmed by
>nationalism, carried away by opportunism, _they surrendered the workers
>to imperialism the very moment of the outbreak of the war and abandoned
>the fundamentals of Socialism, thereby giving up the real fight for
>proletarian interests_.
>
>Social patriotism and social imperialism, as accepted in Germany, not
>only by the openly patriotic majority of the former Socialist leaders,
>but also by-the center of the party around Kautsky, in France by the
>majority, in England and Russia by a part of the leaders (Hyndman, the
>Fabians, the trade-unionists, Plekhanov, Rubanowics, the group Nasche
>Djelo), form a greater danger to the working class then the bourgeois
>apostles of Imperialism, because they mislead the class-conscious
>workers by abusing the Socialist flag. _The uncompromising fight
>against Social Imperialism is fundamental to a revolutionary
>mobilization of the proletariat and the rebirth of the International_.
>
>It is the problem before the Socialist parties, as well as the
>Socialist minorities in the now Social imperialistic parties, to awake
>and to lead the mass of the workers in a _revolutionary struggle_
>against the capitalist governments, to conquer political power for the
>Socialist organization of society.
>
>Without giving up the fight for every inch of ground under present
>Capitalism, for every reform that will strengthen the working class,
>without denouncing any means of organizing and propaganda, the
>social-democrats, on the contrary, will have to use all of the reforms
>in our minimum program _to intensify_ the present _war crisis_, as well
>as every other social or political crisis of capitalism, to an attack
>on its foundations. When this struggle is fought _with Socialism as its
>issue_, the workers will become unaccessible for a policy of
>subjugating one people by another, as the result of continuing the
>domination of one nation by another, and the cry for new annexations
>will not tempt because of any national solidarity, which has now led
>the workers to the battle-field.
>
>The beginning of this struggle forms _the fight against the world-war,
>to end the general murder as soon as possible_. This fight requires
>_the voting against war credits, the giving up of any participation in
>capitalist governments_, the criticism of the capitalist,
>anti-socialist character of the war in Parliament and in the legal, and
>if necessary, illegal press, the uncompromising fight against
>social-patriotism and the use of _every action among the people,
>resulting from the war (misery, losses in the war, etc.) to organize
>street demonstrations_ opposed to the government. It requires the
>propaganda of _International Solidarity in the trenches_, the support
>of _economic strikes_ and the endeavor to enlarge these, whenever
>conditions are favorable, into political, strikes. _Civil war, not
>civil peace_, is the issue.
>
>Contrary to all illusions, as to the possibility of getting a permanent
>peace or a beginning of disarmament by whatever decree of diplomacy and
>governments, the revolutionary Social democrats must show the workers
>over and over again, that the _social revolution_ alone can bring
>permanent peace as well as the liberation of the human race.

American Comrades! This resolution breathes the fighting spirit of a new
generation.

It means a fight against Imperialism and Patriotism, against the defense
of capitalist Fatherlands; it means a fight against "socialistic"
imperialism and "socialistic" patriotism as well. It means intensifying
our economic action to a series of mass actions, street demonstrations
and industrial strikes, as a means of disorganizing the capitalist state
and strengthening the power of labor. It means the social revolution as
a practical issue of the class struggle; civil war till the final
victory.

This always has been the spirit of our INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST REVIEW.
Maybe some of our comrades have temporarily lost somewhat of their
self-confidence and fighting spirit. Those have been mistaken. There
will be new life, new and bigger fighting, new methods in future. Don't
stay behind; be in the first ranks and others will follow. Conditions
are ripe, where are the hands to reap the harvest?

## The Left Wing: Imperialism (June 1916)

NOTE: Dr. S.J. Rutgers, who has been for years associated with the best
known socialists of Holland and Germany, as a member of the
uncompromising Social Democratic Party of Holland, and who is in close
touch with the European comrades who are planning for a new Socialist
Conference, to be wholly International in its aims, has consented to
write a short series of articles for the REVIEW, of which this is the
second. His general subject is the attitude toward Imperialism and
toward Internationalism of the LEFT WING, or revolutionary group, in
each of the Socialist parties in Europe today. These groups seem to us
to contain within themselves the only hope of a real working class
International. We want every reader of the REVIEW to read these articles
carefully, and discuss them with comrades who have become discouraged
and left the Socialist Party. We believe that an overwhelming majority
of American Socialists will welcome the plan of action suggested in
these articles, and will desire to swing the Socialist Party of America
into line with the new International that is even now taking definite
form. We believe these articles will prove to be the most valuable
series we have ever published in the REVIEW. They will put the American
comrades, who want a revolutionary organization, in touch with the
comrades across the ocean who have like aims and a more definite
program. - EDITORS.

The editors have asked me to give more information about the principles
and action advocated by the European Socialists of the Left Wing, who
signed the resolution printed on page 648 of the INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST
REVIEW for May. In so doing, it is of foremost importance to make clear
what these groups understand by _Imperialism_.

This is not so simple as it may seem, and the dictionary will not help.
For Imperialism is a living conception, that has already an evolution of
its, own, and that will broaden its meaning until it has taken definite
form in the heads and hearts of the workers.

Originally the word Imperialism was used in the more restricted meaning
of foreign colonial expansion in its modern form, resulting in
monopolistic tendencies, and in the investment for export of fixed
capital such as steel and machinery, instead of textiles and other
commodities for direct consumption. This form of Imperialism attracted
general attention in Europe, where it originated, and it soon became
clear that foreign aggression was not simply a colonial problem, but
that Imperialism includes a number of tendencies in modern capitalism
that materially affect the relations of social classes. Imperialism
means not merely an aggressive _foreign policy, but an_ aggressive _home
policy_ as well.

In Europe it had already been noticed that for some ten years preceding
the present world war there had been an absolute stagnation in political
reforms. After a period in which some political results, some so-called
social laws, were secured, there followed a period of reaction. Not only
did the bourgeoisie refuse to make any further concession to the working
class, but some of the advantages already granted were actually
withdrawn. The greatly admired social laws in Germany, for example,
enacted some forty years ago, have recently been mutilated; by taking
away from the working class the greater part of its influence over the
management of the funds.

It has become evident that the significance of European parliaments is
on the decline, while the importance of the executive and the senate is
generally increasing; that there is a growing tendency among the judges
to exercise political influence, and that the police grows more powerful
and more brutal. Wherever there was a clash between military and civil
government, the latter has had to back down, and attacks on free speech
and a free press are more frequent. There was a general reaction all
along the line, and back of these reactionary measures were the same
interests that cause foreign aggression -- namely, big capital and
monopoly.

It was gradually realized by close observers of these tendencies among
the European Socialists, that foreign aggression and home aggression
were two faces of the same monster. They came to see that Capitalism,
under the absolute rule of highly concentrated and monopolistic
financial interests, means a new phase of development with new forms of
the class struggle; it means the broadening of the class struggle into
an international world struggle. It is this new policy of the capitalist
class, under control of financial, monopolistic capital, that European
Socialists now mean when they speak of Imperialism. In this sense
Imperialism is _the_ present day form of the class struggle.

Among the characteristics of this new class-policy in Europe are:
Aggressive, brutal home policy; no results from parliamentary
action; declining influence of congress with increasing power of the
executive; brutal police; reactionary judges; growing influence of
militarism; attack on free speech and a free press.

_But that is exactly what you have in the United States!! -- in a form
and an intensity that puts Europe in the shadow!!_

All the symptoms of your own case lead to this one diagnosis: _Highly
advanced Imperialism of a special American variety, with retarded
development of foreign aggression_.

No one can fail to see this, and to me it was a kind of revelation,
because it solved at once a problem that has been haunting many of us
over in Europe.

Most of the European Socialists who were interested in American
conditions reasoned as follows: In Europe we have succeeded in getting
some social reforms, and we expect gradually to get more, together with
a development of democratic influence on the government. In the United
States, conditions being economically more advanced, and democratic
forms better developed, the result should be: more political reforms;
yet we observe that the results are, on the whole, negative. Then we
shrugged our shoulders and murmured something about the difficulties of
so many different languages, corruption, etc., but we knew that these
were by no means a satisfactory explanation.

Now as soon as we realize that present-day capitalism has _not_ a
growing tendency for social reforms and democracy, but that, on the
contrary, the old middle class democracy is on the decline, and social
reforms, as a means to keep labor quiet and content, have lost much of
their attraction to capitalists, the American situation loses much of
its mystery.

European Left Wing Socialists had already emphasized, over and over
again, that in fighting the power of Big Capital, the labor politicians
as such were powerless, and that labor can gain only by putting its
organized mass-power against the capitalist power as organized in
trustified industries and in the State. These smaller groups of European
Socialists had, however, a hard job in fighting their own official party
leaders. This all-day fighting did not leave much time to study American
conditions, and moreover the outbreak of the war meant a temporary
disorganization of the Left Wings.

Since then there has been a readjustment, and the war, which was the
practical, tho horrible proof, that the official parties were wrong and
the principles of the Left Wing were right, has clarified the problem,
and has already produced a new literature and a start towards the
consolidation of future tactics in the class struggle.

At the same time the interest of European Socialists in the problems of
the United States, now that it prepares to enter the field of world
politics, has increased; and we can now understand, that _because_ the
United States is ahead of Europe in industrial development, your home
policy must be brutal, and social reforms are lacking. Far from
expecting more political reforms and more influence of the workers upon
the government than is found in Europe, and far from expecting a less
brutal suppression of the workers in this so-called "democratic"
country, it proves logical to expect a more complete failure of middle
class democracy under the iron heel of financial capital. Even without
much aggression in the direction of foreign colonies, Imperialism, being
the latest form of the capitalist class struggle, must put its mark on
all of _your_ social institutions as well.

The American comrades will realize that, in the more fundamental sense
of the word, Imperialism has already developed in your country, even
farther than it has in Europe, and that the stagnation of your political
party is due to this development. In recognizing this will be found the
only hope for getting out of the dead-lock.

Nevertheless the United States shows signs of a new life. Mass action,
which in Europe, up to now, has been advocated without much result, has
grown up in the United States out of the practical facts -- not as a
theory, but as a necessity of working class conditions. Spontaneous mass
actions on the economic field, and a general recognition that the future
belongs to a higher form of organization along industrial instead of
craft lines, may be considered as the more positive and hopeful results
of Imperialistic development in the United States.

That American comrades have not hitherto recognized Imperialism as the
basic cause of the difficulties in carrying on the proletarian
organization along the old lines, is due to the fact that Imperialism in
America has not shown its most familiar face of foreign aggression.
This, however, has only been a temporary phase, caused by the big
possibilities in developing your own "new world." Now that your masters
have decided to embark upon world politics, the last excuse for not
recognizing actual conditions has disappeared, and even those who still
imagine they have some political "democracy," must admit that the coming
wave of militarism will sweep away all that may be left of the old
methods and old ideals.

That foreign aggression and militarism are on their way in the United
States, no one can deny. Preparedness overshadows all other problems,
and there is not the least doubt about the meaning of this
"preparedness." Your government has already tightened its grip on Haiti
and on some of the "independent" republics in Central America; it has
already practically decided upon intervention in Mexico. The fact that
your president dreads the consequences of his "punitive expedition,"
knowing that real intervention at the present moment might mean the
defeat and annihilation of the present army of the United States, may
give some delay, but will not alter the final results. It is typical of
the unscrupulous methods of Big Capital, that they would not hesitate
one moment to sacrifice the nation's army, and even some of their own
temporary interests in Mexico, in order to stimulate the necessary
national feeling and militaristic spirit at home, and to secure their
future interests, not only in Mexico, but in the world at large.

If you wish to know what will be your future politics, you have simply
to watch the activities of your bankers. The fifty million dollars
invested in the "American International Corporation," organized by the
National City Bank, affiliated with the Rockefeller interests, is of
more importance than all the acts of Congress in a whole session. The
increasing number of branches of United States banking houses in foreign
countries, are the forerunners of Imperialistic capitalism, and pave the
way for this aggressive form of capitalism, as missionaries did for the
old style of colonial exploitation. The fact that each university is
requested to send two graduates to be trained at the National City Bank
for well-paid jobs in South America and elsewhere, illustrates the
interests of the middle class in Imperialistic policy. There can be no
greater mistake than to think that behind preparedness are _only_ the
interests of armament manufacturers. Those interests may be powerful;
they could not dominate the whole nation, if it were not for
Imperialism, binding together the different groups of capitalists with a
new strong _ideology of world power_.

It is disappointing to see the lack of understanding among the workers,
just at the time when the forces of aggression are organizing
efficiently. Take for example the "International Trade Conference,"
where hundreds of bigger and smaller manufacturers came together with
the big banking interests to discuss ways and means for the better
exploitation of the world, and especially of South America. It was
certainly touching to hear these big bankers explain that their
patriotic aim was to stimulate American industry, that they wanted to
give good service for small profits, etc. Of course these passages in
the speeches were for the public and the press, none of the interested
parties being fooled by them. And altho not on the official program,
there arose at this meeting a gentleman who had general attention and
sympathy, showing a picture, on which were indicated in brilliant colors
the big part of the total product that went to labor, and relatively
small parts left to the different forms of profit. And he proved that in
Europe the conditions were not quite so hard for capital, and that there
was not much in foreign trade and foreign markets unless this big share
of labor in the United States could be reduced considerably. General
applause followed, altho the chairman explained that this gentleman was
out of order, meaning that such a truth should not be spoken out loud.
This incident gives an excellent illustration of the fact that a
reduction of the share of labor in its product, which means _home_
aggression, is another face of that same Imperialism that prepares for
_foreign_ aggression: both faces together showing the new and brutal
form of the class struggle.

There has been a lack of understanding and an almost criminal lack of
interest among the workers of the United States as to Imperialism,
probably because it was supposed to be a special European problem. Many
Socialists did realize that the problem would come to America some time,
but it was not thought very actual. As soon, however, as you see
Imperialism in its broader sense, and in the light of your own American
conditions, it becomes the most important problem in actual tactics; it
means moreover for you a chance for the rebirth of your own Socialist
movement.

This is so all-important, that in our next article it will be necessary
to prove more completely, that the broader conception of Imperialism, as
understood in Europe by the Left Wing, is no mere clever piece of
construction, but that it is based upon and grows out of solid economic
facts.

NOTE: The address of the Left Wing of the Zimmerwalder Conferenz was
misprinted in the May issue of the REVIEW and should read Fritz Platen,
Rotachstr., 28, Zurich, Switzerland. There is another typographical
error at the top of page 648 in the declaration of Ledebour and Hoffman
who voted against the war credits because there were no _foreign_
soldiers in Germany, which is a nationalistic argument and accepts the
principle of defending capitalist fatherlands.

## The Left Wing: Economic Causes of Imperialism (July 1916)

In analyzing Imperialism in its broader sense, as the term is understood
by the Left Wing of the European Socialists, we found that this kind of
Imperialism is quite familiar to American workers in their every-day
class struggle, also that Imperialism is at the bottom of the failure of
parliamentary action, and of the temporary set-back in the class
struggle of the wage-workers of the United States.

This important issue (Imperialism) makes it necessary for us to consider
closely the economic facts, which go to show, that the aggressive
foreign policy, to protect the investments of capital for the
exploitation of undeveloped foreign countries, and the aggressive,
brutal, home policy take their origin from the same special economic
causes.

Given the elementary economic fact, that the share of labor in its
product is determined by the cost of its reproduction, that is, the cost
of living, according to historical standards, influenced within certain
limits by the fighting power of the workers; given also the all
important tendency under capitalism of an ever-growing productivity of
labor; the result is, an increasing tendency for expansion of the
markets. That the products should be disposed of by increasing the
purchasing power of labor is not likely to happen, unless labor should
get into power, which means the end of the Capitalist system. For the
capitalist class to consume the growing product in unlimited luxury is
against the most essential characteristic of capitalism, which demands
that the surplus value be invested in new and bigger industries, more
highly developed machinery, etc., bringing certain ruin to those
capitalists that fall behind in the race. To invest the surplus value in
more productive machinery means increasing the difficulty of finding a
market, unless there is expansion at the same time.

To a certain extent the means of production may create their own market,
which strengthens the present characteristic of the supremacy of iron
and steel and basic industries, as compared with textiles and other
similar commodities in an earlier period of capitalism, but the rapid
growth of modern machinery at the same time tends to stimulate the
output on all fields of capitalistic production. So we can easily
understand that expansion is one of the most fundamental characteristics
of capitalism.

Now since all this is a normal feature of capitalism, it does not, even
tho it is at the bottom of imperialism, account in itself for the advent
of what we have called a new phase of capitalism. We might say, that
this new development into Imperialism is an example of a dialectic
development, in which a quantitative change turns at a certain point
into a qualitative one -- but such a statement will appeal only to a few
of the more philosophic socialists.

Keeping, however, to every-day facts, it will be easy to understand how
this fundamental change came about.

The ever-growing concentration and the technical development did not
affect all branches of production to the same degree. On the contrary,
this concentration and trustification did affect first of all some of
the basic industries: steel, coal, copper, oil, etc. In most of these
basic industries, there developed a tendency toward monopoly, while at
the same time other industries were far behind in their development, and
continued along the old lines of capitalistic production.

Now we all know, that "free competition" is one of the fundamentals of
capitalist economics; that in the early days of capitalism this free
competition was the all-important slogan from which developed the
ideology of "freedom," which played so important a part in the
French Revolution, as well as in the policy of the bourgeois at a time
when they still believed in bringing in a better world.

Free competition forms a most important element in the capitalist
economy. Although it does not affect directly the problems of surplus
value and exploitation of the wage workers, it constitutes the
regulating factor in the division of the surplus value among the
different groups of capitalists, assuring each an equal return upon an
equal sum of money invested. The capitalist, being "free" to invest his
money where he thinks it most profitable, will shift it from industries
with smaller profits to such as offer higher returns. Investors,
however, are only interested in the total returns on their investments,
regardless of whether this is in fixed capital, machinery, etc.,
yielding no surplus value, or in labor, which produces all of the
surplus value. This brings about a shifting of capital and of surplus
value from the less-developed to the more highly developed
industries--automatically regulated by the price of commodities; these
selling above or below their values in a way to keep the profit in each
industry at about the average rate.

Within the limit of an article, it is only possible to mention these
fundamental problems, which are treated in the third volume of Marx's
"Capital." Those who are not familiar with these theories will
nevertheless be able to understand the general meaning and to compare
the results derived from the application of the theory with the
every-day facts. So they are invited to proceed.

Given monopolistic tendencies in some of the basic industries, it
follows that the capitalist law, regulating the price of the basis of
free competition, becomes fallacious, and is partly superseded by what
the monopolists call "price policy" -- a policy well described by a
typical phrase derived from American railroad methods as "all the
traffic will bear."

Let us suppose that there is a perfect monopoly in one of the basic
industries, such as the production of steel. Then the price of steel to
a certain extent can be fixed arbitrarily by the monopolist. What will
be the limit under these circumstances?

The monopolist cannot escape the laws of value, and he does not increase
the amount of surplus value by his price policy. He may be in a position
to reduce the standard of living of the wageworkers to a certain degree,
not, however, as a monopolist, but as a powerful master. For even if the
monopolist reduces the standard of living by means of high prices, it
will depend upon the relative power of labor whether it is compensated
by an increase in wages. The economic struggle of labor has always been
for an actual (or a desired) standard of living, not for a certain money
wage, regardless of what can be bought with it. And although, as a
general rule, a monopolist will be at the same time a powerful master,
the worker will always have to receive a wage on which he can live, so
that his exploitation can continue.

But where, if not from labor, does the monopolist get his extra profit,
when he increases the price of his products? The answer is that he pumps
a greater part of the general surplus value into his own barrel, by
reducing the share of his fellow-capitalists, and he can go on pumping
until -- until the profits of the other capitalists are reduced to a
certain standard of income, more or less according to historic
conditions, that allows them to carry on those industries that are not
yet ripe for being controlled directly by Big Capital.

So we find a new element entering the capitalist economy, which
influences the profits of the independent capitalists in a way which
greatly resembles that in which the salaries of employees and the wages
of laborers are fixed, and although the "standard of living" is higher,
there is the same tendency to reduce this standard gradually.

There remains, of course, a competition among the smaller capitalists
themselves, to get a greater share of what is left by Big Capital, and
besides, we must not forget that there is no such thing as a complete
monopoly. But the tendency to increase the profits of Big
Capital at the expense of the other capitalist groups is indisputable,
and has most important results.

Monopolistic Big Capital getting an extra profit as compared with other
capitalists, it is logical that the big interests want to invest their
profits in some equally profitable way. This means that they will use
their enormous profits principally in two ways: in industries that will
soon be ripe for combining with other highly developed industries; or in
extending the highly developed industries that have already monopolistic
tendencies. The development of industries of lower organization into a
higher capitalist form is a process that cannot be forced in a given
situation, beyond certain technical and social limits. Thus the second
possibility, that of extending the existing monopolistic enterprises,
becomes of first importance. And here we are at the bottom of
imperialism in its foreign aggression, with steel and oil interests
and the extractive industries in control, preferably in their
generalized form of financing banking capital.

In the United States, until very recently, conditions have been such as
to induce Big Capital to pay more attention to the first form of
investment, by subjugating less developed industries, under its own
control. At the same time, there were opportunities for developing the
western part of the United States, which gave room for quantitative
expansion, without foreign aggression. Now that this possibility has,
relatively speaking, come to a standstill, foreign aggression is decided
upon by Financial Capital, and you may be sure that this will be carried
out with efficiency and without the slightest scruples.

We have thus shown very briefly the results of economic developments as
affecting big monopolistic capital. But how about the rest of the
capitalist class?

Since Big Capital pumps its extra profits out of less developed
capitalistic enterprises, some of us might expect that the majority of
capitalists would combine to fight Big Capital. And indeed there has
been some fighting of this kind. The United States has witnessed several
attempts to fight monopolies, and an equal number of failures to
accomplish anything. The anti-trust laws have been used against labor
unions, but have had no visible effect upon the Rockefeller interests.
There is unconscious humor in the big signs posted in some of the
smaller New York lunch rooms, printed on paper from the paper trust, in
which the appetite of customers is stimulated by the legend: "We Buy No
Products from Any Trust." As this assumes that they have oil fields,
anthracite mines and steel mills of their own, the only solution of the
statement seems to be that these lunch-rooms must themselves be part of
a gigantic trust.

It is highly interesting to realize, why it is that this fight against
Big Capital is such a failure. On one side we find a small number of
interested individuals, on the other side the great majority of
capitalists, in a country with so-called "democratic institutions," and
without even so much as militarism to protect the interests of the few.
We observe the majority making up their minds to attack the few, and
failing, failing lamentably and giving it up, to become the obedient
servants of Big Capital. Is not this mysterious, and can labor maintain
any hope in its own victory in view of such facts?

Here is a brilliant example of the all-importance of economic facts, of
economic power, when backed by historical tendencies.

Small capital is historically doomed; it is not an indispensable
economic factor. And the more highly developed, the more powerful an
industry is, the greater its chance of emerging into Big monopolistic
capital. The feeling of dependence upon financial Capital is already so
overwhelming in the capitalist class, that any serious opposition is
impossible. In fact, if any capitalist were to venture a serious attack
on the Big interests, he can be most easily ruined. The tendency of
history is to do away with "independent" capital, and this makes the
smaller capitalists powerless. The tendency of history can not do away
with labor, however; on the contrary, Big Capital derives its power from
labor. In this fact lies our power and our hope.

The failure of capitalist attacks upon monopoly implies, of course, the
absolute dependency of the capitalist class upon Big Capital; it means
the control of the latter over the whole field of social and political
life. It means therefore, that the tendency of Big Capital toward
Imperialism becomes a general policy of the whole capitalist class.
Since the smaller capitalist can not resist Big Capital, their only
possible policy is to try to make the best of the situation by
supporting Big Capital, and seeking a share in the profits that result
from foreign and home aggression. For as against Labor, all the
capitalists have a common interest; they all live from surplus value,
and they all try to keep labor cheap and submissive. Moreover, Big
Capital is perfectly willing to grant a certain higher standard of
living and some material advantages to those who are needed to keep
labor down; this includes not only little "capitalists" but the higher
salaried employees as well, and even some elements of the laboring
class. Big Capital is able and willing to pay for services, but it will
not allow any form of independent thought or action. Even the highest
official of a corporation or the President of the United States will be
"fired" if he acts counter to the fundamental interests of Big Capital.

This means the end of old style "politics," in which the conflicting
interests of different capitalist groups might be skilfully used by
brilliant labor leaders to further the interests of the working class
(or of themselves). This means, that we have arrived at what Marx
predicted in the Communist Manifesto, "the splitting up of society into
two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each
other; Bourgeoisie and Proletariat." It means absolutism, brutality,
reaction; it means in one word "Imperialism," not only as foreign
aggression, but as a home policy of the ruling class as well. It _means
the justification of the European conception of Imperialism_.

And it means even more. It means a tendency towards a more complete form
of industrial concentration, in which the whole powerful organization of
the capitalist State will be put into the direct service of the
controlling Financial Interests, to exploit the workers more
efficiently. _State Capitalism_ is the logical outcome, because this
means the highest form of capitalist organization of industries, and at
the same time constitutes the political form best adapted to serve the
interests of the various capitalist groups.

The large group of better-paid employees and officials, the
so-called new middle class, who depend upon their salaries, may
reasonably expect to be better protected in their standard of living by
a state organization, with an official standardization of salaries, than
under privately controlled monopolies. The so-called "independent"
capitalists as a group are, as we have seen above, practically in the
same position as the salaried employees. And Big Capital, which will
control the organization of the new monopolistic state, will find it the
most effective machine that can be devised to enslave the workers, and
therefore will accept this form of imperialism.

State Capitalism will mean the most efficient form of organization in
the struggle for foreign aggression and world power, as well as the
strongest form of class organization against labor, making labor strikes
a crime against the nation, and international solidarity high treason.

No great effort of the imagination is required to picture this
aggressive form of future State Capitalism, in which the most brutal
State, with the most effective militarism in the trenches as well as in
the workshop, will have the best chances for world power.

But this is a conception of the future, with some uncertain elements,
above all the uncertainty whether labor will continue to support the
capitalist class in its "national" ambitions -- whether labor will fail
to recognize its duty to its own class under Imperialism.

But _Imperialism as a class policy_ of modern financial capitalism under
_present_ conditions, for the exploitation of the world-proletariat, is
no conception of the future; it is a living fact before our eyes.

This form of Imperialism is without doubt highly developed in the United
States, and the fact that the workers have not realized it, and have
kept to the old and obsolete forms of lifeless democracy, accounts for
the scanty results accomplished by the socialist movement on this side
of the ocean. There is a beginning of new life, a beginning of
mass-democracy, but it lacks a clear understanding of its relation to
the past and the future, as well as to the rest of the world. As soon as
red-blooded, class-conscious workers get into their heads that the
present-day form of capitalism is Imperialism, and that under
Imperialism the only possible form of democracy is mass action, there
will be the beginning of a new fighting period; there will be an end to
the present stagnation.

This new democracy and its practical methods of action will be the
subject matter of our next article.

## The Left Wing: The Passing of the Old Democracy (August 1916)

Imperialism means the end of the middle class democracy, as we have
already stated. Imperialism means the control of Big monopolistic
Capital over all other grades of capitalists; means the Government of
money kings (Plutocracy).

The old democracy is the form of government which best suited the
interests of competitive capitalism in its growth. It permitted the
capitalist class to rule with the help of the farmers and the old middle
classes, against the interests of the feudal classes and land
aristocracy. During the period of conflicting interests among the
different groups of the bourgeoisie, the labor class succeeded in
getting some results by using its political influence, together with
some of the capitalistic groups. This was the period in which
reformistic socialism originated.

The highest forms of this "democracy" were developed in countries with
prevailing middle-class interests. The most perfect example is, perhaps,
Switzerland, a country with prevailing small industries and small
farmers. Another example is France, with its numerous class of small
farmers. Germany never developed this system of democracy to its full
extent, because of its special historical development. When in 1848 the
bourgeoisie in Germany gathered sufficient strength to make a political
revolution, and the King of Prussia barely escaped falling into the
hands of the insurgents, the bourgeoisie decided not to use the
situation to its full extent, not to establish a bourgeois democratic
Government after the French model.

It has been generally admitted among European socialists, that fear for
the growing influence of the laboring class, at that time, prevented the
German bourgeoisie from striving for a fully developed middle class
democracy, and that it therefore preferred to make a pact with the
feudal classes. The result was, that feudal aristocracy put itself into
the service of modern capitalism, and became a capitalist force of great
importance.

Although in Europe this is the general conception, I have met American
Comrades who ventured the supposition that it was not Feudalism that
became the servant of capitalism, but that Feudalism maintained a
leading position as such. That this conception is wrong is proven by the
fact that German capitalism developed in a short time the most efficient
capitalist organization of Europe. The fact that the German capitalists
could leave their Governmental affairs to a special class of efficient
bureaucrats had the double advantage of leaving them to their task of
industrial development, and avoiding the more direct class conflicts
with their workers on the political field.

They could leave this to the "Junkers" and pretend that reactionary
measures were taken against the wishes of the "liberal" bourgeoisie.
This not only proved the most efficient method of government during the
development of capitalism, but it will be easily understood that this
more absolutist form of Government proved to fit most admirably the
capitalist conditions under the early Imperialism.

England, the oldest among capitalist States, also had a special
development of its own. In the first part of the eighteenth century,
during the beginning of capitalism, it was most brutal in its
governmental system. But it soon gained a position of absolute control
over world industry, and could afford to originate a democratic regime,
in which the upper layers of the working class counterbalanced the
interests of land aristocracy; the class of small farmers and the old
middle classes being early ruined by the marvelous growth of young
capitalism.

This necessity of giving political influence to parts of the laboring
class is one of the reasons for the better situation which skilled labor
in England has long enjoyed, but at the same time capitalist class
thought it wise to establish a system of capitalist safety valves, which
nowhere else has been developed in such a degree. Not only is the power
of the Senate in England stronger than on the Continent, and is the
power of Parliament restricted by an elaborate system of "traditions."
But in England originated the dominating political power of the judges,
a system afterwards introduced from England into your political
machinery.

Whatever may be the historical differences in European "democracies"
they are all alike in that they are middle class democracies,
originating in the necessity of uniting different groups of capitalists,
with somewhat different interests, into one strong government, in which
occasionally some upper layers of labor might co-operate.

The same holds true in the United States. The original democracy was
mainly a democracy of farmers and small capitalists, and it combined
features of different European countries.

Now we have seen that under Imperialism the capitalist interests
gradually consolidate into _one_ common interest, under the control of
Big monopolistic capital. This not only does away with the original
capitalist necessity for "democracy" and turns it from a tool to further
capitalist interests into a stumbling block, but we _actually notice_ in
all of the leading countries a passing away of the old democracy,
growing reaction, and a tendency towards absolutism. In Europe, this
process has been proceeding during at least twenty years, and it has
been recognized in the "Left Wing" socialist press. Details will not
much interest my American readers, and the few examples in my June
article will be a sufficient indication for those who are familiar with
recent European history.

But the United States having developed even farther into Imperialism
than Europe, we must expect to find, and indeed, do find, the same
tendency. It is, to my mind, one of the funniest experiences, to hear
members of the working class in the United States, and even well
informed socialists, boast of their American "political democracy." And
it is one of the best features of your International Review to have
constantly, issue after issue, year after year, pointed to the facts
that illustrate the passing away of those old forms of democracy.

What do you mean by your "democracy?"

Is it the fact that your "Boss" sometimes pats you on the back and calls
you a jolly old boy, asking you about your wife and the kids, perhaps
indexing your name for future reference? If so, there may be some
democracy, although even this is on the decline.

Does political democracy simply mean that you have a vote for Congress,
or for some of the political officers? Suppose at the moment you have to
vote somebody with a revolver tells you how to vote, or somebody with a
bag of dollars is willing to pay for the vote, and you need the money
badly. Or suppose they fool you about your interests at school, in the
press and in the church, and prevent you from getting your own
informations about your class interests. Political democracy requires
something more than a vote, something more than a formality.

Democracy means that your class must influence the Government in the
broadest sense, according to its importance and its number. A farmers'
democracy means that the interests of the farmers are taken care of.

Nowadays the workers are in the majority, but nobody supposes that they
can dictate a policy that takes care of their interests. Many of you
only look to political _forms_ and the vote, and don't understand why
there is no such thing as political influence of the working class.

But when you look at the _facts_ there will be no longer any doubt.

It is not the most important fact, but it is an interesting one, that
far more than one-third of the workers do not even have a vote: Negroes
in the South, immigrants in the North, and men who must keep moving in
pursuit of jobs are barred, and this percentage has been vastly
increasing in the last twenty years, so as to surpass, nowadays, that in
most of the European countries.

But even if all of the workers of the United States had a vote, this
would not make a real difference. Congress has lost so much of its
influence that it is only a lame wing of the real Government. The Senate
has increased its power and exercises it with real class consciousness.

The power of the President of the United States, in important issues
like peace and war, is greater even than that of the King of England. It
is of little importance that the Constitution tells you that Congress
declares war, because Congress simply has to approve the results of the
diplomacy of the President and the executive powers. This has been shown
again and again in the last months, and it makes no difference in
practice, whether this is a result of Presidential aggression or
Congressional self-elimination.

The most effective method of doing away with democracy, however, is in
the political function of the judges, with the Supreme Court as its
highest and unparalleled form. Nowhere in the world will you find an
equally reactionary institution. What becomes of the influence of your
Congress, as compared with that of the executive power of Governors,
Mayors, Judges, and the Police? Look over the pages of your
International Review and see what has become of democracy in your
courts, and under the rifles of your most brutal police and militia. And
yet, these institutions form a part of your government as well, and
certainly are of much more importance in the practical life of the
workers than Congress. What becomes of your freedom of speech and press,
as soon as you use them for a real attack on capitalist institutions?

If you look beyond the form to the facts, there proves to be no greater
lie than that of political democracy in the United States.

Some clever headed theoreticians will answer: we cannot deny the facts,
but there is something in the form, because this will enable us to have
real democracy in the future. They forget two facts: first, that in the
whole capitalist world, and especially in the United States, there is no
tendency towards more democracy, but that on the contrary, a primitive
middle class democracy is on the decline, is lost, and second, that if,
by some unexpected wonder, the workers should succeed in using the old
democratic forms in a real fight, the capitalist class would change the
forms, rather than allow an easy victory to its enemies. The reality is,
that Capital deliberately fools you with the form, as long as you allow
yourself to be fooled, and that this is the only reason and the only
"advantage" of this sham "democracy."

It is one of the most important necessities, if you wish to get out of
the present stagnation, that you realize without and reserve that there
exists no such a thing as political democracy in the United States, and
that the old forms of parliamentary methods will not develop into real
political democracy, and therefore, have only a restricted, temporary
meaning to labor.

It certainly is an advantage that present-day "democratic" forms enable
socialists to demonstrate effectively the class differences and class
antagonisms. Congress can be a valuable platform for socialist
propaganda, as for instance, is shown by the activities of Karl
Liebknecht, in the Prussian Diet. But we must see its limits; we must
understand that in the class struggle it is only power that counts, and
that old parliamentary forms will be changed, in fact are
uninterruptedly changed, as soon as they are no longer in the interest
of the ruling class.

The old style of parliamentary action is rapidly losing its significance
for the working class, but remember, that there is a very great
difference between what we nowadays call parliamentary action and the
political influences of the working class.

About this difference and the future of a new "mass" democracy on the
industrial, as well as on the political field, will deal the next and
last article in this series.

What this difference is, and what is the future of a new "mass"
democracy on the industrial as well as the political field, will be the
subjects of the next and concluding article in this series.

## The Left Wing Socialists: Mass Action (November 1916)

In the August issue it was stated that the European middle class
democracies are passing away, and it was found that in the United States
this process had already developed so far, as to eliminate almost
entirely the influence of the working class, and also to a great extent
that of middle classes, on the Government controlled by Big Capital.

The result is, that as long as the Socialist Party is working on the old
lines, it is doomed to inactivity. There, of course, is left the
possibility of doing some work of propaganda and education, but we know
that without _action_, the general educational work does not amount to
much. Besides, in keeping to the old conception of a growing political
democracy, it is logical that the party looks upon the empty form of
democratic institutions as upon the most precious treasure, and mistakes
governmental jobs, which are acquired by some of the leaders, in
co-operation with non-socialist elements, for real power. The result is
this most disgusting situation, of electing socialist mayors, sheriffs,
aldermen, etc., only to expel them afterwards from the party or else to
disrupt what is left of the socialist organization. Is there any wonder
that there has been a general feeling of discontent among the rank and
file, and that the workers as such do not join the Socialist Party?

As soon, however, as we recognize the fact, that the old democratic form
is rapidly losing its significance under the new form of Imperialistic
Capitalism, there is some hope of adopting methods in accordance with
the new conditions.

Voting for Congress or for political jobs, and in general what we call
parliamentary action, pure and simple, loses much of its significance as
a proposition to improve the conditions of the working class, and it is
simply absurd to expect that we could Vote our ruling class out of
power.

_But parliamentary action is not the only form of political action_.

To understand European literature and to understand the Resolution of
the Left Wing mentioned in the May issue, it is necessary to realize
what European Left Wing Socialists mean by political action. In this
resolution one of the most important forms of future action is indicated
by what is called "political strikes," by which are meant strikes that
go beyond the purpose of getting higher wages or shorter hours, or any
other improvement in the position of the workers on the job. Not only a
strike like the one in Belgium to conquer general suffrage is called a
political strike, but also strikes for free speech or to protest against
reactionary decisions by judges, and in general, those strikes in which
the general class interests of the workers conflict with general
capitalist class interests. An economic conflict and strike, in which
the capitalist class uses its political power of militarism and militia,
may broaden into a political strike, because it is no longer a conflict
between the worker and his employer, but becomes a conflict between the
working class and the capitalist class.

Now, some of you may feel as if this were playing with words, but it
always proves an absolute necessity to keep to fundamental definitions,
in order to know exactly about what we are talking. And at all events,
it is essential for you to know what our European comrades understand by
certain expressions, if we want to co-operate with them on an
International understanding.

As far as the United States is concerned, it has long been recognized by
a great number of our comrades, that the old form of economic action, as
represented in the craft unions and the A. F. of L., has been outlived.
The highly concentrated monopolistic industries are beyond the reach of
unions on craft lines and it has been recognized that the future forms
of fighting will have to be along industrial lines. It has been realized
also that, in this industrial action, unskilled labor will play a
decisive part, and that this action is only possible when the rank and
file emancipates itself from the system of all-powerful leaders.

This is most apparent, be it only for the simple practical reason, that
it has already become a practice of your ruling class to imprison or to
shoot the leaders as soon as an important mass action is at hand.

Now, there is no doubt that, as far as _economic action_ is concerned,
the general recognition of the fact, that class power has to concentrate
from craft unionism into industrial action, has made more headway in the
United States than in Europe, and this is in harmony with your more
developed concentration of industrial and financial capital. But on the
_political field_ the old methods have been maintained on account of the
successful attempts of Capital to fool the workers with the obsolete
forms of a sham-democracy. It, however, must be clear to anybody with
some sense for reality, that a parallel change in political action is
absolutely indispensable.

As soon as we don't stare ourselves blind on parliamentary votes and
jobs, it is easy to understand that political influence can only result
from power, and that power, now that the laboring class is confined to
its own force and has nothing to hope for from the help of middle
classes, can only be developed in mass action. So we get to the very
logical result, that political action must be developed along the same
lines, along which economic action has already started: _those of mass
action_.

Now there can be different forms of political mass action: meetings,
street demonstrations, political strikes and revolts, which gives an
opportunity to develop gradually into higher forms of mass action. Even
voting in an election can be made a mass action, if only there is no
compromising and no effort to catch non-socialist votes, but real
Socialist propaganda and education. If you don't compromise, there is
not much danger of getting jobs, and wherever there should be so much
influence of uncompromising Socialists, as to conquer a political
position by virtue of their own strength, mass action means that the
workers themselves keep control of their nominees, or else have to leave
them to their own fate. Mass action, however, is by no means confined to
elections, nor is this the most promising field for this form of
political action.

As soon as there is a general (or political) class issue, for instance,
reactionary measures in Congress or Senate, an attack on free speech or
free press, a reactionary decision of the Supreme Court, an attack from
the police or the militia, etc., the working class should get into the
habit of showing their sentiment and indignation by protesting in
meetings, on the streets, in temporary strikes of protest, etc. And the
more reactionary our present-day, Imperialistic capitalism becomes, the
stronger will be the feeling of protest and the more the mass actions
will develop, and will gain in power. Of course, we cannot "make" a
powerful mass action, but the more we make the workers see that the
present methods are insufficient and that the only possible result is in
mass action, the sooner we may expect that the general discontent and
oppression will give birth to an organized mass action, which will lead
to a new and effective form of political action.

It must be clear, that this mass action as a political method, at the
same time solves the problem of democracy. The old democratic system of
voting the power into the hands of leaders and leaving it to those
leaders to make the best of it, has utterly failed. The German Socialist
party certainly is the best and unmistakable example. There evidently is
no other alternative to the old "democracy" than a permanent and
effective influence and control by the masses. We have so long
worshipped the old forms of democracy that we can hardly imagine
how to do without a complicated system of more or less independent
leaders, but we must understand that the spirit and capacities necessary
to have democratic mass control will develop gradually, together with
the development of mass action itself. It is already much to see the
direction in which the only solution of this important problem is to be
found and it is encouraging that this is the same solution that has
already been recognized on the economic field.

This leads us to another important feature of this form of political
action. It solves the antagonism between political and economic action.
Present day parliamentary action does not appeal to the industrial
wageworkers. There really is not much to gain for an industrial wage
slave in joining the Socialist Party, and every now and then they lose a
good comrade, who becomes a "politician," gets a job and ends by being a
traitor to his class. This proves to be almost a natural process, which
only strong personalities can resist. No wonder that this sort of
outgrown parliamentarism is condemned, nor that at the same time, to the
disadvantage of the working class, political action as such sometimes is
condemned with it.

On the other hand, some among those workers who realize, what cannot be
denied anyhow, that the political power of the capitalists is a strong
weapon in their class struggle, advocate a kind of political action by
direct influence of the industrial organizations. This opinion, for
example, dominated in some of the older preambles of the I.W.W., and
also among those of many of the European Syndicalists.

Practical fighting methods, however, have increasingly developed a
feeling among industrial unionists, that there is a great strength in
self-restraint, and it is the prevailing opinion that the industrial
organization should confine itself to the industrial field, in order to
broaden its membership and to concentrate its efforts.

Some may have a conception for the future, to develop this industrial
action into a general or political action, but they see this more as an
ideal than as a practical working proposition for the present day class
struggle.

Those who admit that it is possible to organize political Socialist
parties on the principles of mass action and what we might also call a
more direct action of the workers, will greet every effort in this
direction with sympathy. And although it may often be difficult to
decide where industrial action ends and political action begins, this is
no disadvantage, provided both are real _class_ action. On the contrary,
whenever there proves to be a field, covered by both actions, there can
be co-operation, and this co-operation will again broaden the mass
action until both industrial and political action become practically one
strong class action, which means the realization of the ideal of the
Socialists, as well as of the Industrialists.

Many of you will perhaps admit that this sounds well, that it is almost
too attractive, and they will ask, whether this is more than a scheme,
and whether we may expect that the working class will be able and
willing to fight in this way, which no doubt will involve great
sacrifices.

I answer:

_First_. Old political "democracy" is doomed by the Imperialistic
development, under the iron heel of Big Capital.

_Second_. On the industrial field, the new form of mass action has
already developed, and few doubt that the future belongs to the more
concentrated form of industrial action.

_Third_. Industrial Unionism, under present conditions, cannot cover the
whole field. It is, as such, powerless against the most powerful modern
manifestations of capitalism: Imperialism, militarism, judges, and last,
but not least, the crippling of the minds in public schools and
educational institutions.

_Fourth_. Political instruments of Capitalism in its Imperialistic form,
with police, judges and militarism, will strongly and brutally interfere
with industrial action and will compel the working class to put its
_general class-power_ against the general class-power of capitalism.

_Fifth_. Therefore, political mass action in the new and only possible
form is bound to grow out of the very fact of aggressive capitalism and
the only problem is to realize _in time_ what will be the most efficient
form of political class action, so as to lose no time and restrict the
sacrifices in misery and life to the smallest possible amount.

_Sixth_. As soon as conditions will be ripe for it, industrial action
and the political action will both emerge into the unit of one fighting
organization on democratic mass action lines, in accordance both with
the ideals of social democrats and industrialists.

There is another feature in this conception of political mass action
which is not less important to us. It solves the dualism in the
conception of the "Revolution." In reading some of the excellent
articles in your REVIEW, I often found that, up to a certain
point, there was a climax, leading to a final peroration about the
Revolution. Almost without exception however, there was an absolute lack
of sense for reality, as to how this revolution could be expected.

It seemed to drop from the air, rather than to result from some previous
developments.

Most of us understand that there cannot be such a thing as a sudden
revolution, resulting from some accident with a stone or a gun, and that
the working class cannot seize _and hold_ the power, unless it has
developed forms of organization and democratic institutions of its own.
To the old style Socialists this was easy enough and most of us will
remember that there was a time when the general conception was as
follows: The influence of the workers on the political institutions of
the bourgeoisie was considered growing. One industry after another was
to be converted into State or municipal ownership. It was admitted that
this was not yet Socialism, but with a growing democracy, some day or
another we would get to have the majority in parliament and State owned
industries could be changed into socially owned and managed ones, while
at the same time the working class would have acquired the necessary
qualities as to organization and government, in the practice of
increasing democratic institutions.

This idyllic conception has been destroyed, but at the same time the
Revolution has become for many of us such a vague, unreal ideal that it
seems to be no practical issue in our expectations. As soon, however, as
we understand that the only possible form of democracy is in mass
action, we must realize that this new form of democracy is able to
develop gradually the qualities which the workers need to organize and
maintain a new social commonwealth.

Those qualities, as well as the necessary power, will develop in the
fighting itself, which at the same time is bound to disorganize the
existing instruments of class power of our dominating class.

It is beyond the scope of a series of articles like this, to even
attempt going into details of what action is required at present, altho
a few remarks may prove of advantage.

Mass action means meetings, street demonstrations, political strikes,
and can be developed from our present methods. It is, however, essential
that a spirit of readiness must develop in the minds of the workers,
which makes them rise to protest at important issues, without it being
necessary that orders be issued from headquarters.

While the necessity of paid officers to serve organized labor cannot be
denied, there must be effective control by the rank and file. To break
down the so-called party machinery is one of the most important issues
at hand. If this cannot be done in the present organization, it is worth
while breaking down this organization and building a new one. It is far
more important to develop the rank and file, so as to make future mass
actions possible, than to sustain a most complete system of rules and
order, which may have the admiration of judges and school-masters, but
which requires, even, for them, years of practice to use it efficiently
to control conventions, and to kill whatever fighting spirit there may
develop in the workers of the rank and file.

Together with the development of an organization on democratic mass
control lines, our meetings and street demonstrations will have to grow
and will meet with the resistance of the capitalist political
instruments: police, law and judges.

Protests against these brutal forces will call for stronger means and
there will be a logical development into strikes of protest. Here we
touch the industrial field. But the issues at hand will be such as free
speech, the right to organize and to hold meetings, or such as the
shooting of Joe Hill and others. And no industrial organization on class
lines will have any objection to supporting such action. Political
strikes, moreover, have the advantage that their character in the first
place will be that of protest, and therefore, they often can be short
ones. There may be not even a direct demand which could be granted at
once, and the principal effect often will be that of disorganizing the
capitalist instrument of class power. This is not only a conception in
the air, but we have had a practical illustration in Russia after the
Japanese-Russian war. Under those enormously difficult circumstances,
labor there has gained most remarkable results. It even secured an
eight-hour day in most of the leading industries. In this movement,
economic and political demands were often mixed, and an actual
"leadership" was utterly impossible, on account of Russian conditions.
As soon as a labor strike was pressed too hard by the instruments of the
capitalist state, the strike was dissolved, only to spring up in several
other places and to be renewed as soon as pressure was released. In this
way wholesale slaughter was prevented and the action resulted in such a
degree of disorganization of the Government that European Socialists
eagerly watched conditions in Russia; many of us expecting that this
action would, at that time, spread over the rest of Europe. In fact,
there was a beginning of mass action even in Germany, as shown in that
remarkable successful demonstration in Berlin contrary to the most
positive instruction of the almighty chief of the Berlin police.
Continuation of this action was strongly advocated by Rosa Luxemburg,
Pannekoek and others, but the party machine, with the assistance of Karl
Kautsky, advocated a policy of defense, rather than aggression, and
helped to kill a beginning mass action which might have prevented the
present European war.

The Russian movement could not maintain itself against a new
strengthening of the Government, inaugurating a new reactionary period.
Russian industry being only in its infancy, the working class proved to
be too weak even to maintain the results, without the response from the
older and stronger labor organizations in other European countries. But
the glorious achievements of the Russian proletariat will stand as an
example of what can be accomplished under difficult circumstances by
mass action.

And it is hardly possible to imagine what could be achieved along
similar lines in a country industrially developed like the United
States.

Left Wing Socialists in Europe realize that the only hope in the coming
reactionary period, under Imperialism, lies in mass action,
internationally organized. Will our American comrades fail to join
hands, or may we expect a brilliant example, which would do more to help
the present European situation, than a dozen peace resolutions and as
many congresses for peace and Internationalism?

## The Left Wing: Mass Action and Mass Democracy (November 1916)

The disadvantage of a series of articles, especially in a monthly
review, is that nobody can be expected to recollect what has been said a
few months, or even a month, ago. We live in such a hurry and have such
a variety of impressions, provided we are not yet dumb-founded and
crushed by modern capitalism, that we are prevented from fully enjoying
even THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST REVIEW. Most of us have lost the art of
reading properly. If you only try to experiment with yourself in reading
an article which interests you, asking at the end about the beginning,
you will be astonished at the results, unless you read very carefully
several times. To remember the contents of an article which was read a
month ago is practically beyond human effort and this means a serious
setback to the greater part of the American people, who, for their
mental development, depend largely upon magazines and newspapers, rather
than upon books and pamphlets.

To develop any kind of logical reasoning on a serious subject generally
demands more words than can be pressed into one article, the more so
because lengthy articles are very seldom read carefully. The only
half-way remedy seems to give a short summary at the end, which, altho
it will always lack logic and force, may induce some of the readers to
take up once more the original articles and re-read them as a whole. The
Left Wing series, not being the expression of the point of view of some
individual, but of a growing group of International Socialists, it is
worth while to reconsider their new conceptions and to compare their
experience with American practice.

To facilitate this, I give the following summary:

Capitalism with its concentration of capital and growing productivity of
labor, develops monopolistic tendencies, which enable the monopolists to
get a bigger share in the general surplus value. To invest these big
profits in a profitable way, it is necessary to extend big business and
monopolies, broadening the field by opening new territories or deepening
the monopolistic tendencies by subjugating new industries.

This leads to aggression, both abroad and at home and to a complete
breakdown of whatever was left of a more or less independent capitalist
class. The big monopolistic interests, concentrated in the banks, secure
complete control of the so-called independent capitalists and middle
classes, economically as well as politically, which are only two sides
of the same condition. (July issue.)

This leads to a new aggressive policy of the capitalist class against
the workers all over the world and it is this new form of class struggle
which we call _imperialism_, of which the foreign aggression is one face
and brutality against the workers at home, another. In this sense, the
United States are by no means behind in the imperialistic race, altho
the special form of development here has prevented the workers from
recognizing its complete form in time. (June issue.)

Instead of a growing democracy, this development means the end of the
old middle class democracy. Democratic forms are used in the political
control of financial monopolistic capital, and develop into a new form
of absolutism, the so-called "plutocracy" (government of money kings).
The United States show the most typical and most advanced form of this
political system, and it is the worst of self-deceptions to tell the
workers that there is so much as a political democracy in this country.
(August issue.)

The new forms of capitalist class struggle and the fundamental change in
what we may expect from middle class democracy greatly affects our own
class struggle. The old form of Socialist parliamentary action becomes
ever more obsolete; we can no longer hope to gain practical results by
instructing our leaders to skilfully exploit the differences in the
interests of capitalist groups, even if we put our power into the hands
of the most prominent lawyers. We gradually realize that we confront
one solid opponent, who succeeds only too well in fooling the workers by
all kinds of promises or even by accidentally voting a labor law, that
often is not even put into effect, or that is more than checked by other
measures.

The situation certainly must look hopeless to those comrades who fail to
see the new development which brings its own solution of the problem.

Instead of putting our hope on leaders, on which we were fully dependent
in the period of political negotiations, the workers are forced to take
their fate more in their own hands. We have to realize that the
"leaders" generally belong to a (middle) class, which becomes ever more
antagonistic to labor, which makes it still more dangerous to depend
upon them, and at the same time the issues at stake lose the complexity
of old style politics and become more and more straight issue of class
power. It may require a competent lawyer to understand at least some of
the tricks of politicians and bankers, but to protect against the
shooting of peaceful strikers requires class sentiment and courage in
the first place. Our Socialist politicians and office holders gradually
become useless, because they have no success and cannot have any real
success in their old style fight for the working class. They are worse
than useless, because the rank and file trust in the ability of leaders
to protect their interests and fail to develop their own energy and
class power.

The cleverest and strongest among a group always will have a certain
amount of influence, but experience has already shown that those who
have influence upon the workers in critical times of class war are
thrown into jail. And we cannot hope to gain the slightest advantage
when our methods of fight are not such as to allow every open place in
the ranks to be readily occupied by another worker during the fight.
This demands simple, open methods of fighting and a general class
consciousness and understanding among the rank and file.

Strong leaders who did complicated fighting were a feature of the old
form of "democracy" and they failed, together with the general failure
of middle class democracy. In fact, a class of powerful leaders is out
of harmony with the very principle of real democracy. The new form of
class fighting, in which the masses (rank and file) will have
understanding and control, solves the problem of democracy, as the very
meaning of democracy is the control of the masses.

Mass action and mass democracy have to develop gradually; in fact, there
is a beginning of this development, mostly on the economic field, and
there is no use in denying that the future of labor belongs to these new
forms and not to the Gompers, Hutchinsons and other leaders of the A. F.
of L., nor to the politicians and officials of the Socialist party.
(October issue.)

So far, this is a summary of what has been illustrated more fully in the
preceding articles. It seems to me that the facts as stated are very
plain. They may be wrong and then you should say so, but if not, if the
facts are all right, then it cannot be denied that this conception of
the Left Wing is very important; that we have to make up our minds what
to do; how to help the new developments, the new methods; how to act to
increase our class power.

Somebody asked me: how can you expect the workers to understand their
own interests without sufficient schools and teaching and time to read
and to study? and, as in Europe, as well as in the United States,
imperialism has decided that the present school system is already too
expensive, that the workers know already too much to be good slaves, to
agree with this view means to give up all hope in a victory of the
working class in the near future.

We readily admit that, very likely, the workers will never learn to
clearly understand what is their interest in fighting for certain laws,
discussing whether labor is a commodity or not; they will not learn to
understand what it means when the same policy is called first a
protective tariff, then a competitive tariff, then fiscal, then
anti-dumping, etc.; they will not understand parliamentary fighting as
long as their own leaders follow the capitalists in their methods, which
are established by the capitalists for the sole purpose of fooling the
workers.

But the workers will easily understand their interests in important
class issues, they will understand their interests, when their fellow
workers are shot by thugs or militia, or jailed by capitalist judges,
and they would rise to protest if they had not lost the control of their
own interests and their own self-respect, and yet the victims of
capitalist power will not have fallen in vain, because the brutality of
the ruling class will gradually awaken the workers. They will see this
series of bloody crimes from Ludlow to Minnesota and they will note that
their leaders did nothing to prevent or even to protest seriously. And
if the class consciousness of the workers is not dead, if the workers
are not prepared to be beaten to pieces, one group after another, they
will back up protests with their masses, if necessary, over the heads of
their leaders.

It is not, in the first place, the difficulty of understanding what are
the real interests of the workers in the class struggle, it is the
difficulty of how to act, how to break the old forms of power, including
the power entrusted to leaders, and how to get the habit of fighting and
experience to fight and to control the fight, both on the political and
economic field. The capitalist class uses political instruments,
militia, judges, etc., as strong, efficient tools in their class
struggles; the workers will have to fight those tools as well as the
economic instruments, but in a manner that suits their purposes and not
according to the methods their foes invented for them; not in
parliamentary negotiations and hair-splittings, but by the power of
their masses, compelling the capitalist class to openly oppose or to
submit to their demands.

Fighting, as everything else, has to be learned in practice, and mass
fighting means that the rank and file has to do some independent
thinking and has to get its own understanding of important class issues
under imperialism, not resting before there is organized protest and
organized action in each special case. The form of this mass action
will develop with a growing class consciousness and a growing
international understanding, and will at the same time enable the
workers to acquire the qualities necessary to organize a co-operative
commonwealth.

## The Left Wing: An Actual Beginning (December 1916)

While many of us were "talking it over," a group of comrades in Boston
performed a deed, made an actual beginning in trying to organize the
Left Wing forces in the Socialist Party of America. Born in the actual
fighting of a minority opposition in the State Convention of
Massachusetts, the "Socialist Propaganda League" is a legal offspring of
the Socialist Party.

Its first manifesto appeals to the members of the Socialist Party asking
for revolutionary socialism instead of opportunism; democracy instead of
bureaucracy, a firm stand for Industrial Unionism as being superior to
Craft Unionism and endorsement of Political Action in its fullest sense
instead of Parliamentarism for reforms and offices only.

Furthermore, this manifesto appeals to all Socialists who stand for the
uncompromising class struggle on the industrial, as well as on the
political field, to unite and emphasize the fact that this unity should
be made international in a new international organization "with
authority on questions affecting workers in more than one nation," under
control of a world referendum.

It goes without saying that a special demand is made that the party
members should take a firm stand against all militarism, including
compulsory military service, as well as defensive wars.

It was inspiring to meet the Boston comrades who took the initiative for
this "Socialist Propaganda League," a bunch of class-conscious
workers who, mostly through every-day facts and experiences of life, had
come to realize the new forces of imperialism as it develops all over
the world and who rightly responded by an _act_. Organizing means
preparing for action, is a part of the action, and once started on a
sound basis is bound to proceed. Local in its beginning, the Socialist
Propaganda League has now decided to make a nation-wide appeal and to
support their action and their organization by a weekly paper, "The
Internationalist Weekly of the Left Wing."

### Comrades all over the United States

This is an effort to organize the workers of the New World to take their
share in the immense world struggle between the capitalist and the
working classes, of which the European war is only a most frightful but
instructive episode. The Socialist Party in this country confronts a
capitalist class unscrupulous in its methods, fully under control of
financial monopolistic capital. In no other country of the world has
"bourgeois democracy" been so abused to fool the workers, and the
results of parliamentary action along the old lines nowhere have been
poorer. There is not the least doubt but among the rank and file of the
Socialist Party, as well as among thousands of former members and
uncounted workers who have not joined it, there exists a hopeless
feeling and a disgust with the inefficiency of present methods of
fighting. They know that the working class has to fight and has to win,
but they do not see how it can be done. Let them look the world over and
notice that everywhere, even on the battlefields of Europe, new hope is
arising.

Left Wing organizations are an international feature in the Socialist
parties of all countries. They mean new life rising from old ruins. Do
your share; join the Socialist Propaganda League; read the new weekly,
together with THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST REVIEW, the monthly that has
kept to the fighting line all the long years of its existence. Don't say
that the program in the Manifesto should be a little more this or a
little more that. It is a living proposition that will grow and develop
with the facts and with you--if you at least join and work for it with
heart and soul.

Don't worry about this not being the most formal way to reorganize a
Socialist Party. We have already had far too much of formalities. The
party members advocate new forms of action, new forms of organization,
and the party will have to follow, no matter in what manner this
majority expresses itself.

Freedom of speech and of criticism is the very fundamental democracy,
and we have the right to form organized groups to criticise and if
possible to reorganize the party in every land. To deny the full rights
of criticism or to keep to dead formalities in a period of rebirth and
readjustment will mean to disrupt the Socialist Party. We want a new
adjustment of opinions and a new lining up. This is to the interest of
new groups, which can only gain by clearing up the situation. But
suppression of free speech has often been the tactics of old elements
who fear that criticism will hasten their downfall. If those elements
refuse a chance for reorganization, this will only illustrate their lack
of vitality.

There now is a beginning of _action_, however small as yet. Some of you
may not like it at this moment, others perhaps would have preferred it
in some other form. Don't bother about smaller details. Act; join;
participate in discussions, in meetings, in demonstrations; give your
backing, give your personality, and this will gradually develop into a
strong group, an organized power capable not only to disorganize the
government of the capitalist class, but to build up the organized "New
World" of the workers. It is worth while to join and to try.

Send $1.00 to P.O. Box 23, Roxbury, Boston, Mass, for a yearly
subscription to the new paper, _The Internationalist Weekly_, and join
the League.
