---
title: "Stalin: A Critical Survey of Bolshevism"
author: Souvarine, Boris
date: 1935
description: This history of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution, and Stalin's role therein, was published in French in 1935 and published in English, as translated by C.L.R. James, in 1939. This red texts edition is based on the Marxists Internet Archive version, available here <https://www.marxists.org/history/etol/writers/souvar/works/stalin/index.htm>, as proofread carefully against a PDF version available at <https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.525012>.
keywords: USSR
...

## Table of Contents

[Foreword][]
[Chapter 01: Sosso][]
[Chapter 02: The Years of Apprenticeship][]
[Chapter 03: Prologue to Revolution][]
[Chapter 04: A Professional Revolutionary][]
[Chapter 05: The Revolution][]
[Chapter 06: The Civil War][]
[Chapter 07: The Soviet Republic][]
[Chapter 08: The Heritage][]
[Chapter 09: The Inheritor][]
[Chapter 10: Stalin][]
[Postscript][]

## Foreword

>Djugashvili, J.V., peasant of the province and district of Tiflis, from
>the village of Didi-Lilo, orthodox, clerk. By decision of the Ministry
>of the Interior, exiled under surveillance for two years, dating from
>the 29th September 1908, to Solvychegodsk, province of Vologda, whence
>he escaped. Exiled again to the province of Vologda, he again escaped
>on February 29, 1912. By decision of the Ministry of the Interior,
>exiled under surveillance for three years dating from June 8, 1912, to
>Narym district, whence he again escaped on September 1, 1912.

These few lines contained, at the beginning of the Russian Revolution,
all that was known of an obscure Bolshevik answering to the surname
Stalin; it was found in the archives of the Moscow Police Department,
and published in 1918 at Moscow. General A. I. Spiridovich, one of the
heads of the _Okhrana_ (secret political police) of the old regime,
reproduced it almost verbatim in 1922 in his _History of Bolshevism in
Russia_. But no one at that time paid any attention to it. Stalin's name
was still lost in a semi-anonymity, unknown not only to the people of
Russia but even in the ranks of the Bolshevik Party and, obviously,
still more so abroad.

This police chit may be supplemented by a note of the local gendarmerie
relating to the year 1903 and published by close associates of Stalin in
_Zarya Vostoka_ of Tiflis, official organ of Bolshevism in Georgia:

>According to information recently received from our agents Djugashvili
>was known in the Organisation under the nicknames of "Sosso" and of
>"Koba"; he has been working in the Social-Democratic Party since 1902,
>Menshevik first and then Bolshevik, as propagandist and director of the
>first section (railways).

The first biographical notice of Stalin by the Communist Party, less
obscure but as brief as that of the _Okhrana_, is to be found in the
explanatory or documentary notes added to the _Complete Works_ of Lenin:

>J. Stalin, born in 1879, member of the Party since 1898, one of the
>most notable organisers and leaders of the Bolsheviks. Frequently
>imprisoned, six times deported; member of the Central Committee
>uninterruptedly since 1912; editor of _Pravda_ in 1917; after the
>October Revolution, People's Commissar for Nationalities; in 1921-1923
>People's Commissar for Workers' and Peasants' Inspection; member of the
>All-Russian Central Executive Committee, Secretary of the Central
>Committee of the Communist Party.

During Lenin's lifetime it appears that comparatively little attention
was paid to the future master of Russia, although Stalin was already
Secretary of the Bolshevik Party. His name did not figure in any
authoritative history of socialism, of the workers' movement, or of the
Russian Revolution. In the first ten volumes of Lenin's works treating
of the events, the ideas and the men of a whole epoch, he is never once
mentioned; very rarely in the other ten, and then only as a lay figure.
There is no word of him in the innumerable memoirs and recollections
published in the course of ten years. In the _Great Upheaval_, a work in
which Lunacharsky sketches a series of _Revolutionary Silhouettes_,
afterwards collected under this name in a small volume, Stalin is not
taken into consideration. There is not a trace of him in the
publications of the Party and hardly any in the local press. His early
career resembles that of hundreds of other revolutionaries of different
schools: arrest, deportations and escapes under the old regime; high
political and administrative functions under the new. At first sight, it
is duller than many others; devoid of any outstanding, of any memorable
episode, of any notable event in the revolutionary calendar; it offers
no contribution to the body of socialist thought. In another volume of
Lenin's _Works_ there are some supplementary details in the appendices,
of no particular interest to the outsider:

>Stalin, J. V. Djugashvili, revolutionary name "Koba," of peasant origin
>in the province of Tiflis. Frequently arrested and deported.
>Participant in a number of congresses and conferences. One of the most
>notable organisers and leaders of the Bolshevik Party. Co-opted at the
>beginning of 1912 to the Central Committee of the Russian Workers'
>Social-Democratic Party; after the general conference at Prague he
>entered the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee, and was active
>illegally in Russia, where he was soon arrested, and then deported to
>Turukhansk. Returned from exile after the February revolution. Close
>collaborator of Lenin at the time of the preparation and achievement of
>the October Revolution. Member of the Central Committee uninterruptedly
>from 1912 onwards and of the Council of People's Commissars since 1917.

Identical notes are to be found in other volumes of Lenin's _Works_ and
in the _Works_ of Gregory Zinoviev. Stalin's peasant origin is noted in
each case. The article _Djugashvili_, in the unfinished work of V.
Nevsky: _Material for a Biographical Dictionary of Social-Democrats_, is
more complete and detailed but contains inaccuracies. After Lenin's
death, a new revised and augmented edition of the _Complete Works_ was
undertaken, but the official historians, in spite of their zeal for the
new master, could give him little more, after ten years of revolution,
than a dozen lines (Vol. XX). Some of the variants may be quoted:

>Militant Social-Democrat from 1896 onwards. Organised in 1902, at Baku,
>various workers' demonstrations, was exiled to Eastern Siberia, escaped
>in 1904, and began illegal activity.... Exiled in 1912 to the Narym
>district; exiled in 1913, after another escape and return to St.
>Petersburg, to Turukhansk....

But in the next volume, published in 1928, the tone changes. The account
of Stalin's life is modified and becomes more detailed. It is still
documentary in form, but the propagandist element is apparent.
Bolshevism was then engaged in merciless intestine struggles, and the
personal record of every important figure became a weapon in the
struggle. Each of them searched the past of his adversary in the hope of
discovering some instance of weakness, some error or mistake. And each
accentuates his own title to the confidence of the ruling party and the
new dominant class. This time Stalin dictated the notice himself:

>Stalin, J.V. (Djugashvili), born in 1879. Son of a boot operative in
>Tiflis, militant from 1897 onwards, one of the original Bolsheviks;
>imprisoned in 1901 for having directed strikes at Baku, deported to
>Eastern Siberia, escaped and returned to the Caucasus to take part in
>the Party's illegal activities. Was present in 1905 at the Tammerfors
>Congress; delegate to the Stockholm and London Conferences of the
>Russian Social-Democrats; in 1907 made the Baku organisation the
>stronghold of Bolshevism in the Caucasus. Arrested and deported in 1908
>and 1910; militant in illegal activity at Petersburg, again arrested,
>elected to the Central Committee in 1912. Took part in editing the
>legal Party organs in 1912-13, deported in 1913 to Turukhansk, where he
>remained until the time of the Revolution. Member of the Political
>Bureau of the Party from May 1917, directed the central organ of the
>Party, when Lenin was outlawed after the events of July 1917, with
>Sverdlov managed the Sixth Congress of the Party, was a member of the
>Committees of Five and of Seven which organised the October
>insurrection. People's Commissar for Nationalities, then for Workers'
>Inspection, served in the Red Army in the Civil War (defence of
>Tsaritsyn, on the Polish front, in the Wrangel campaign, etc.). From
>1920 to 1923, member of the Revolutionary War Council. General
>Secretary of the Party since 1922. Member of the Executive Committee of
>the Communist International from 1925 onwards. Author of a series of
>works on Leninism and the question of nationalities.

Thus the Didi-Lolo peasant had become a boot operative of Tiflis, and
his son Sosso, as he was familiarly called in Georgia, later "Koba," and
finally Stalin, made known his merits as writer, politician, soldier,
statesman, and even as thinker and theorist. This account was to serve
as a basis for the article compiled by his secretary for the dictionary
and encyclopaedia _Granat_, and reproduced _ad nauseam_ in Russian
brochures and periodicals.

But this is nothing compared with the remarkable demonstration of
December 21, 1929, Stalin's fiftieth birthday. The whole Soviet press
displayed vast headlines, large portraits and articles of enormous
length. The eulogies of the Dictator were not less portentous. According
to the incense-burners of his entourage, all human and some superhuman
virtues were incarnate in Stalin. His modesty, courage and devotion were
paralleled by his knowledge and wisdom. He was the organiser of the
Bolshevik Party, the leader of the October Revolution, the head of the
Red Army, and victor in the Civil War as well as in foreign war. He was,
moreover, the leader of the world proletariat. The man of action proved
himself as great as the theorist, and both are infallible; there is no
instance of a mistake made by Stalin. One _leitmotiv_ recurs constantly
in the dithyrambs: man of iron, steeled soldier, allusions to the name
he had adopted, with variations on the invariable theme of steel and
iron: "iron Leninist," "granite Bolshevik." The same formula, the same
exaggeration, the same extravagant expressions of admiration and
submissiveness, in strict conformity with models sent down from Moscow,
recur in thousands of addresses, messages and telegrams from all parts
of Russia, which fill whole pages of the newspapers, and then several
columns daily for weeks. The State publishing-houses issued thousands of
copies of collections of these tributes in which panegyrics filled over
250 pages, in addition to innumerable messages simply indicated by the
names of the senders. An official portrait bust was manufactured by mass
production and distributed officially. The name of Stalin, already given
to several towns, was again given to factories, electricity stations,
rural undertakings, barracks and schools....

Under the title of "Stalin the Enigma," a contributor to _Pravda_, the
Bolshevik official organ in Moscow, set out (December 21, 1929) the
terms used outside Russia to describe the man of the day: "Stalin, the
mysterious host of the Kremlin"; "Stalin, dictator of a sixth of the
world"; "Stalin, victor over all opposition"; "Stalin, Impenetrable
Personality"; "Stalin, the Communist Sphinx"; "Stalin, the Enigma."
"Insoluble mystery," "indecipherable enigma" were the most frequently
used tags, no doubt because Stalin emerged quietly from an obscure past
and an apparently banal present, and because none but a few of the
initiated could explain his access to unlimited power.

One of Stalin's oldest comrades, of Caucasian origin and resembling him
also in his rise to power, Serge Ordjonikidze, wrote naively on the same
anniversary: "The whole world is writing to-day about Stalin," as if the
orders of the Bolshevik dictatorship had the force of law for the press
of all countries, as if the circulars of the Secretariat of his party
were propagated and could be imposed beyond the Soviet frontiers like
waves of light. He adds, this time with more justification: "Much will
also be written in the future," and further, "His enemies will write
with hatred and his friends with love," forgetting that it may be
possible to write "without hate and without fear," conscientiously and
with some degree of critical spirit, in an attempt at impartial
investigation and historical truth.

Ten years earlier, on April 23, 1920, Moscow celebrated the jubilee of
Lenin, the real initiator of Bolshevism, the actual founder of the
Communist Party, the authentic victor of October, the true creator of
the Soviet State. It was practically an intimate gathering of the Moscow
Committee of the Party. Old friends exchanged their recollections. The
record is a modest pamphlet of thirty pages. Between 1920 and 1930 a
profound change had come over the Russian Revolution. The Bolshevism of
to-day is no longer what it was. It is this which lends a special
interest to the personality of Stalin, wielder of a dictatorial power
unparalleled in the world of to-day and unprecedented in history.

## Chapter 01: Sosso

### 1.1

STALIN, his real name Joseph Vissarionovich Djugashvili, was born in
1879 at Gori, Georgia, and not at Didi-Lolo (in reality Didi-Lilo), his
grandfather's native place. Trotsky (Leon Davidovich Bronstein) was born
in the same year. Most of the leaders of the Russian Revolution of 1917
belong to the generation of the '80's of the last century; Lenin
(Vladimir Ilyich Ulianov) was older by a decade.

Stalin's father, Vissarion, was a peasant like his grandfather, but a
handicraftsman as well, as were innumerable _kustari_ peasants in the
various provinces of the former Empire. In the Djugashvili family the
shoemaker's trade was hereditary, though they remained attached to the
soil; and little Joseph would have continued the family tradition but
for his father's premature death. According to the official biographer,
Vissarion worked at the small Adelkhanov boot factory, at Tiflis, the
only town in the neighbourhood. The peasant shoemaker died, leaving an
only son of eleven years old. Three other children had died before his
birth. His mother, Catherine, died in 1937 at the age of 78, and had
lived during her last years at Tiflis in a modest apartment in a
socialised mansion, once the residence of the former Viceroy. She was
devoted to her only son, and sent him to the church school at Gori, with
the idea of making him a parish priest. There young Sosso acquired the
rudiments of education, and learned many prayers.

He was Sosso, in accordance with the equalitarian and simple Georgian
custom, which transforms names from the calendar into endearing
diminutives, and makes general use of the familiar second person
singular. A Georgian retains his petname all his life, and many friends
would be incapable of saying what were the real Christian names of a
Chito or a Zakro, a Valico or a Kote. Among his relatives and friends
Stalin therefore remained Sosso.

Gori was a big township on the left bank of the Kura (Greek, Kuros;
French, Cyrus), seventy versts from Tiflis, the capital of Georgia and
of Transcaucasia. The stream is rapid and abounds in fish; in the Turki
language its upper reaches are romantically called "Coral Waters" or
"River of Pearls." The "town" had 5,000 inhabitants when Stalin first
saw the light of day there; the population is now about twice that
figure. When Dubois de Montpéreux visited the place he noted that there
was an Armenian majority, "almost all of them artisans and traders," but
the proportion diminished substantially later on. There is a Tartar
admixture in the Georgians of the valley. Gori lies in the centre of a
lacustrine plain, with a fertile soil and a climate favourable to
agriculture; its peasants produce good wine and the best wheat in the
Caucasus. "Nothing could be more picturesque," writes a traveller, "than
the two thousand year old fortress, dominating the town from the summit
of an isolated hill in the centre of a plain surrounded by high
mountains, among which may be discerned in the distance the snowy summit
of Mount Kasbek." The slopes are forest clad. There is no local
industry. Eight kilometres away is the troglodyte city of Uplis-Tzikhe,
attributed by Greek legend to Ulysses, with the relies of an ancient
civilisation in its caves.

Sosso grew up among the Georgian and Tartar peasants of Gori until he
was fourteen. In 1893 he entered the Seminary at Tiflis, where the
curriculum corresponded roughly to that of a Russian High School, except
for the large share allotted to instruction in the Greek Orthodox
religion. The seminarists were usually destined for holy orders or for
the lower ranks of the clergy. There, apparently, he acquired his
knowledge of Old Slavonic, and the ritual phraseology which appeared
later in some of his most characteristic writings.

His friend B. Bibineishvili, in memoirs published at Tiflis in 1930
under the title _A Quarter of a Century_, has devoted a short chapter to
him. For Stalin's school-days he uses articles written by old boys of
the seminary, Bakuradze and Parkadze, printed in the review _Drosha_
(The Flag) in 1924. From these, however, he gets very little. He says he
remembers seeing him riding on the back of their fellow-student
Davitashvili and shouting "_Ya stal, ya stal_" (I am steel). If this
story, which cannot be authenticated, is true, then Stalin was very
early conscious of his strength. Catherine Djugashvili maintains,
erroneously, that her son received his name of Stalin from Lenin. It
appears also that Sosso wrote verses of which some were printed under
the pseudonym of Sosselo, in _Iveria_, a local nationalist journal
edited by I. Chavchavadze, but the verses have never been reprinted.

There is hardly any reliable information to enable us to judge of his
childhood and youth -- no recollections of relatives or memoirs of
acquaintances, no family papers or private letters, no school notes or
boyish essays. All that is available is the guarded confidences of some
of his comrades of those days. The brochure of I. Iremashvili, _Stalin
und die Tragödie Georgiens_, published in Germany, is too suspect to be
accepted by serious persons without confirmation of the contents. There
is little scope in such a case for the art of the self-styled
psycho-analysts who seek the origin of great historical and social
events in the adolescence of great men.

Once only, his mother made a statement, a serious one, for publication.
"He was always a good boy.... I never had to punish him. He worked hard,
was always reading and talking, and tried to understand everything. He
went to school when he was eight." This maternal account is flatly
contradicted by the accounts already referred to of Bolshevik Georgians
who were his school-fellows. They found Sosso hard, insensitive, without
consideration for his mother, and adduce rather unpleasant facts by way
of proof. But a mother is a mother, and indiscreet boyhood comrades are
in prison or in exile.

Sosso did read, but in Georgian, that is to say, folk-lore, fabulous
tales which are the foundation of the literature of his native land and
no doubt the great epic and lyric poem of Rustaveli, _The Knight in the
Panther Skin_. Georgia obstinately resisted Russification, and the
people maintained their original language. Even to-day Stalin speaks
Russian incorrectly, with a strong Caucasian accent which arouses the
rather scornful irony of "real" Russians. Except with a Georgian
interviewer his mother required an interpreter. One cannot help thinking
of the Corsican Bonaparte, whose mother tongue was Italian and who hated
France before he came to govern it, just as the Georgian Stalin was to
govern the Russia whose imperial rule he had detested.

His reading and the teaching at school provided him with the rudiments
of education; neither have left visible traces in his writings and
speeches. In that he is unlike any other notable revolutionary of modern
times. The speeches of the outstanding men of the French Revolution
constantly reveal their spiritual ancestry by quotations from
Montesquieu, from Rousseau and Mably, by references to the heroes and
famous stories of Sparta and Rome. The revolutionary idiom of our own
day is impregnated with the ideas of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels,
with here and there formulae taken from Lassalle and Blanqui, from
Proudhon and Bakunin, and their successors, and with references to
historical precedents -- to Jacobinism, Babouvism, Chartism, the
Revolution of 1848, the Commune of 1871. Nothing of the kind with
Stalin. The age-long tradition which revives to-day the name of
Spartacus finds no expression in his words, even though it is continued
in his deeds. Nevertheless from a given moment he neither spoke nor
wrote without quoting Lenin at every point, as if he owed everything to
one book, a work in twenty volumes -- just as Cromwell seems to have
read only the Bible. If he should happen to quote another writer it is
at second hand, as if to create the impression, unwillingly revealed, of
a modicum of erudition.

His compatriot, A. Yenukidze, a high official devoted to his service,
says: "Stalin, while still a seminarist, read books on science,
sociology, and the working-class movement, but in secret, like a
conspirator. In spite of all precautions, his reading was discovered by
the vigilance of his monastic directors, and Djugashvili was expelled
from the Seminary." It seems very strange that the reading of purely
scientific books, all of which had in any case been submitted to the
strict Russian censorship, should at that time be considered a crime,
even at the Tiflis Seminary; the zealous but clumsy friend here seeks to
prove too much. Moreover, Sosso's mother explicitly denies his
expulsion: "He was not expelled. I brought him home on account of his
health. When he entered the Seminary he was fifteen and as strong a lad
as could be. But overwork up to the age of nineteen pulled him down, and
the doctors told me that he might develop tuberculosis. So I took him
away from school. He did not want to leave. But I took him away. He was
my only son." Catherine Djugashvili insists again and again: "He was not
expelled; I took him away."

Thus the little information we have about his youth is inexact or
contradictory. For those who seek historical analogies at any price,
here is one more slight resemblance to Cromwell. One may assume, in both
cases, that probably this obscurity hides nothing very important.
Stalin's character is comprehensible without a knowledge of its early
indications; his work can be estimated without knowing his childish
impressions, his early desire for knowledge or any precocious ideas he
may have had. He was certainly not haunted by Plutarch's heroes, by the
great historical figures which some leaders of men have sought to follow
as their model. The work he was one day to do was not the fruit of early
meditation, nor the execution of a great premeditated plan. The first
factors in his life demanding attention are the peasant psychology of
his family and friends; and the basic theological education. The other
factors we must seek in the general conditions of the country and the
period, in the half-light of the historic past, before tracing more
direct influences on his character.

### 1.2

THE Caucasus was known in legend before it entered upon the stage of
History. But mythology, geography, ethnology and linguistics were merely
a confused and distant memory when the World War shattered established
national relations, brought into play the interests of States and
coalitions, raised frontier questions once more, and with them interest
in the nationality of the inhabitants of the districts involved.

For the purpose of the peace negotiations, rival propagandists hastily
improvised instruction for the general public in the past records of
forgotten races, raising historical claims that had lain dormant for
centuries. As the Russian Revolution brought Caucasian, and especially
Georgian, problems to the forefront, short courses of history and
geography in pamphlets reinforced current knowledge of legendary
history. And of all this, in the minds of the contemporaries of Stalin,
what remains?

This is the mythical country of Colchis whither Jason led the Argonauts
to secure the Golden Fleece. Some see in this a symbol of the riches of
the country, others an allusion to the particles of metal in the
sheepskins used to wash the auriferous sands of the Ingur and the Rion.
In earlier times the Hebrews had believed that Noah's Ark came to rest
on Mount Ararat. The Greeks, more especially Aristotle, seem to have
been fascinated by the mighty mountain chain of the Caucasus, raising
its crests of over 16,000 feet like a natural rampart between two
worlds. In it they saw the cradle of their race, the birthplace of
civilisation. The Caucasus is the home of the Prometheus myth, the
symbol of humanity in revolt handed down the centuries; its adoption by
modern revolutionary thought presaged the storm about to break between
East and West.

Is the Caucasus part of Europe or Asia? Historians and geographers as
far back as Herodotus and Strabo have raised the question. In saying
that "It can no longer be doubted that the Caucasus belongs to Asia,"
Elisée Reclus follows Humboldt, and Humboldt, Pallas. History and
ethnography confirm the geological fact. The indigenous races, settled
mainly on the southern slopes, belong to the Asiatic world; before the
Russian conquest they were linked in every way with Asia Minor and
Persia. "By her fauna and flora Transcaucasia belongs to subtropical
Asia," writes Reclus, summing up earlier scientific observation. The
epithet _Asiatic_ spontaneously applied to Stalin in Russia is correct,
apart from the special sense sometimes attached to the word.

The physical geography of the country has been exhaustively described:
high mountains and narrow valleys, except for the basin of the Kura
which opens out more and more until it reaches the Caspian Sea; steep
slopes, rugged escarpments, ravines and precipices, torrents fed by the
eternal snows from the glaciers. Magnificent vegetation, especially in
the eastern regions, and forests of great variety cover more than half
the country in spite of barbarous deforestation. Possibly the vine
originated in this region where, according to Jewish tradition, a
patriarch first pressed the grapes, and was the first to be drunk with
wine. The walnut is said to have originated in the valleys of Imeretia.
In no country of the world is there to be found so great a variety of
fruit and nut-bearing trees. Hunting has not exterminated a fauna
stretching back to far distant times; there formerly could be found the
aurochs, lynx, tiger, panther, hyena, brown bear, antelope, eagle, the
bearded vulture, and rare birds such as the rosy starling and the blue
thrush.

Strabo counted seventy races in the Caucasus, speaking as many
languages. According to Pliny there were a hundred and thirty languages
in use in the marches of Colchis. The Arabs gave the name _Mount of
Languages_ to the great rocky massif whose folds shelter the residue of
prehistoric migrations. Even in his time Reclus put the number of
dialects and local patois at seventy, but classified them under a few
main groups. This variety of language reflects the differentiation of
the population into tribes isolated by physical obstacles and the
configuration of the country. The common assertion that mountain
districts encourage conservatism can be verified in the Caucasus better
than anywhere else. For the ethnologist and philologist there is
inexhaustible material for controversy. It is agreed that the Georgians
(or Kartli), the race to which Stalin belongs, are of Iberian origin;
they are sub-divided into Gurians proper, Svanetians, Imeretians,
Mingrelians, Khevsurs, Pshavs, Tushes, Lazis, with some Chechens,
Ossetes, and Lesghians; yet they have maintained for two thousand years
their ethnological entity and the purity of their language. Recent
philological studies have attempted to throw light from Georgian sources
on the tale of Tristan and Iseult, thus linking the Caucasus with
Brittany.

The mixture of races makes it unnecessary to seek for pure racial
characteristics in Stalin. The Georgians, surrounded by various remnants
of Mongol, Slav, and Aryan populations, have an admixture of Tartars,
Persians, Armenians, Kurds and various Mediterranean peoples. On the
authority of Herodotus, Maspero mentions the presence in Colchis even of
descendants of Egyptians brought there by Sesostris. Summarising the
observations made by writers on the Georgians, Reclus has written, in
words pregnant with meaning for anyone who knows Stalin: "They are said
to have a lower average intelligence than the other Caucasian peoples;
sitting side by side in the schools with Tartars and Armenians, they
show less facility than these in the study of foreign languages,
science, and elocution." But, if we are to accept literally the
descriptions of the Georgians as friendly, frank, care-free,
straightforward, sociable and peaceable, then it must be supposed that
Stalin has a strong infusion of Turki blood, through Kurd or Tartar
ancestry. Old socialist militants in the Caucasus assure us that
Catherine Djugashvili is an Osse (Ossetinka) and attach great importance
to this detail: not only are the Ossetes less subtle and more crude than
the Georgians, but Russia has always recruited among them a strong
proportion of gendarmes and of convict-guards.

The history of Georgia yields to no other in horror. Twenty-five
centuries ago Georgia had reached a higher degree of civilisation than
the greater part of Europe. Her Euxine shore had been colonised by the
Greeks; then in turn the Jews, the Romans, the Persians, and later, the
Genoese left their traces on the country from the Black Sea to the
Caspian. As the main land route to Central Asia, the Caucasus was
frequently invaded, was conquered by Alexander the Great, was subjected
by Mithradates Eupator, and later experienced the destructive tidal wave
of the Huns. Christianity became the dominant religion there almost at
the same time as in Greece, much earlier than in Europe generally. The
Iberian Church formed a point of contact with Byzantium. "... There
arose a highly civilised society based on a curious synthesis of
Byzantine culture and Arab and Persian influences." This civilisation
reached its highest point in the twelfth century, in the reigns of King
David and Queen Tamara, during the short respite Georgia enjoyed while
the Persians and the Turks were at war. Then the Mongol hordes of
Genghiz Khan, followed by those of Tamerlane, put the country to fire
and the sword; towns and villages were completely devastated and the
inhabitants almost exterminated.

In the next five centuries Georgia was coveted and fought for by her
warlike neighbours, invaded many times, dismembered, pillaged, sacked
and her population decimated by Persian and Turkish armies, and by raids
followed by razzias of human cattle (especially of women intended for
the harem). She appealed in vain for Russian protection. Annexation by
the Tsars in 1801 put an end to her age-long misfortunes by enabling her
to share the unenviable, but relatively endurable, lot of the other
peoples of the Russian Empire. Her population had fallen from seven
million to one million. For half a century longer a guerilla war was
maintained in the higher mountain regions, where Georgian rebels against
Russification by force defied the Tsar's troops from their inaccessible
retreats, and carried out audacious surprise attacks.

This long series of terrible calamities, alternating with periods of
torpor following on massacres, left Georgia poor in spite of her rich
natural resources and backward in spite of the antiquity of her
civilisation. For strategic reasons the Russians built roads, thus
facilitating trade and travel; they encouraged wine-growing, which was
not competitive with Russian agriculture, and contributed to
repopulation by sending to Georgia soldiers, officials, traders,
tourists, and political and religious exiles. A century of peace brought
back life to the unhappy country without, however, substantially raising
either the standard of education or of living, or improving technical
methods.

At the time of Stalin's birth, Reclus wrote: "The ancient method used in
the construction of Georgian houses has been maintained for two thousand
years. There are whole villages composed of nothing but holes made in
the ground and in the rocks, only indicated from the outside by heaps of
brushwood on their mud roofs, on which the women sit out in the cool of
the evening." In most Georgian towns many houses still have only the
traditional mud roofs.

Agricultural implements were rudimentary and ineffective. In 1900 an
official report stated: "The Georgian plough is a very large, costly and
heavy contrivance, which does not give satisfactory results and demands
enormous labour power it must be drawn by from three to four pairs of
oxen or buffaloes according to the nature of the soil and other
considerations." To provide a team of this kind the peasants form a
temporary artel, putting into the common stock one man's plough,
another's harness, others' cattle. Their harrow is simply a plank;
everywhere the sickle is used for harvesting, and often the harvest is
carried on men's backs.

Industry was practically non-existent, mineral riches neglected,
transport archaic. The extraction of manganese in the Kutais province
and of petroleum at Baku were only just beginning. Domestic industry on
a small scale by local artisans covered domestic needs, and sufficed for
clothing and weapons. The railway had not yet replaced the ruts of the
road dug deep by the heavy _arbas_ drawn by oxen. Tools remained
primitive.

The past weighed heavily on the family and social life of the Georgians.
Stalin's parents had been serfs, the system not having been abolished in
Transcaucasia until about 1865. Some of "the nobility, who have remained
great landlords, have not yet lost the habit of treating the peasants as
animals subject to their caprice, and the manners engendered by serfdom
among the people themselves have not disappeared." The same author,
Reclus, in describing the condition of the countryside, says: "In spite
of the fertility of the soil of Georgia and the relatively small
population occupying the land, the peasants in the Kura valley are
mostly very poor, and they possess wretched cattle, scurvy cows, and
sheep with wool almost like bristles." Marshy ground and absence of
sanitation made vast stretches of country unhealthy.

Even the favoured coast region, the "Caucasian Riviera," was wretchedly
poor, and a former Minister of Agriculture, A. Yermolov, wrote in 1907:
"To see this lovely country the traveller must journey for hundreds of
kilometres through virgin forests and waste land, spend nights in the
poor huts of the peasants complaining of their poverty and sometimes
dying of fever, listen to the howling of the jackals, hear the
complaints of the inhabitants on the ravages of bears and wild boars in
their maize fields ... in fact see a country poor and desolate in the
midst of luxuriant vegetation." At the other end, descending towards
Tiflis, the valley of the Kura, like that of the Lower Araxes, is
rendered arid by the scorching winds from Asia; its poverty is not less.

Such was Stalin's environment in his earliest years. He was surrounded
by remnants of barbarism, by ruin, desolation, and sometimes famine
(there was scarcity in 1891-2 and in 1897-8). Patriarchal traditions and
many a mediaeval custom still persisted. Religion laid its powerful hand
on a population of which more than three-quarters in all, and a higher
proportion outside the towns, were illiterate. "No country in the world
is richer in churches," wrote Dubois de Montpéreux. Gori, he adds, "has
two large modern churches, a Catholic Church and an Armenian, and other
smaller Greek Orthodox Churches, making eight in all." Among other
survivals from the Middle Ages, little Sosso would be accustomed to
meeting in the mountains Khevsurs, a curious people who wore coats of
mail, buckles, arm-pieces, and a whole equipment which induced the
belief long held that they were descendants of the Crusaders. There was
a feudal touch about the local costume, borrowed from the Cherkesses; it
resembled a miniature walking arsenal complete with pistols, dagger,
sabre and cartridge belt, now more decorative than useful. The practice
of brigandage, kept up by the natural inclination of armed mountaineers
to prey on the products of the plain, was maintained in various forms,
from highway robbery to political banditry. Gori, says Dubois de
Montpéreux, lay at the centre of a district where brigandage was rife.
Young Stalin was witness of racial hatreds between Armenians and
Georgians, between Tartars and Armenians, fostered by the Russian
colonisers in their own interests.

The population, twenty-three to the square kilometre according to the
census of 1897, was five parts rural to one urban. The majority were
landless peasants, and small farmers on a _métayage_ system, who were
exploited by a rural gentry numerous but by no means rich. Narratives of
travel in the Caucasus always express the amazement of Western observers
at the multitude of the poor landed gentry -- a Mingrelian nobleman as
inn-waiter, an Imeretian prince as stable boy. In this country princes
are as plentiful as game, noted von Thielmann. Another traveller says of
the Georgians: "Most of them are at once noble and poor, and this is not
the only trait in which they resemble the Spaniards," and to this rather
summary estimate he adds some just remarks on the idleness of the
indigenous population, their immoderate indulgence in Khaketian wine and
their propensity to brigandage: "Young men belonging to the most ancient
families have earned on the highroad a reputation which does not injure
their standing in society but often ends in Siberian exile." The
ownership of five or six hectares of land might carry with it the title
of Prince. Artisans, ranking with the peasantry in the country or in the
mountains, and with the small shopkeepers in the towns, did not form a
well-defined class. Workmen properly so called, few in number, remained
attached to their native village. There was neither industrial
proletariat nor capitalist bourgeoisie, in the modern sense of those
terms. A small intelligentsia and the rank-and-file of the clergy were
in close relations with the common people. The handful of nobles of
higher rank, the great landed proprietors, attached themselves to the
Court at St. Petersburg or became officers in the peasantry in the
country or army. The whole structure of society was dominated by the
Russian bureaucracy.

Tiflis, when Stalin began his studies there, was a rapidly growing
oriental city of some 150,000 inhabitants, with a commonplace European
quarter built by the Russians. The Georgians were in a minority, the
population including Armenians, Northern and Southern Slavs, Tartars,
Persians, Germans, Jews, Greeks and Ossetes. The principal centres of
activity were the Persian, Armenian and Tartar bazaars, whose alleys
were thronged with a motley Asiastic crowd, through which watercarriers,
camels, and donkeys laden with wine-skins and bales of goods pushed
their way; on sale were carpets from Persia and Kurdistan,
bright-coloured woollens and cottons, pottery and inlaid work, sabres
from Daghestan and arms made on the spot. Large-scale trade in the town
was in the hands of the Armenian middle-class. The ancient Georgian
Tiflis, bearing the stamp of Persian domination, was an unchanged mass
of grey terraced houses, intersected by a maze of steep streets with
refuse drying in the sun.

### 1.3

YOUNG Stalin certainly could not imbibe new ideas or be subjected to
European influence in this mediaeval agglomeration of Western Asia with
its manifold religions and national superstitions, in a backward
society, with a continuous infiltration of nomads; nor in the
administrative and military quarters of the city where the despotic
Tsarist bureaucracy was housed in buildings European in style. But he
entered a new sphere in the Seminary where, in the course of his
clerical studies, he came for the first time into contact with the
spirit of revolt.

For the beginning of a tradition of insubordination existed, even under
the stern rod of religious discipline, among the students at Tiflis, as
elsewhere in "All the Russias." The resistance of the rising generation
to the oppression of the old regime, which long retained a purely
national character among the population, gradually assumed a liberal and
then a socialist colour. As early as the beginning of the nineteenth
century, that is from the date of the Russian occupation of Georgia,
subversive ideas had been brought into the country by exiles who had
been compelled to live in the confines of the Empire. The policy of
brutal Russification adopted by Yermolov, Viceroy of the Caucasus,
aroused a popular movement of protest, violently suppressed by Cossack
troops. Down to the date of the emancipation of the serfs there were
incessant and sanguinary peasant revolts. The Tiflis Seminary became an
intellectual centre of the opposition to Russian rule. Finally there
appeared the new and decisive factor which was to change the social
centre of the revolutionary struggle. In 1867 the first railway in the
Caucasus was begun, from Tiflis to the Black Sea.

Capitalism began to penetrate into the Caucasus. In the workshops
Georgian peasants who had become unskilled labourers and skilled Russian
workmen were fused under the hand of the same management and formed the
beginnings of a proletariat. At this period begins the exploitation of
manganese at Chiaturi, and of naphtha at Baku. Transcaucasia emerged
from its provincial isolation, and was dragged from the rut of primitive
economic life into the highway of capitalist production.

In 1873, twenty years before the arrival of Stalin at Tiflis, there had
been trouble at the Seminary, where the students felt their national
pride was offended. Many students, expelled in consequence, returned to
their villages to become propagandists of advanced ideas. Ten years
later there was a revolt on a small scale in the same school. The Rector
spoke in contemptuous terms of the Georgian language, and a student rose
and struck him. This youth, Sylvester Djibladze, was conscious of the
support of his fellow-students and even of the Georgian teachers, He was
condemned to three years in a disciplinary corps, and the Seminary was
closed. In 1886 the Rector, the arch-priest Chudnietsky, was stabbed to
death by a seminarist aged nineteen. "Scarcely half the students condemn
the crime, and many hardly conceal their wicked delight," wrote the
Exarch of Georgia to Pobiedonostsev, the Procurator of the Holy Synod.
"The Russian teachers are demoralised; the Georgian teachers assume a
fierce manner. Some go so far as to excuse the assassin; all in their
heart of hearts approve." The Seminary was closed once more. Each time
more students were scattered among the villages, propagating their
burning convictions.

At this point the second section of railway was completed, from Tiflis
to the Caspian Sea. The line crossed Caucasia from west to east, by the
valleys of the Rion and the Kura, parallel with the main mountain chain,
connecting the Black Sea with the Caspian, Baku with Batoum. The
petroleum industry, provided with new means of transport, received a
great impetus; a production of 800,000 metric tons in 1883 increased to
1,370,000 metric tons in 1885, and continued to increase. The
proletariat of the petroleum wells and the railway grew in proportion.
That same year the first socialist groups were constituted, under the
leadership of pupils of the Seminary, and composed mainly of Georgian or
Russian intellectuals in exile; among the foremost were Sylvester
Djibladze, Noah Jordania, Nicholas Chkheidze and Ninoshvili. This was
the first "cell" of Georgian Social-Democracy. The _Communist Manifesto_
of Marx and Engels was translated; the Caucasian rebels set themselves
to study European ideas.

On arriving at Tiflis in 1893, therefore, Stalin found the germ of a
revolutionary socialist movement, and before long faint echoes of
ferment among the workers penetrated the thick walls of the Seminary;
the first railwaymen's strike at Tiflis occurred in 1896. The class
struggle became more important than the national struggle. The Georgian
question gave way to the social question. Tiflis railwaymen, Baku
oil-workers and Chiaturi miners were all directed from one centre.
Moreover, the general unrest among the proletariat throughout
Transcaucasia was now not merely a local incident. The gigantic massif
of the Great Caucasus, which had in the course of centuries prevented so
many invaders from reaching the steppes, and had retained so many
migrant peoples in its hollows, could no longer resist the solidarity
created by the bonds of capital and the workers' lot. By force of
circumstances Caucasian revolutionaries became a detachment of the great
army of revolutionary socialism taking shape in Russia in the school of
struggle.

Speaking of the origin of his conversion to socialism, Stalin one day
said: "I became a Marxist thanks so to speak to my social position -- my
father was a worker in a shoe-factory and my mother was also a
working-woman -- but also because I could hear the murmurs of revolt
among the people who lived at the social level of my parents, finally on
account of the rigorous intolerance and jesuitical discipline so cruelly
crushing me in the orthodox Seminary where I passed some years." And he
added: "The atmosphere in which I lived was saturated with hatred
against Tsarist oppression and I threw myself with all my heart into
revolutionary activity."

In 1898, when Catherine Djugashvili took her son away from the Seminary,
which was seething with councils and clubs of all shades of opinion,
Sosso was caught in the current which swept with it the more active of
his contemporaries. Like other self-taught socialists, he read
propagandist pamphlets, abstracts, drafts, schemes. That was sufficient
for membership in the Tiflis Social-Democratic group. In the workshops
of the railway where had laboured the manual worker, Alexis Peshkov, to
be one day celebrated under the name of Maxim Gorky, Stalin came into
contact with the proletariat. Some years earlier he might have met among
them the locksmith. Serge Alliluyev, and two years later, the
lathe-worker, Michael Kalinin. This was the time when the pioneer
workmen's clubs, the clandestine _krujki_, which had been springing up
throughout Russia in the last twenty years, were taking steps to form a
general organisation, with a single directing centre. In that year there
was a small meeting of nine delegates at Minsk, who boldly called
themselves a "Congress of the Russian Workers' Social-Democratic Party."
In one of the Ukrainian provinces, near Nicolayev, a youth of Sosso's
age had already been arrested, transferred from prison to prison and was
awaiting deportation to Siberia; this was the future Trotsky. And in
Eastern Siberia an exile aged twenty-nine was engaged on a learned work
on the development of capitalism in Russia; he was writing an essay on
the "economic romanticism" of Sismondi and his followers and translating
the _History of Trade Unionism_ by Sidney and Beatrice Webb; this was
the future Lenin.

Nascent Russian Social-Democracy had embarked on its life and death
struggle with Tsarism. And with the quiet resolution of the volunteers
for civil war, Sosso had enrolled himself in the ranks of the new party,
the Russian section of the international working-class movement; this
was the future Stalin.

## Chapter 02: The Years of Apprenticeship

### 2.1

SIDE by side with the formation of the industrial proletariat, socialism
developed in Russia toward the middle of the last century on a somewhat
confused and complex basis of ideas, and grew steadily stronger by its
diversity. But from the beginning, both the socialist movement and the
proletariat showed certain fundamental characteristics which were to
give them a future unparalleled in history.

It is essential to glance at the origins of the Russian
Social-Democratic movement, its precursors and its notable exponents, in
order to understand Bolshevism and its representatives at different
stages of its evolution from Lenin to Stalin.

In Russia a poverty-stricken working class grew up slowly around the
earliest spinning mills, iron-works and factories. The first rudimentary
strikes caused by the cruel labour conditions Occurred at Moscow, Kazan,
Yaroslavl, Tambov, Kaluga, Voronezh and Tula. Under Alexander I about
half the 200,000 persons employed in industry remained serfs, bound to
the works or the factory by their master's orders; the rest, with the
"freedom" to work sixteen hours and more a day, overwhelmed by fines,
privation and persecution, were hardly better treated. Nicholas I,
sometimes called the "Iron Tsar" -- for in its political regime Russia
experienced the iron age before the steel -- even promulgated a law
making it a crime at common law to go on Strike. The peasants,
transferred by force from the village to the factory, generally remained
peasants, passing part of the year at work on the land. All of them
preserved close links with the village and retained their peasant
psychology long after the change in their work.

Industry, aided by foreign capital and technique, made rapid and
continuous progress; in less than forty years after the abolition of
serfdom it recruited more than a million and a half peasants. The mass
of the Russian proletariat, therefore, derives directly from the
countryside, whereas the proletariat of the West had for its basic
nucleus the descendants of mediaeval guild workers, from whom it
inherited urban culture and its own traditions. This is its most
distinctive characteristic.

The early revolutionary tradition of the Russian working class bore the
imprint of peasant influence. From the sixteenth century onwards,
declares M. Pokrovsky the historian, Russia was perhaps the most
rebellious country in Europe. Each of the other great countries had its
peasants' civil war; Russia had four in two centuries -- those of the
"Time of Trouble," of Bogdan Khmelnitsky, of Stenka Razin and of
Pugachev. Peasant revolt was not entirely crushed out, in spite of
implacable repression. And since the freeing of the serfs in 1861, some
two thousand local risings have been counted, down to the insurrection
on a large scale in 1905. "Revolution," wrote Leroy-Beaulieu, "is latent
in the Russian people." Such is the mark on contemporary events. Strong
characteristics of peasant mentality were transmitted to the workers'
movements: passive resignation interspersed with violent rebellion,
individual mistrust and collective credulity, simplicity of ideas,
mystical feeling and fanatical prejudice -- all have come down to the
Russian workers from this little developed class which, according to
Karl Marx, represents barbarism in the heart of civilisation.

Russia, where capitalism developed late and inadequately, possessed no
bourgeoisie capable of becoming a ruling class. Peter the Great himself
created the first factories; Catherine II followed his example, and
later on Imperial initiative was required for the construction of the
first railways. Nowhere in the world did the Government control so many
productive industries, of which the distillation of vodka was not the
least important. Industry advanced slowly at first, sheltered by
protective duties. A bourgeoisie feeble in economic activity could not
claim the political role of a Third Estate. Russia never had any
equivalent of the English Magna Carta or the French Declaration of
Rights. Thus the intelligentsia, consisting of the generous and learned
elite of the aristocracy and the landed gentry, cadres of the army and
the cultivated bourgeoisie, after attempting single-handed a desperate
and vain struggle against absolutism, was to provide skeleton cadres for
the workers' and peasants' revolution.

In spite of certain national characteristics, there was nothing
exclusively Russian about Tsardom. "The type of domination exercised by
the Romanovs is absolutely identical with that of the Valois and the
Tudors," remarks Pokrovsky. The pioneers of liberalism came for the most
part from free-masonry, which was twice dissolved. Novikov and
Radishchev, the earliest, expiated their humanitarian anticipations, the
one in prison, the other in exile, thanks to Catherine II, friend of
Voltaire and of the encyclopaedists. The attempt at a revolution made by
the Decembrists (1825) was merely a conspiracy against the domination of
the nobility, and had no links with the people. But the most resolute
leaders were already thinking in terms of republicanism with slightly
socialist tendencies. The Decembrists, members of lodges and other
secret societies, had among them officers who had come into contact with
the French Revolution through the Napoleonic armies, and intellectuals
in charge of capitalist enterprises. The torture of the ringleaders,
Pestel, Ryleyev, Kakhovskoi, Muraviev-Apostol, Bestuyev-Riumin, and the
deportation of one hundred and fifty conspirators put an end for a long
time to dreams of liberty, equality and fraternity. The reign of
Nicholas I began under the auspices of the executioner.

Despotism grew yet stricter under the Iron Tsar, but even so a varied
and intense spiritual life found some expression. Driven from politics,
free thought sought a refuge in literature and philosophy. The great
writers of Russia, from Pushkin to Tolstoy, gave lustre to this epoch.
Lermontov was followed by Nekrassov, Gogol by Dostoievsky; Goncharov and
Turgenev were succeeded by Ostrovsky and Shchedrin. Thus literature took
the place of the public platform; poetry and the novel, satire and the
drama combined to discredit serfdom, to ridicule bureaucracy, and to
outwit the censorship. Bielinsky raised literary criticism to the height
of a criticism of society and founded the tradition which Dobroliubov,
Chernishevsky, and Pissarev were to follow. Enlightened youth
passionately embraced the doctrines of Fichte and Schelling, Hegel and
Feuerbach, later of John Stuart Mill and Spencer, Büchner and Darwin.
Petrashevsky's circle studied Saint-Simon and Fourier, Cabet and
Proudhon, Louis Blanc and Lamennais, which earned for its members prison
and exile, after a condemnation to capital punishment commuted to forced
labour at the last minute. It was only by a very narrow margin that the
pen of Pushkin was not broken in the adventure of the Decembrists; and
by even less was Dostoievsky to escape death on the scaffold in 1849,
with the _petrashevtsy_, before enduring the long torments of the _House
of the Dead_.

In the 'forties two currents of earlier origin divided the
intelligentsia into "Slavophils" and "westerners." Reacting against the
brutal reforms of Peter the Great, introduced with violence in order
more quickly to imitate European evolution, the slavophils, hostile to
exterior influences and the imitation of the foreigner, idealised the
Russian past, argued that the backwardness of "Holy Russia" was superior
to the "decadent West," and insisted on the jealous and mystical
conservation of the aristocracy, the Orthodox Church and the national
characteristics. They repudiated rationalism, science and democracy as
the products of an exhausted civilisation. The westerners wished to
raise their country to the level of cultivated Europe, to secularise
Russian life, to liberate the genius of the people and to introduce the
rights of man. But with Alexander Herzen a new tendency arose, a purely
Russian form of socialism which attempted a synthesis. Later, under the
varied influences of his successors, this was destined to assume a very
different form and finally to become the movement known as Populism
(_narodnichestvo_).

Herzen reconciled in one eclectic doctrine his faith in the universal
subversive mission of the Slav peasants with his borrowings from the
revolutionary theories of the West, above all from Proudhon. He
elaborated a conception which would resolve at the same time "the
Russian question and the social question," predicted the end of
bourgeois Europe on the morrow of a devastating war, and foretold the
advent of communism in the world at a signal from Russia, where the
peasants would set an example to all humanity. For the Russian people,
so Herzen and his disciples, influenced by the slavophils, believed, had
the advantage above all others of its ancient institutions: the village
community (_obshchina_ or _mir_) had by its very nature a tendency
towards socialism and constituted the embryo of the federalist and
co-operative organisation of the future. Rural Russia, then, would
initiate the era of social revolution and the march towards communism.

Through Haxthausen in Germany, Mackenzie Wallace in England and
Leroy-Beaulieu in France, much is already known outside Russia of the
system of collective property and agricultural exploitation of the
_mir_, to which Herzen, his rival Bakunin, and his followers and
critic's Chernishevsky and Lavrov, genuine theoreticians of Populism in
the 'sixties, attached such hopes. Populists of all colours, whether
disciples of direct action like Bakunin or propagandists like Lavrov,
believed that bourgeois evolution is not progress but regression, and
that the backward Russian economy was an ideal to be brought to
perfection. On the original basis of the _mir_, completed by _artels_,
or associations of artisans, a unique civilisation could be built up,
avoiding all the evils of capitalism, provided only that the land was
handed over to the communes, and the factories to the workers. But from
the general tendency of Populism, various different schools, based on
natural science, political economy, or sociology, were developed. There
is a great gulf between the radical and explosive peasant anarchism of
Bakunin and the balanced and educative evolutionary socialism of Lavrov.
Herzen's successors repudiated his pan-Slavic messianism, his mysticism
and utopianism, while adopting his slogan: _Land and liberty_, and his
famous advice: _Go to the people_. Many also followed his example of
emigration to the West, where he published _Polarnaya Zviezda_ (The Pole
Star) and _Kolokol_ (The Bell), as weapons in the struggle against
Tsarism.

Bakunin, "the apostle of universal destruction," believed that the
desires of the Russian people tended spontaneously towards a seizure of
the land by those who tilled it, and to communal autonomy in opposition
to any form of government. He preached a permanent peasant revolt, even
though it must be partial and doomed to checks, while he dreamed of a
universal uprising of which Stenka Razin and Pugachev were the
precursors. He also held a high opinion of brigands, those "instinctive
revolutionaries." It was he who issued to the young students the urgent
slogan: _Go to the people_, originated by Herzen and repeated by Lavrov.
In effect he said to them: "You must abandon at once this world which is
destined to perish, these universities, these academies and schools....
You must go among the masses.... All science must be submerged along
with the world of which it is the expression." A new Stenka Razin was
approaching, he added, but this time in numbers, multiplied and
therefore invincible.... The final revolt was to bring about an
anarchist federation of free communes without a central power and
without a State.

In readiness for the great day when the irresistible conflagration would
break out, helped on by local riots, Bakunin sought to prepare his
tools, that is to say persons who were fore-armed and ready for
anything. For their instruction he drew up a book of rules from which
they were to derive inspiration-a strange document which contrasted with
the high morality of the young Populists and was more likely to repulse
than to attract them. This _Catechism for a Revolutionary_, introduced
into Russia by his disciple Nechayev, contained many sections. In the
first, _Attitude of a Revolutionary towards Himself_, Bakunin advocated
the renunciation of every interest, sentiment and personal bond; a break
with the civilised world, its laws and conventions; to know only one
science, that of destruction; to despise public opinion; to hate
accepted morals and customs; to be ruthless, expecting in return no
mercy, but to be always ready to die and prepared to bear torture; to
stifle in one's self all family sentiment, friendship, love, gratitude,
and honour; to find no other satisfaction than that of the success of
the revolution, and to this end to destroy all obstructionists. In the
second part, _Attitude of a Revolutionary to his Comrades_, the writer
recommended solidarity between the brethren in so far as each one was
useful to the cause; every comrade should have one or two second or
third class revolutionaries at his disposal, as a sort of capital to be
used with economy; in case of misfortune a comrade should only be saved
from danger if his revolutionary value was such as to justify the
necessary expenditure of forces. In the third, _Attitude of a
Revolutionary to Society_, Bakunin urged the need to penetrate into
every milieu, including the police, the Church and the Court; to make
out a list of those who must be condemned to death in the order of their
importance, and another of those who might be spared until such time as
their wicked conduct incited the people to revolt; to exploit rich and
influential persons, discovering their secrets in order to blackmail
them; to enter into pretended conspiracies with liberals in order to
deceive them, make use of them and compromise them; to lead on and
inveigle the doctrinaires and garrulous conspirators so that the
majority might more rapidly be ruined and the rare few might be trained
and tempered for the struggle; to make use of women according to their
quality -- the lives of the mediocre might be sacrificed, but the best
were to be looked on as "the most precious treasure." Finally, in the
fourth, _The Attitude of the Association towards the People_, the author
urges that the misfortunes and sufferings under which the people labour
must be aggravated by all possible means, to exhaust their patience and
drive them to universal revolt; for this the revolutionaries must unite
with bandits, "the only genuine revolutionaries in Russia," and form an
irresistible force capable of destroying everything in its way.... No
resume can give any idea of the tone of cold hatred and explicit
cynicism of the famous anonymous Catechism, which no study of the
origins of Bolshevism can afford to neglect.

Herzen had said: "We lack all the riches and all the inheritance of the
West. We have no heritage from Rome, from antiquity, from chivalry, from
feudalism, nothing Catholic, hardly anything bourgeois in our
traditions. Therefore no regrets or relies, no respect for the past can
hold us back." Bakunin showed this in his writings without taking
responsibility for it, and Nechayev demonstrated it later by his
actions, from which even Bakunin himself recoiled in horror or disgust.
By lies and impostures, tricks and intimidations, intrigues and
blackmail -- since all means are justified -- but also by hard and
obstinate work and extraordinary energy, the confidential bearer of the
_Catechism_ succeeded in forming and directing a secret society, called
the _Narodnaya Rasprava_ (the People's Avenger), which was destined to
come to a bad end; one of the members was assassinated by the others at
the instigation of Nechayev, who had spread false rumours of his
treason, in order to get rid of him. The affair resulted in hundreds of
arrests and a prosecution that resounded throughout the country. This
incredible drama is known in Europe and America through Dostoievsky's
book, _The Possessed_. The _Catechism_, when it was revealed,
scandalised revolutionary circles, and Bakunin refrained from laying
claim to the authorship, which, for a long time, was attributed to
Nechayev. The latter took refuge in Switzerland, where he accorded to
Bakunin just that revolting treatment laid down in the rules for a
perfect revolutionary, summed up in the formula: "Drag him as deeply as
possible through the mire." The master broke with his fanatical and
perverse pupil, whose unlimited devotion to the cause of the people he
could not but admire, but whom even he considered too devoid of
scruples. The term _Nechayevshchina_ is still used to describe a
pseudo-revolutionary lack of morality. But it must not be forgotten that
Nechayev was the first genuine "practitioner" of subversive organisation
in Russia, and the first professional revolutionary for whom the desired
ends justified the use of any means. Many imitators were to follow in
his steps.

The realists of the 'sixties succeeded the idealists of the 'forties,
and were succeeded in their turn by the men of action of the 'seventies.
In contrast to the Bakuninists, believing in riot and anarchism, and to
the Lavrists, believing in propaganda and education, a very small group
grew up around Peter Tkachev, in 1875, believing in a quite different
ideology, that of Russian Jacobinism, whose symptomatic importance was
not seen until the following century. By his belief in the _mir_ and his
reliance on the creative faculty of the peasant, Tkachev ranks as a
Populist, but his conception of the path of the revolution and the means
of attaining it, showed him to be a Jacobin and intellectually close to
Blanqui. He explained in _Nabat_ (The Tocsin) that a revolution must
first of all seize the power, since this is an indispensable step to
achieving final success. Propaganda can only give results after the
power has been taken over: it must follow the _coup d'état_ and not
precede it. The _coup d'état_ will be achieved by a conspiracy carried
out by a small, disciplined minority. It must be carried out by
violence, which necessitates a centralised, carefully chosen,
disciplined and hierarchic Party, which would watch over the safety of
its militants, carry out reprisals against its executioners and avenge
its martyrs. "Neither now nor in the future can the people achieve the
social revolution if left to itself. We alone, the revolutionary
minority, are capable of rapidly carrying out this task.... The people
cannot save itself ... it cannot give expression to its real needs, nor
breathe life into the idea of social revolution." The fewer
revolutionary elements there are among the people, the smaller will be
its role in the upheaval, and the greater the authority which will
revert to the thinking minority, who will introduce communism. "The
people, deprived of leaders, is not fit to build up a new world on the
ruins of the old.... This role and this mission belong only to the
revolutionary minority." Tkachev foreshadowed the terrorism which was
soon to come, and the Bolshevism of the future.

Already in 1866 a first attempt had been made on the life of the
Emperor, an isolated gesture by the student Karakozov. Towards the end
of the 'seventies, the violence of the tyranny began to give rise to
violent opposition. Revolvers, bombs and daggers replied to
persecutions, deportations, executions and long prison sentences. The
Populists, disillusioned with their peaceful movement "towards the
people," began to defend themselves against the police with arms, and
declared war against the Government which ruled by terror. In 1876 they
created, at the instigation of Alexander Mikhailov, the first
revolutionary Socialist Party in Russia, the _Zemlya i Volya_ (Land and
Liberty) group, which absorbed the existing circles of intellectuals and
the various scattered revolutionaries, and which staged at St.
Petersburg the first workers' demonstration in the streets where a
student addressed the crowd. The members of Chaikovsky's circle, founded
a few years earlier, joined the group, as did also Mark Natanson, Sophia
Perovskaya, Stepniak and Kropotkin. The organisation had a Central
Committee, sections for work and a section of fighters. In 1878, Vera
Zasulich fired at General Trepov, who had ordered a political prisoner
to be whipped, and Stepniak stabbed Mesentzev, the Chief of Police. In
1879, a Prince Kropotkin, cousin of the foregoing, and Governor of
Kharkov, was assassinated, but Soloviev just failed in his attempt on
Tsar Alexander II. This series of attacks was quite open; "Land and
Liberty" claimed full responsibility. Under the redoubled blows of the
repression, the terrorists elaborated their technique, preparing a
bloody revenge. But the best men, such as Ossinsky, Lizogub and
Vittenberg were sacrificed. Opinion among the _zemlievoltsy_ became
divided on the question of tactics, some believing, with Alexander
Jeliabov, in systematic terrorism, others preferring, with George
Plekhanov, the use of persuasive propaganda. In 1879, at the secret
Congress of Voronezh, the party split into the _Narodnaya Volya_ (The
People's Will) and the _Chorny Perediel_ (The General Distribution).

The Executive Committee of the People's Will at once took up the
struggle, and a few months later, Sophia Perovskaya, daughter of the
Governor-General of St. Petersburg, attempted, with Mikhailov's and
Hartman's assistance, to blow up the Imperial train. Her friend,
Jeliabov, and her comrades, Kibalchich and Vera Figner, made similar
attempts at other points on the railway line, but without success. In
1880, the worker Khalturin succeeded in exploding a charge of dynamite
in the Winter Palace, narrowly missing the Tsar. Finally, in 1881,
Sophia Perovskaya directed the attempt in which both Alexander II and
Grinevetsky, his murderer, were killed, but which cost the lives of all
the regicides, Perovskaya, Jeliabov, Mikhailov, Ryssakov and Kibalchich,
all of whom were hanged a month later. Contrary to their expectations,
the event did not provoke the smallest reaction from the peasant
population, who remained inert. Following the advice of Pobiedonostsev,
the new Tsar refused to listen to the demands of the _People's Will_,
which, through the pens of Mikhailovsky and Tikhomirov, promised to
cease all terrorist activity if he would grant a Constitution and
certain liberties. The _Okhrana_ was created following the death of
Alexander and a period of crushing reaction set in, during which the
desperate efforts of the _Narodovoltsy_, "the advance-guard without
arms," gradually weakened under the blows of the autocracy. Tikhomirov's
retraction, Degayev's treason and Lopatin's arrest hastened the decline.
The later conspiracies miscarried and the _People's Will_ was brought to
the point of death by the execution of five students, implicated in a
plot against Alexander III. Among them was Alexander Ilyich Ulianov,
whose younger brother, Vladimir, was later to be known as Lenin.

The lessons of this tragedy were not to be forgotten, and the example of
the _Narodovoltsy_ has become a part of the national revolutionary
tradition. Karl Marx was right when he wrote to his eldest daughter, in
the very year in which the _People's Will_ was crushed:

>These are admirable men, without any melodramatic pose, full of
>simplicity, real heroes. Making an outcry and taking action are two
>things completely opposite which cannot be reconciled. The Executive
>Committee in St. Petersburg, although it acts with such decision,
>publishes manifestoes of an extreme moderation. The Executive Committee
>is endeavouring to convince Europe that its _modus operandi_ is a
>specifically Russian form of action, which in any case is historically
>inevitable, and on which one can no more moralise, for or against, than
>on the catastrophe of Chios.

"A specifically Russian form of action" -- this is certainly the
characteristic which must be underlined in the attitude of those men who
regarded terrorism as a "painful and terrible necessity," and who
protested with eloquence against the assassination of President
Garfield, declaring: "Violence is only justifiable against violence."

The lassitude and pessimism which followed on the voluntary sacrifice of
the revolutionary elite could not prevent the growth and strengthening
Of that force which was truly capable of overthrowing Tsarism. Under the
pressure of war and the requirements of the world market, a primarily
agricultural State was impelled in the process of economic evolution
towards capitalism and modification of its social system.

Big industry supplanted small rural industry, giant works the domestic
workshop, and both drew labour from the enfranchised and
poverty-stricken serfs; there was no transition stage. For a long time
army requirements made the State the main customer of industry. A
definite stimulus was given to metallurgical industry in the 'sixties by
the railways, which advanced from 2,000 kilometres in 1860 to 10,000 in
1870, and then went on increasing at an average rate of 1,500 kilometres
a year. Moreover the advance in transport stimulated trade of every kind
in an immense country without roads fit for traffic. The 'sixties have
been called by some a "brief eighteenth century"; they saw the
initiation of a privileged minority of the bourgeoisie into intellectual
life. At that time only ten per cent of the population was urban, and
less than one per cent attended school. The proletariat was massed
together in the industrial centres, where a primitive form of capitalism
made profits of sixty per cent with poor equipment, by monstrous
excesses and cruel spoliation of the workers, who were herded in
barracks or crowded into cellars; and simultaneously the peasants,
overwhelmed with charges on their steadily decreasing plots of land,
fell into indescribable poverty. Tsarism suppressed by force strikes in
the town and revolts in the country. But while the intellectuals
exhausted themselves by individual actions which were doomed to defeat,
a new movement was being born. From St. Petersburg to Odessa, workers'
circles sprang up, putting forward political demands which conformed
more and more to the programme of European socialism. As the antagonism
between capital and labour gradually became more important than the
struggle of the peasants against the landlords, the proletariat
crystallised and the elements of a new party were prepared. During the
'eighties, and the years that followed, the signs become more marked,
foreshadowing the Social-Democracy. Many Populists of yesterday, having
learned from their failures, were converted to Marxism.

### 2.2

THE most important pioneer was George Plekhanov, who, as a student, took
part in the St. Petersburg demonstration of 1876, in front of the
Kazansky Cathedral, where two hundred and fifty workmen ventured for the
first time to demonstrate in the streets. He separated himself from the
_Narodovoltsy_ to constitute the ephemeral group of _Chorny Perediel_.
In 1882 he translated the _Communist Manifesto_, adding a preface of his
own; in a letter to Lavrov he roundly criticised the Proudhonism of
Stepniak, one of the surviving Populist terrorists, and declared himself
ready to make Marx's _Capital_ "a bed of Procrustes for all the
contributors to the _Messenger of the People's Will_." In 1883, with
Axelrod, Leo Deutsch and Vera Zasulich, former Bakuninists, he founded
at Geneva soon after Marx's death the professedly Marxist group of the
Emancipation of Labour. His pamphlets: _Socialism and the Political
Struggle_, and _Our Discords_, caused a sensation, and made him famous
as a theorist even before his incomparable power as a polemist in
writing and in speech made him the central figure of the Russian
Social-Democracy. In 1889, at the International Socialist Congress, he
boldly declared that the Russian Revolution must conquer through the
agency of the working-class or fail.

Socialist clubs became more numerous in Russia, strikes more frequent.
An economic crisis in the 'eighties fed the class struggle. The workmen
secured the first laws restricting the exploitation of labour. The great
famine of 1891, followed by a fresh impetus to industry, accentuated the
movement. Some groups amalgamated, others formed _fighting alliances_. A
new generation of revolutionary intellectuals, among them men of
powerful mental calibre, appeared: at St. Petersburg, Lenin and Martov;
at Odessa, Riazanov; at Nicolayev, Trotsky. In 1898 the first
Social-Democratic Congress was held at Minsk and adopted the text of a
manifesto drawn up by Peter Struve; a year earlier had appeared the
_Bund_, the Jewish workers' Socialist party. The nine members of the
Congress were arrested or compelled to disappear, but the first step had
been taken.

It was into one of these workmen's clubs guided by intellectuals working
for the people's interests that Stalin entered at Tiflis. What part did
he play in it, while the leaders of the Party were developing their
first theoretical and practical controversies abroad? We have his own
testimony on this point.

In 1926, Stalin, addressing the workers of Tiflis, delivered a speech in
which he put in their place the servile officials who were already
offering him incense to secure power and place for themselves.

>I must, in all conscience, tell you, comrades, that I have not deserved
>half the eulogy that various delegates have here given me. It appears
>from them that I am one of the October heroes, the director of the
>Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the head of the Communist
>International, a peerless knight and all sorts of other things. This is
>mere fantasy, comrades, and a perfectly useless exaggeration. That is
>the way one speaks at the grave of a revolutionary. But I am not
>preparing to die. Therefore I must give you a true picture of what I
>once was and say to whom I owe my present position in the Party.
>Comrade Arakel (Okuashvili) has said that he once considered himself as
>one of my masters and me as his pupil. That is absolutely correct,
>comrades. I have been and still am a pupil of the pioneer workmen of
>the Tiflis railway workshops.

Even if this apparent modesty were affected and homage to the railway
workers an astute demagogic device, the tone is none the less worthy and
it is very possible that at that moment Stalin was expressing a genuine
sentiment. In his autobiographical speech he went on to say:

>Allow me to revert to the past. I remember the year 1898, when for the
>first time the workers in the railway workshops put me in charge of a
>club. That is twenty years ago. I remember how, at Comrade Sturua's
>rooms, in the presence of Sylvester Djibladze (he was then also one of
>my teachers), of Zakro Chodrishvili, of George Chkheidze, of Mikha
>Bochorishvili, of Ninua, and other advanced workers of Tiflis, I
>learned _practical work_. In comparison with these comrades I was then
>a tyro.
>
>Perhaps I had a little more book-learning than many of these comrades.
>But in the practice of revolution I was certainly a beginner. Here,
>among these comrades, I received my first baptism of fire in
>revolution. Here, among these comrades, I became an apprentice of
>revolution. As you see, my first teachers were the workers of Tiflis.
>Allow me to express to them now the sincere gratitude of a comrade.
>
>Then I remember the years 1905 to 1907, when at the desire of the Party
>I was _thrown_ into the work at Baku. Two years of revolutionary work
>among the oil workers made me a _practical_ fighter and a _practical_
>leader. In the society of the advanced section of workers at Baku such
>as Vatsek, Saratovetz and others, on the one hand, and on the other in
>the stormy conflicts between the oil workers and the oil masters, I
>learned for the first time what the leadership of great masses of
>workmen really meant. I had my second _baptism_ of fire in revolution.
>Then I became a journeyman of revolution. Let me now express my sincere
>gratitude as a comrade to my Baku teachers.

The speech, deliberately unpolished, with its sometimes clumsy phrases,
its naive metaphors and monotonous repetitions, reveals the
characteristics of the speaker: a religious turn of mind finding
expression in a style like a litany, the insistence on the metaphor of
"baptism" and humility in public testimony. There is a repeated allusion
to "practical" work, the real strength of a leader able to impose
himself without being either orator or writer. Finally there is the
anxiety to place himself on the low level of the mass of the people
without attempting to raise his audience or to rise intellectually
himself; he is careful to describe his past life as spent exclusively
among the proletariat as he was later to try to pass for the son of a
workman. The last part of the speech emphasises the picture:

>I remember 1917, when by the decision of the Party, after prison and
>deportation, I _was thrown into_ Leningrad. There, among the Russian
>workers, in close contact with the great educator of the proletariat
>throughout the world, Comrade Lenin, in the storm of the mighty
>struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, during the World
>War, I learned for the first: time to understand what it meant to be
>one of the leaders of the great working-class Party. There, in the
>midst of Russian workmen, liberators of oppressed nations and fighters
>in the proletarian struggle in all countries and among all nations, I
>received my _third baptism of fire_ in revolutionary warfare. There, in
>Russia, under Lenin's direction, I became a master-worker in
>revolution. Let me express to my Russian teachers my sincere gratitude
>as a comrade and bow my head before the memory of my master Lenin.
>
>From apprentice at Tiflis, to journeyman at Baku, to masterworker in
>our revolution at Leningrad -- such, comrades, is the course of my
>apprenticeship to revolution. Such, comrades, is the true picture,
>honest and without exaggeration, of what I was and what I have become.

If it be true that an individual cannot be judged by the notion he has
of himself, still less on the view of himself he desires to present,
nevertheless certain aspects of Stalin's individuality are involuntarily
revealed in this case. In so far as "style is the man," Stalin is
presented in a fairly crude light. As for any facts illustrating or
illuminating the opening of his political career, they are almost
entirely lacking in the literature relating to this period -- historical
documents, contemporary publications, party literature and polemics. To
explain this gap in information is less important than to indicate its
existence by way of explanation.

From his earliest steps in Social-Democracy Stalin showed the qualities
which were later to attract the attention of the Party leaders and
procure uninterrupted advancement. Devotion to the cause, the desire to
be useful, and self-surrender, did not distinguish him from thousands of
other revolutionaries of the same temper; but the sense for practical
work, the power of acting when others prefer talking, a rare composure
and exceptional firmness made him an executive agent of the first rank.

Practical activity meant the obscure and ungrateful task, effective but
inglorious, of the hunted conspirator; it meant patient, meticulous
organisation, continually countered or destroyed by the police but
continually renewed, propaganda and agitation conducted by means of
clandestine newspapers and pamphlets; it was what the world calls "doing
the dirty work," specially difficult in Russia at that time. Stalin was
in his element.

He had the defects of his qualities. With small aptitude for
intellectual work, either theoretical or scientific, he was apparently
absorbed in a thousand local details, in subterranean tasks and in the
risks of open action. His outlook remained provincial, there was nothing
in his employment as a tool of revolution to enlarge his views or mature
him. Happily, if one may say so, for him as for all revolutionaries his
imprisonment was, later on, to provide him with the enforced leisure to
complete his studies.

Nevertheless some of his weaknesses even served his purpose in his
original environment. To be understood by Georgian and Tartar peasants,
even if they had donned the workman's blouse, recently emancipated serfs
or sons of serfs, inaccessible to abstract ideas and ground down by
poverty, what was needed was simple, rather coarse speech, appealing to
immediate interest and suited to the mentality of the race and to local
circumstances. Stalin spoke that language. Railwaymen, tobacco workers,
shoemakers and navvies understood him. But he took no part in
theoretical discussion, important at that time for the future of
Social-Democracy and for the direction of the movement. There is not a
trace of him to be found in this sphere, for he left none.

At that period, at the turn of the century, Plekhanov's party still had
its inconsistencies; its theory was halting and ill-defined.

Marxism was making its way against the influence of earlier systems of
thought, and was being transformed by new interpretations. Karl Marx was
read and highly esteemed by intellectuals in Russia before Marxism
became a cult, and the _People's Will_ had paid him public homage. The
very first translation of _Das Kapital_ was published in St. Petersburg
in 1872, and was the centre of discussion in the controversies between
the different schools of socialism. The opinion of Marx and Engels on
the agrarian community was a matter of never-ending discussion.
Plekhanov and the _Emancipation of Labour_ published abroad literature
on Marxism which aroused livelier attention in Russia than anywhere
else. "Marxist works appeared one after another, Marxist reviews and
newspapers were founded, there were mass conversions to Marxism,
Marxists were flattered and courted, and publishers were enthusiastic
over the extraordinary sales of Marxist books..." wrote Lenin.

"Legal Marxism" (so called because the censorship did not understand
economic studies written in learned terminology, and allowed them to be
published without suspecting their significance, seeing in them merely a
criticism of Populism) satisfied for some time the eager thirst of the
intelligentsia for new knowledge, but it soon gave way to revolutionary
and illegal Marxism. Modern socialist thought and the spontaneous
workers' movement developed simultaneously and independently, until the
time of their union.

Lenin called the interval between the foundation of the _Emancipation of
Labour_ group down to the accession of Nicholas II the "intra-uterine"
period of the Party; there were then but few skilled exponents of the
Social-Democratic programme. The next period, up to 1898, was "infancy:"
there was elemental movement among the masses of the people, and strikes
were frequent; the intellectuals mixed with the workmen and a new
generation studied Marxism and gained strength by fighting. Then the
Party was founded; according to its historian, V. Nevsky, it may have
had about five hundred members. Next came "adolescence," and growing
pains; "the adolescent's voice breaks," said Lenin, "and so did that of
Social-Democracy."

The "Legal Marxists," under Peter Struve, Berdiayev, Bulgakov,
Tugan-Baranovsky, developed rapidly, some in a liberal and bourgeois
direction, some towards spiritualism and religion. Others,
Social-Democrats, like Martinov and Krichevsky, abandoned revolutionary
politics and became syndicalists (or trade unionists) under the name of
"Economists." Long drawn out controversy developed between the spokesmen
of the various camps. The working classes naturally could neither follow
their arguments nor understand the points at issue, and sought their own
road.

Those Social-Democrats who were most conscious of the requirements of
revolution and most determined on methodical action now began seriously
to organise the Party and to provide it with a directing brain. Lenin
and Martov, on their return from exile in Siberia, where they had been
thinking out the problems of the hour, went abroad for this purpose;
together with Potressov they joined the veterans of the _Emancipation of
Labour_. "The revolutionary struggle is often impossible without a
revolutionary emigrants' group," thought Lenin, inspired by the example
of Herzen and of Bakunin, of Tkachev and of Lavrov. In 1900 the three
young men, with Plekhanov, Axelrod and Vera Zasulich, founded at Munich
_Iskra_ (the Spark), the journal of the Workers' Social-Democratic
Party. The editors, to affirm the continuity of the Russian
revolutionary tradition, adopted as a motto the phrase addressed by the
martyred Decembrists to Pushkin: "_The spark will kindle a flame_." The
prefatory declaration and the first article were by Lenin.

The best sketch of the situation at this time is given by the future
leader of the revolution in words which reveal at this early date the
keenness of his vision and his analytical ability:

>The past few years have been marked by an astonishingly rapid spread of
>Social-Democratic ideas among our intelligentsia, and this tendency of
>educated thought is echoed by the independent movement of the
>industrial proletariat which is beginning to unite and to fight against
>its oppressors and is eagerly striving towards socialism. Circles of
>workers and Social-Democratic intelligentsia are springing up
>everywhere; local agitation leaflets are beginning to appear; the
>demand for Social-Democratic literature is increasing and is far
>outstripping the supply, while the intensified persecution of the
>Government is powerless to restrain this movement. The prisons and the
>places of exile are filled to overflowing. Hardly a month goes by
>without our hearing of socialists being "discovered" in some parts of
>Russia, of the capture of literature and printing presses-but the
>movement goes on and grows....

As for Social-Democracy, Lenin criticises its lack of concentration, its
division into groups often ephemeral, disconnected and without
tradition, with ideas often confused and contradictory. "Before we unite
and in order to unite, resolute differentiation is essential."

In its prefatory announcement _Iskra_ denounced the purely reformist
Social-Democrats, who were influenced by the German revisionist, E.
Bernstein. It demanded "the spirit of a clearly defined tendency," that
is, of revolutionary Marxism, and envisaged "controversy among comrades"
in its columns. It set out to provide a common programme for the whole
Party, to create means of communication, of information, and for the
spread of socialist literature. For these purposes it appealed not only
to the workers and to the socialists, but "to all who are oppressed and
crushed by our political system," to "all democratic elements."

But the most striking ideas of the Social-Democratic organ were
contained in the very first number, in Lenin's comprehensive article.
The anonymous author did not pretend to add anything new on the general
ideas of socialism. His exposition is in agreement with classic Marxism,
of which Karl Kautsky had been the recognised exponent since the death
of Engels, but with a specially clear understanding of Russian
conditions. Following Plekhanov's example he refutes especially the
Syndicalist thesis, with its tendency to restrict the worker to the
economic struggle, condemning it as contrary to the general interests of
the proletariat. He approves the unity of the socialist and the workers'
movements, insisting on its absolute necessity from the national point
of view: "_Unity has in every case arisen from historical conditions and
has been carried out by methods varying with the circumstances of time
and place_." Finally he emphasises the urgent necessity of a fighting
political organisation under strict control: "No class has ever attained
power without having found within itself political leaders, pioneers
able to organise and direct the movement."

Axelrod, the able tactician of the first generation of Russian
Social-Democracy, of which Plekhanov was the theorist, wrote that this
article had affected him like "a vivifying stream of clear water." The
newcomer showed the stature of a great leader. From 1900 to 1903 he was
to play an increasingly important part among the Iskraists. "It was
precisely during those few years," said Trotsky, "that Lenin became
Lenin."

Before he left St. Petersburg, he had earned from his friends the name
of the "old man," because of his assurance and his early won authority.
His knowledge, already considerable, grew continually. Whether on
economic and historical questions or on current matters of policy and
tactics, he would always make a serious contribution showing personal
and persistent effort to understand and develop the subject. Moreover,
he excelled all others in his gift of bringing out the main lines in a
mass of facts and figures, of emphasising the essential. His work on
_The Development of Capitalism in Russia_ shows how conscientiously and
scrupulously he examined, scrutinised and compared statistics, what
pains he took to draw from them conclusions for the future.

Like all the socialists of his time, he was above all a fervent
democrat. His socialism aimed at conquering political democracy in order
to complete it by economic democracy. "The difference between the
political demands of the workers' democracy and those of the bourgeois
democracy is not one of principle but of degree," he was to write in
_Iskra_. Such reflections were to abound both from his pen and from that
of others. For example: "Without political liberties, all forms of
workers' representation will remain a miserable deception, the
proletariat will continue imprisoned as heretofore, deprived of the air,
the light, and the space which are indispensable to its complete
emancipation." As for the nationalisation of the land, demanded by the
descendants of the Populists, he predicted that it would lead to an
"absurd experiment in State socialism" in the absence of "deeply rooted
and firmly established democratic institutions."

He regarded himself as a pupil of Plekhanov, especially in theoretical
and philosophical problems; he took respectful counsel of Axelrod, and
he frequently exchanged views with Martov and Potressov. But at the same
time he could not help being conscious of his superior ability as a
commander; he thought, rightly or wrongly, that the moment was
approaching when he must go beyond his masters, and he foresaw his
destiny as organiser of the advance guard and leader of the masses in
the coming social struggle. His whole effort was bent towards battle and
victory, and that soon. He began prudently to think out his personal
tactics in the hard tasks before him.

His writings in _Iskra_ and in the review _Zarya_, his pamphlets and
correspondence reveal glimpses of the ideas which were to detach him
from the foremost phalanx of Social-Democracy and lead him to originate
new paths. In 1902 he published a little book, _What is to be Done?_, in
which his strength as a leader in civil war is shown with extraordinary
force; it contains, among many germs of the doctrine which was to bear
his name, his perfected and specifically Russian conception of the
"professional revolutionary."

In a passage from Stalin's speech already quoted the expressions "_I was
thrown_ into the work at Baku," "_I was thrown_ into Leningrad" were
emphasised. He meant that the Party had been able to dispose of him like
a soldier at the disposition of his superior officers, available,
according to circumstances, for any place and any task. This was the
method in which one section of the Party was eventually organised, in
conformity with Lenin's view of the necessity of opposing the army of
absolutist repression by an army of "professional revolutionaries." The
police, in the document already quoted, attributed to the recidivist
Djugashvili the trade of "clerk," and it is possible that Sosso
practised it after leaving the Seminary, or after having worked for a
few months at the Tiflis Observatory, for he had to live without
counting on support from his relatives. But, as political action became
more and more absorbing, he had to give himself up to it more and more
until he became a "professional revolutionary" in the full sense of the
term. It is important to examine the definition given by its initiator.

"We must educate men who devote to the revolution not only their free
evenings, but their whole lives," wrote Lenin in the first number of
_Iskra_. There lay the root principle of his organisation of the Party.
In _What is to be Done?_, the same idea is driven home with
characteristic insistence by repetition and by turning his opponents'
arguments against themselves. "The struggle with the political police
demands special qualities, professional revolutionaries"; it must be
organised "in accordance with all the rules of the art." Parallel with
mass action, there must be action by men selected, trained and prepared
with a definite object in view. "It matters little whether they are
students or workmen; they will be able to make themselves professional
revolutionaries." The distinction between intellectuals and proletarians
disappears in the close, secret association "which must include first
and foremost men who adopt revolutionary action as a profession,"
whereas trade union organisation is necessarily on a large, public
scale. It is not claimed that the argument is valid in all times and
places; he is talking of Russia under the autocracy, where any workman's
demonstration is forbidden.

Lenin sums up by asserting that there can be no serious revolutionary
movement without an established directing organisation to ensure its
continuance; the larger the fighting force, the more need there is of
this directing group; it will consist mainly of professional
revolutionaries, limited in number; it will accept none but militants
who have served their apprenticeship in the struggle with the police,
and are consequently able to evade them. "_There are many people, but no
men_," that is to say, many discontented persons, many rebels, but no
"directing minds, political leaders, men of talent." These must be
educated. "Without the 'dozen' of tried and talented men (and talented
men are not born by hundreds), professionally trained, schooled by long
experience, and working in perfect harmony, no class in modern society
is capable of conducting a determined struggle." It is a conception very
near to Tkachev's, originating with Blanqui, but more precise and
deepened in its application.

But this does not exhaust the question, and nothing escapes Lenin. How
is the professional revolutionary to secure bread and butter? "We must
arrange for him to live at the Party's expense, so that he can pass at
will to secret action, move from place to place, as otherwise he will
not acquire great experience, enlarge his horizon, or survive, for
several years at least, the struggle with the police." The struggle
demands thoroughly drilled specialists. "When we have detachments of
revolutionary workers specially prepared by a long training (of course
'in all the arms' of revolutionary warfare), no police in the world will
be able to master them."

An organisation of this kind could not be democratic, Russian autocracy
permitted neither publicity nor elections, essential conditions of
democracy, effectively and rightly used by socialist parties enjoying
political liberty. "Rigorous secrecy, a minutely careful selection of
members, and lastly complete fraternal confidence among
revolutionaries," were essential in Russia. Here were the traditions of
the _Zemlievoltsy_ and of the _Narodovoltsy_. There are many objections,
for which Lenin has an answer. "It is far more difficult to catch ten
clever men than it is to catch a hundred fools," he replied to those who
pointed to the ease with which a movement led by a handful of
intellectuals could be decapitated. "The concentration of all secret
functions in the hands of the smallest possible number of professional
revolutionaries by no means signifies that they will do the thinking for
everyone," that the mass will not take part "actively in the movement."
It is a question of division of labour. And finally, categorically and
frankly, he says point blank "_What we need is a military
organisation_."

### 2.3

THUS, in view of the coming revolution, Lenin provided for the formation
of a real army, strong by its military discipline and practised in
tactics. Stalin was one of the first recruits, and it was soon evident
that he had the qualifications needed for a non-commissioned officer.
Like his companions, he was busy with strikes, demonstrations, and the
distribution of leaflets and of pamphlets drawn up by others. A radical
democrat, George Tseretelli, at that time published in Tiflis a Georgian
review of the extreme "left," _Kvali_ (The Track) with the collaboration
of N. Jordania, Ph. Makharadze, etc., who converted it into a socialist
publication. From propaganda the Social-Democrats passed to agitation,
that is, to use Plekhanov's words, that instead of instilling many ideas
into a few individuals, they spread less ideas among more individuals.
Mass action began to develop.

On May 1, 1900, the workers of Tiflis assembled for the first time in
the suburbs with a red banner bearing the names: Marx, Engels, Lassalle.
The penalties in the form of dismissals which followed sent into the
countryside earnest agitators who began to convert the peasants to
socialism. Next year on May 1 the workers demonstrated in the streets of
Tiflis; there was a Cossack charge, and casualties, both killed and
wounded. The Social-Democratic Committee was broken up, the militants
prosecuted, and Sosso, whose lodgings were searched, became an outlaw,
and changed his name several times: he was "David," "Nijeradze,"
"Chijikov," and for a long time "Koba," as he is sometimes still called.
Some have seen in this last choice a borrowing from the novels of the
Georgian poet, Alexander Kazbek, denoting a keen nationalist sentiment,
but that is not certain for "Koba" is a name common enough in Georgia.
Finally, he used to attend congresses under the name of Ivanovich before
he definitely adopted the name "Stalin."

Brief reports have been discovered in the archives of the local police:
"Joseph Djugashvili, employed at the Tiflis Observatory, intellectual,
has connections with the railwaymen," a communication made on March 28,
1901, to the department of police. "On Sunday, October 28, at nine in
the morning, Station Road, there was a meeting of advanced railwaymen,
in which the intellectual, Djugashvili, took part." Other denunciations
relate to his goings and comings and show his extreme prudence. His
closest friend, R. Kaladze, has found nothing to write relating to this
period. Bibineishvili notes that at this time "Comrade Sosso" made the
acquaintance of a young Armenian Ter-Petrossian, a revolutionary of no
particular opinions, and got him to serve the Party. The new recruit was
later to gain a certain celebrity under the name of Kamo.

At the end of 1901 Sosso suddenly left Tiflis. Of this unexpected
migration the Georgian Social-Democratic review _Brdzolis Khma_ (The
Echo of the Struggle) provides the only known explanation:

>From the earliest days of his activity among the workmen, Djugashvili
>attracted attention by his intrigues against the principal leader of
>the Social-Democratic organisation, S. Djibladze. He was warned, but
>took no notice, and continued to spread slanders with the intention of
>discrediting the authorised and recognised representatives of the
>movement and of thus succeeding to the management of the local
>organisation.... He was brought before a Party tribunal, found guilty
>of unjust slander of S. Djibladze, and was excluded unanimously from
>the Tiflis organisation.

According to this version of the affair, he showed his greed of power
and intrigues for its satisfaction at the very beginning of his career;
the exclusion would explain the necessity of his betaking himself
elsewhere. He went to Batoum, a port on the Black Sea.

Batoum is a small town of about 35,000 inhabitants in an unhealthy
situation; it was formerly a fishing village and a nest of pirates. The
population had increased tenfold in twenty years, thanks to the transit
of petrol from Baku, and it had become the principal commercial port of
the Caucasus and the terminus of the railway. The strongest workers'
units were in the Rothschild and Mantashev works. Stalin worked among
them, encouraged strikes, and took part in a street demonstration
in 1902\. The disciplinary measures taken against him at Tiflis did not
prevent him from militant action elsewhere in the then primitive state
of Social-Democratic organisation. But he had little inclination to
measure himself against N. Chkheidze, I. Ramishvili, and other leading
spirits at Batoum, and he created a separate group where he would not be
overshadowed. From the recollections of the printer S. Todria it appears
that C. Kandelaki was the only outstanding individual of this circle.
The recent arrest of the principal representatives of the Party left the
ground clear for the time being. Stalin seized the opportunity to incite
unarmed workmen to attack the prison, an adventure which cost several of
the assailants their lives. The workers of Batoum never forgave the
useless shedding of the workers' blood.

This sanguinary affair led to the arrest of most of the militants,
Kandelaki and Stalin among them. The latter passed eighteen months in
prison. The following details on the prisoner Djugashvili were provided
by the Colonel of Gendarmerie, Shabelsky, on June 17, 1902: "Height 2
_archins_, 4 1/2 _vershoks_. Body medium. Age 23. Special features:
Second and third toes of the left foot attached. Appearance: Ordinary.
Hair dark brown. Beard and moustaches: Brown. Nose straight and long.
Forehead straight but low. Face long, swarthy and pockmarked." The
police called him "the Pockmarked." According to certain doctors, the
malformation of the foot, and the semi-impotence of the left arm, which
the police did not remark, seem to confirm the alcoholic heritage on the
paternal side mentioned by various persons.

Side by side with this information, R. Bibineishvili also gives (1930) a
personal account of Stalin's bearing. He was, he says, calm, resolute
and above all "implacable" (the word is several times repeated), very
severe in matters of discipline and punctuality. At a committee meeting
he once addressed an "implacable" rebuke to a comrade who was late,
ending with: "You should not keep us waiting, even if your mother were
dying." Condemned to three years "administrative exile" in Siberia,
Stalin was sent by stages to the little village of Novaya Uda, in the
Irkutsk province. All the revolutionaries gifted with some character and
devoted to their cause had the same alternatives, the same experience
and the same fate.

While new arrivals were constantly reaching the colonies of exiles, the
road back to Russia by a thousand secret routes restored to the
revolution its most active members. Among those who escaped was a young
Marxist who hastened to attach himself to the _Iskra_ organisation, with
which he came into direct contact at Samara. Having learnt much in
prison and in exile, Leon Trotsky had begun his career as a publicist
and his socialist faith was clarified and strengthened. At the end of
1902 he arrived in London; he visited Lenin; on the way he had made
acquaintance with Victor Adler at Vienna, and with Axelrod at Zurich.

_Iskra_ found in the twenty-three-year-old member a brilliant
contributor and propagandist, an eager student, an impassioned theorist,
and a writer and orator who immediately made an impression in émigré
centres. Lenin soon proposed that he should become a seventh member of
the editorial board. "He is incontestably a man of the greatest ability,
convinced, energetic, and will certainly go far," he wrote to Plekhanov.
Foreseeing the coming discord in the Party, Lenin was anxious to secure
an assured majority of the younger men against the veterans of the
movement. Plekhanov scented the manoeuvre and opposed it. Preparation
was then being made for the Second Congress of the Social-Democrats and,
as the approach of great events demanded active intervention, concealed
dissensions were developing in the background.

It was not only a matter of difference of temperament, of divergences on
certain methods of application of common principles, or on the questions
of organisation and tactics. Up to the time of the Congress no sign of
the differences appeared in _Iskra_. The paper suddenly rose to a
superior intellectual level, and its editorials, by dint of strenuous
effort, showed a united front to its readers. Hence its prestige and
influence on the Russian revolutionaries of the time. Off the stage
Plekhanov and Lenin were discussing the draft programme of the Party
with acerbity, but yet no one suspected irreducible differences.

But Lenin, with that sixth sense which warned him of the imminence of a
great political and social battle, wanted to accelerate the
transformation of the Social-Democratic groups into fighting units.
"_Give us an organisation of revolutionaries, and we will turn Russia
upside down_," he would say, paraphrasing Archimedes. No one was so
obsessed as he was with the necessity and urgency of this practical
measure, and his whole heart was fixed on advancing as far as possible
in this direction, without knowing exactly how far. As far as theory was
concerned, he was at one with the other Iskraists. The contrast lay in
the clearness, the categorical tone, and the combative spirit of his
view.

In his first writings there are certain key ideas, which, without being
peculiar to him, reveal the lucidity of his thought and express his
convictions. His attention was especially directed towards the
understanding of Russian realities: "Hopeless poverty, ignorance, the
inequality and the humiliation of the peasant give our whole regime an
Asiatic stamp." He looked on Tsarism as the "most powerful rampart of
European reaction," a thought borrowed from Karl Marx, but he added:
"and of Asiatic reaction." He saw in Russia "a State politically
enslaved in which ninety-nine per cent of the population is completely
perverted by political servility." These views were in keeping with his
notion of the management and organisation of men -- fierce reaction
against the servility and perversion engendered by serfdom. A social
system which was the outcome of two and a half centuries of serfdom
largely accounted for political inertia. Lenin, like Karl Marx, knew
that "the tradition of all the past generations weighs like a nightmare
on the thought of the living."

In connection with the importance of the social system in historical
development, it is necessary here to recall Kropotkin's words:

>... A whole series of habits is born of domestic servitude, outward
>scorn of the individual personality, despotism by fathers, hypocritical
>submissiveness of wives, sons and daughters. At the beginning of the
>century domestic despotism prevailed everywhere in Europe -- witness
>the writings of Dickens and Thackeray -- but nowhere so much as in
>Russia. The whole of Russian life, in the family, in the relations
>between heads of departments and their subordinates, between officers
>and soldiers, employers and employed, bore the stamp of despotism. A
>whole system of habits and methods of thought, of prejudices and of
>moral baseness, of manners engendered by an idle life had gradually
>grown up....

What Turgenev called Nihilism, a movement erroneously confused in the
West with terrorism and anarchism, and which Mikhailovsky considered to
be the "infantile malady" of the revolutionary movement, was, in the
'sixties, a negation of this social system, a reasoned reaction,
specifically Russian, against conventional falsehood, family and social
hypocrisy, politeness and fashion, prejudices and tradition, dogmas and
religion. But the nihilism of which Pissarev was the theoretician, the
doctrine of "the thinking realist," nourished on the physical and
natural sciences, positivist and materialist, iconoclastic and
atheistic, remained an unmixed current of intellectual individualism,
lacking contact with the people.

Lenin gave the workers a preponderant part in the liquidation of this
burdensome past: "The industrial proletariat alone is able to fight the
autocracy _en masse_ and unhesitatingly." But he did not forget the
claims of the peasant, "so that the cause of democracy and the political
struggle for freedom may profit from the connection which many
intellectuals and workers devoted to Social-Democracy have with the
countryside." "The peasant," he wrote, "suffers as much, if not more,
from the pre-capitalist regime, from survivals of feudalism, as from
capitalism itself." This is why he demanded the expropriation of the
landlords and nationalisation of the land. At the same time he reminded
the workers that they needed the guidance of the intellectuals. Like
Blanqui, he assigned an essential place to those who had left their
class. "Demagogues are the worst enemies of the working class," he told
the syndicalists. He fought against sham plebeian ignorance: "Without
revolutionary theory there is no revolutionary movement." He inveighed
against the narrowness of nationalism: "Our young movement can only bear
fruit by assimilating the experience of other countries."

His conception of the relations between workers and intellectuals is
worth attention:

>The history of all countries shows that _the working class, left to its
>own resources, can develop only trade-union consciousness_; that is, it
>may itself realise the necessity for combining in unions to fight
>against the employers, and to strive to compel the government to pass
>necessary labour legislation, etc. The theory of socialism, however,
>grew out of the philosophic, historic and economic theories that were
>elaborated by the educated representatives of the propertied classes,
>the intellectuals. The founders of modern scientific socialism, Marx
>and Engels, themselves belong to the bourgeois intelligentsia.
>Similarly in Russia the theoretical doctrine of Social-Democracy arose
>quite independently of the spontaneous growth of the labour movement;
>it arose as a natural, inevitable outcome _of the development of ideas_
>among the revolutionary socialist intelligentsia.

It is true that the workers may contribute to this development: "but
they do not contribute in their capacity as workmen, but in their
capacity as a Proudhon or a Weitling," that is to say "in the degree in
which they acquire the knowledge available in their time and increase
it," by assimilating general culture. "There are some wretched
intellectuals who think it is enough to speak to the workers of factory
life and to go on repeating what they have known for a long time."
Marxists must inoculate the people with the "bacillus of revolution."

He has this idea at heart and insists on it repeatedly: "The
_spontaneous_ development of the workers' movement leads to the
domination of bourgeois ideology." Why? "For this simple reason, that
bourgeois ideology is far older in origin than Social-Democratic
ideology, and far more fully developed...." Consequently: "The workers
can acquire political class consciousness _only from without_, that is,
only outside of the economic struggle." It can only be found in the
relations of all classes with one another and with the State. He quotes
a whole page from Karl Kautsky, whose words are "profoundly true and
important." Thus: "Socialism and the class struggle arise side by side
and not one out of the other." The proletariat can create neither
economic science nor modern technique. "The vehicles of science are not
the proletariat, but the _bourgeois intelligentsia_ (K.K.'s emphasis).
It was out of the heads of members of this stratum that modern socialism
originated...." This should be borne in mind by anyone who desires to
judge Lenin's disciples by the tenets of their master.

The political realism, the supple tactics, which were later to be
praised even by his enemies, are already visible: "Social-Democracy does
not tie a man's hands, is not limited to one plan or one fixed method
once for all; it admits all means so long as they lie within the
resources of the movement and permit the maximum results under the given
conditions." He is anxious to use the university movement, then in the
vanguard, and to associate it with working-class action. He thinks that
the liberal opposition against the reactionary State should be
supported, "to help forward all democratic opposition," to carry "to all
classes of the population" the activities of Social-Democracy. Without
allowing himself to be influenced by mistaken trade union purism, he
envisages alliances with the bourgeois liberals. "Only those fear
temporary alliances, even with uncertain elements, who lack confidence
in themselves." His masterly intuition is perfectly shown in the words:
"The whole of political life is an endless chain composed of an infinite
number of links. The whole art of the politician consists in finding and
taking firm hold of the link that it is most difficult to take from you,
the most important at the given moment and the one which best guarantees
to you the possession of the whole chain."

On the eve of assuming the responsibility of a revolution in his Party
and pending the revolution in his own country, Lenin attained perfect
mastery over his means. His confidence in himself was reinforced by his
confidence in Marx and Engels, by intellectual agreement with Plekhanov
and Kautsky, especially with his immediate master, the Plekhanov who had
thrown in _Iskra_ the prophetic warning: "In the great socialist
movement two different tendencies are emerging and -- who knows? --
perhaps the revolutionary struggle of the twentieth century will bring a
rupture between the _Mountain_ and the _Gironde_ of Social-Democracy."
For Plekhanov such visions were an intellectual exercise; for Lenin
realism in ideas was to be translated into serious action.

## Chapter 03: Prologue to Revolution

### 3.1

"I FIRST made Lenin's acquaintance in 1903. The acquaintance, it is
true, was not personal but by correspondence, but there remained with me
an indelible impression which has never left me during the whole of my
work for the Party. I was then in Siberia, an exile." These words,
spoken after the death of Lenin, are Stalin's only personal allusion to
his first period of exile.

There seems to be no documentation on this first short stage of his
adventurous life; the person most interested has taken pains that it
should disappear. Nothing about it is to be found in the prolix memoirs
of former prisoners or political exiles, nor in the voluminous accounts
of the Social-Democratic Parry. In the police archives, where valuable
material on revolutionary history is preserved, all traces of Stalin
have been removed, though various reviews have published all that can be
found about the more or less remarkable or noteworthy Bolsheviks. Are we
to conclude, with Trotsky, that the writings of the Stalin of that
period, of "Koba," would compromise his reputation? The reply is to be
found in the statement of the facts and analysis of documents.

The rest of Stalin's speech gives the measure of its veracity:

>Knowledge of Lenin's revolutionary activity from the end of the
>nineties, and especially after 1901, after the publication of _Iskra_,
>had led me to the conviction that we possessed an extraordinary man in
>Lenin. He was not then merely a director of the Party in my eyes; he
>was its effective creator, for he alone understood its internal
>substance and its urgent needs. When I compare him with other Party
>leaders, it always seems to me that his companions in arms --
>Plekhanov, Martov, Axelrod and others -- all of them a head below
>Lenin, were such that in comparison with them Lenin was not simply one
>of the directors, but a director of a higher type, a mountain eagle,
>knowing no fear in the struggle and boldly leading the Party forward by
>the unexplored paths of the Russian revolutionary movement. I was so
>profoundly moved by this conviction that I felt I must write on the
>subject to one of my nearest friends, then an émigré, asking him for a
>reply.

This is obviously a version prepared after the event for a special
purpose. In fact the writings of Lenin in the 'nineties were anonymous
or signed by names still unknown. In _Iskra_ the articles were unsigned;
no one except a few of the initiated in London and in Switzerland, no
one in Russia except very close friends, and certainly no one in the
Caucasus, knew exactly Lenin's share in the paper. Martov was the
principal stand-by of the paper because of his prolific output,
Plekhanov for the extent of his knowledge and his authority in the
International. In _Zarya_, except for a refutation of the criticisms of
Marx on the agrarian question, Lenin used various initials, but never
his own. His book on the development of capitalism in Russia,
inaccessible to a young seminarist ignorant of the alphabet of
economics, revealed the author's learning and powers of analysis, but
not the foresight and audacity of the future leader. Nothing but
immediate contact with Lenin in his daily work could give an idea of his
quality or reveal his importance, and that is why it was possible for a
thoroughly experienced revolutionary, Alexeyev, visiting Lenin in
London, to say to Trotsky: "I think that as far as the revolution is
concerned, Lenin is more important than Plekhanov." In order to
appreciate -- and that after twenty years' delay -- Lenin's personal
contribution to the anonymous Social-Democratic press, the complete
edition of his works was required, and even then it was impossible for
his wife, his sisters, and his closest fellow-workers to attribute with
certainty the paternity of certain articles. The clairvoyance of which
Stalin boasts ought not therefore to create any illusions, but rather to
be taken as an indication of the intention by which it was inspired.

>Some time afterwards [continued Stalin] while I was an exile in Siberia
>-- it was at the end of 1903-I received an enthusiastic reply from my
>friend, and a letter, simple but profound in substance, from Lenin, who
>had been informed of my letter by my friend. Lenin's note was
>relatively short, but contained a bold and fearless criticism of the
>tactics of our Party and a remarkably clear, brief exposition of the
>work of our Party in the immediate future. Lenin alone could write
>about the most complicated matters so simply and clearly, so briefly
>and boldly, that each phrase hit the bull's eye. This simple,
>courageous letter strengthened my conviction that we had in Lenin the
>mountain eagle of our Party. I cannot forgive myself for having burned
>this letter of Lenin's, with many other letters, in accordance with the
>instinct of an old conspirator.

(A literal translation leaves to Stalin the responsibility for the
metaphors as well as for the thought.)

The improbability of this account becomes clear from the statement, in
his official biography, that Stalin remained only one month in Siberia
at the time of his first exile. The exchange of correspondence by
clandestine ways between the West and Baikal would have taken much more
time. Furthermore, he escaped before arriving at his destination, at
least if one can trust Nevsky's dictionary; he could therefore neither
give any address nor receive any letter. As to the pretended instinct of
the old conspirator, it has not deprived the Lenin Institute of
thousands of manuscripts, letters, copies, drafts, fragments, etc. -- an
inheritance jealously guarded. What emerges is that Stalin thought it
necessary to antedate his relations with Lenin as if to parry an
expected attack.

Though it may seem pedantic, outside a small circle of experts, to
examine a detail apparently so unimportant, it is really necessary, for
it concerns one of the pretexts which have served as an excuse for the
bitterest internal quarrels at Moscow. Besides, the by no means
fortuitous disappearance of essential biographical material about
Stalin, the absolute impossibility for those living in Russia of
supplying information and of establishing the facts in a sense
contradictory to Stalin, compel the biographer to put scraps together
and to interpret them in the light of knowledge. Stalin, like many other
people discussed by their contemporaries or by posterity, cannot be
believed on his word alone, nor invariably contradicted. Historical
accuracy demands the verification of his statements and, in case of
need, the motives for his modifications.

Social-Democracy did not really exist in Russia at the moment when Koba
underwent his first months of imprisonment. Its formal foundation by the
little committee at Minsk, five years before, was necessarily only a
pioneers' gesture, whose symbolic value did not supply the realities of
a party. But steady progress in industry, the development of the
proletariat, repeated strikes, and the multiplication of clubs,
emphasised the necessity of a central organisation which should embrace
all the isolated groups and co-ordinate their scattered effort -- a
party able to draw the masses after it, and to mould their elemental
action. Such a party was about to appear.

### 3.2

THE real Constituent Congress of the "Workers Social-Democratic Party of
Russia," preceded by long preparatory conversations, opened at Brussels
in July 1903, but, owing to the action of the police, was compelled to
move to London. Of fifty-eight delegates, fourteen of them with
consultative voice, there were only four workmen and there was some
difficulty in arranging for their presence. The fact is important, for,
as the principal leaders afterwards admitted, the plethora of
intellectuals largely explains the exhausting subtlety of the
interminable discussions of the Social-Democratic émigrés.

The Congress held no less than thirty-seven sessions, as well as
innumerable supplementary meetings. Twenty subjects were on the agenda,
several of them -- such as the Party programme, for example -- involving
many others and requiring; different votes, without counting the votes
on procedure. The infinite complexity of these controversies --
sometimes on a high plane -- and the often transitory classifications,
make it difficult even for the initiated to comprehend the situation. A
subsequent historico-polemical literature, considerable (in quantity),
has still further confused and obscured it by a thousand variants,
errors or omissions. The lack of an accurate stenographic report and the
abundance of hidden meanings and unavowed motives increase the
difficulty. Nevertheless, we must try to disentangle the bare essentials
in order to understand the sequel.

The Iskraists were in a majority and at first formed a bloc directed
particularly against the _Bund_ which wished to preserve its
independence in a federative organisation. But in voting on the first
article of the Statutes, they divided into almost equal sections, 28
supporting Martov, and 23 Lenin. For want of an available definition,
the latter were called "hards" and the former "softs," as characteristic
of the two temperaments. The majority oscillated by the margin of a few
Votes between Left and Right. Finally when the personal question arose
over the election of central organs, Lenin, thanks to the departure of
the more moderate members of the Congress, secured 19 votes against 17
and 3 abstentions; but the minority declined to give way. There was a
virtual schism in the Party. Henceforward Social-Democracy was divided
into two main sections, that of the majority, the "Bolsheviks," and that
of the minority, the "Mensheviks," without counting those who, like
Riazanov, stood outside both.

Although Lenin was to play the decisive role in the issue of the
Congress and its consequences, Plekhanov dominated its debates from the
intellectual standpoint. In the Party Programme Committee, over which he
presided, he "illuminated the big meeting like a burning, blazing
firework of knowledge and wit," says Trotsky in _My Life_. "_The safety
of the revolution is the supreme law_" he said in plenary session,
commenting on the Party programme, in which were included such essential
demands as a Constituent Assembly elected by universal suffrage, liberty
of conscience, of speech, of the press, of meeting, the right to strike,
and inviolability of the person. "If the safety of the revolution
demanded the temporary limitation of such and such a democratic
principle, it would be criminal to hesitate.... It is an admissible
hypothesis that we, Social-Democrats, might be against universal
suffrage.... The revolutionary proletariat might limit the political
powers of the upper class just as they limited ours in the past." As
though he foresaw the fate of the future Constituent Assembly, he
declared: "If the people, in a moment of revolutionary enthusiasm,
elected a very good parliament, we should try to make it a Long
Parliament, but if the elections should turn out ill, we should have to
try to dissolve it, not at the end of two years, but, if possible, at
the end of two weeks." These words engraved themselves on Lenin's
memory. On the question of the death penalty, Plekhanov warned the
Congress against taking up too absolute a position, suggesting the
possibility that the revolution might have to get rid of the Tsar and
some of the nobility.

At one of the first meetings Trotsky had made a very successful speech,
following the general policy of _Iskra_; Riazanov called him "Lenin's
big stick." Later on, though temperamentally one of the real "hards," he
inclined more and more to the side of the "softs." Probably Plekhanov's
instinctive dislike of him had something to do with this. His attachment
to the old staff of the journal, especially to Axelrod and Vera
Zasulich, kept him on the side of the minority. But the simple
explanation is no doubt that a politician of twenty-four cannot be what
he will be when he reaches maturity. Plekhanov was then forty-seven;
Lenin thirty-three. Wisdom and experience strengthened the ascendancy of
their distinguished personalities. It was no small thing to be able to
meet them in argument with original views.

The Party programme already envisaged the dictatorship of the
proletariat, thus defined: "The dictatorship of the proletariat is the
pre-requisite of the social revolution, _that is to say the conquest by
the proletariat of power which will permit them to crush all resistance
on the part of the exploiting class_." For Trotsky this dictatorship
would only become possible if Social-Democracy and the working classes
were ready to unite. "It will not be a case of the seizure of power by
conspirators, but the political reign of the organised working class,
forming the majority of the nation" -- a conception evidently
inacceptable to the "hards." In looking forward to tactical co-operation
with the liberals, Trotsky was opposed to Lenin, and supported the wider
formula of Potressov.

When the line of demarcation between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks was
drawn, Trotsky gave energetic support to the latter. The first article
of the Statutes proposed by Lenin admitted as Party members "all who
profess its programme and support the Party not only with money but by
personal participation in its organisations." Martov put forward a text
with the modification: "and give regular personal assistance under the
direction of one of the organisations." Controversy grew round these
formulae. Axelrod referred to the example of the _People's Will_ in
support of the argument that the most devoted elements of the Party
should be surrounded by a category of less active members. That is to
say the Party might include sympathisers not formally affiliated to the
organisation. "We are the conscious interpreters of an unconscious
process," said Martov in defining the Party. "The more people there are
called Party members, the better it will be. We shall have reason for
rejoicing if every striker and every demonstrator pleading his case can
call himself a member of the Party."

Plekhanov took the side of Lenin. "I have no preconceived idea," he said
in substance, "but the more I reflect on what has been said here, the
stronger is my conviction that 'the truth lies with Lenin.' There is no
insurmountable obstacle to the entry into the Party of a real
revolutionary. 'As for the gentlemen who do not want to join, we have no
need of them.' The intellectuals alone will hesitate for individualistic
reasons to join the Party, but so much the better, for they are
generally opportunists." Trotsky, in agreement with Martov, replied: "I
don't know that you can put a statutory exorcism on opportunism -- I do
not give the statutes any sort of mystical interpretation."

In replying to his opponents, Lenin began by reassuring them: "I do not
consider our differences to be so vital as to be a matter of life or
death for the Party. We certainly will not perish because of a bad
clause in the rules!" But nevertheless he stuck firmly to his text.
"Trotsky has completely misunderstood the fundamental idea advanced by
Comrade Plekhanov," he said, giving further precision to his ideas:
"Does my formula restrict or broaden the term, member of the Party? My
formula restricts this conception while Martov's broadens it." In the
same way Trotsky "completely misinterpreted the main idea of my book
_What is to be Done?_ when he said that the Party is not a conspirative
organisation.... He forgot that in my book I propose a number of types
of organisations; from the most secret and the most exclusive to the
comparatively broad and 'free' (loose) organisations." The working
class, he added, should work "under the control and direction" of the
Party and not identify itself with it. "_Our task is to form a
clandestine group of leaders and to set the largest possible mass in
motion_."

To Axelrod and Martov he replied: "It is exceedingly difficult, and
almost impossible, for us to distinguish talkers from workers. And there
is hardly another country in the world in which the confusion of these
two categories is as common, causes such boundless confusion and does so
much damage as in Russia. We suffer severely from the presence of this
evil, not only among the intelligentsia, but also in the ranks of the
working class; and Martov's formula legitimatises it." In conclusion he
said: "Each member of the Party is responsible for the Party, and the
Party for each member."

Defeated by five votes, Lenin was not discouraged for a moment; he
pursued his plan tenaciously and at last succeeded in obtaining a
majority of two votes for the reduction of the _Iskra_ editorial board
to three members. Martov refused to join Plekhanov and Lenin in this
triumvirate; the minority took no part in the election of the Central
Committee; the breach was irreparable. Lenin was reluctant to acquiesce
in it. For him, as for all, the schism was a surprise and a disaster.
But his intransigence, really fundamental, left no hope of
reconciliation. People began to talk of a state of siege in the Party,
of seizure of the leadership, of dictatorship. To which Lenin coldly
replied that he was not afraid of big words: "In regard to unstable and
wavering elements, it is not only our right but our duty to create 'a
state of siege.'" To the elders of the Party, astounded and indignant at
the audacity of their emancipated disciple, Plekhanov said: "_It is of
such stuff that Robespierres are made_."

How did Koba react in his prison at Batoum to the news of the rupture in
London? The police note quoted above from _Zarya Vostoka_ placed him
among the original Mensheviks; Stalin having never denied it, Trotsky
used it against him. The supposition does not at first seem very
plausible, for the three delegates of the Caucasus at the Congress,
Topuridze (Tiflis), Zurabov (Batoum), Knuniantz (Baku) were ranged on
the Bolshevik side. Jordania, one of the original Mensheviks, was
present at the London Conference, with consultative powers, but stayed
for two years abroad. But Koba, with his slow and prudent temperament,
may possibly have been influenced by Kandelaki, his close companion, who
was always a Menshevik, or he may have hesitated momentarily before
joining the camp of the "hards" to which his character predestined him.
In any case ordinary militants were very slightly informed. And perhaps
the doubtful story of the letter from Lenin may have been an
unverifiable fiction chosen to cover up a difficulty. In any case the
hesitation was of very short duration.

Extraordinary stress, for no real reason, is laid by the Bolsheviks on
details of this kind. In 1903 no one understood the exact nature of the
conflict, and Lenin himself, in striving to reunite the divergent
sections, in seeking to associate them with himself in work and in
action, showed plainly enough that he did not regard the rupture as
definitive, or the positions taken up as irremediable. The history of
the Party, indeed, saw numerous reconstructions of the directing
personnel, unexpected separations, and unforeseeable rapprochements. The
controversies among the émigrés seemed confused and meaningless in
Russia. In the Caucasus especially the schism was for a long time
incomprehensible. Everywhere an external unity concealed the truth from
the average Social-Democrat. The real touchstone -- revolution -- was
not there to try men, to test ideas. Is it not an arbitrary proceeding,
in any case, to pretend to compare individuals without taking account of
their age, origin, environment, acquired education, and the divers
influences to which they are submitted?

Historical examples show the meaninglessness of these retrospective
criteria, especially among those precedents which the Bolsheviks claim
as their own. Marat did not enter the French Revolution as a Republican;
before the fall of the Bastille, he shared the general illusions, and
hoped for an enlightened, limited despotism; the first numbers of the
_Ami du Peuple_ advocated a liberal monarchy; up to the middle of 1790
he still had confidence in the King; then he denounced the hereditary
principle, and in 1791 advocated a restriction of the prerogatives of
the Crown; on the 10th August, he still favoured an elective monarchy;
finally he accepted the Republic as an accomplished fact. Robespierre,
also, admitted in 1792 different forms of sovereignty: "I should prefer
to see a popular representative assembly, and citizens free and
respected under a king, than a nation enslaved and degraded under the
rod of an aristocratic senate and a dictator. I do not like Cromwell any
better than Charles I, and I could not endure the yoke of the Decemvirs
any better than that of Tarquin." A year before the armed rising in
North America against England and the War of Independence, Washington
wrote (1774): "Independence is neither desired, nor is it in the
interest of this colony, or of any other on the Continent...." And
Jefferson (1775) Said: "There is not in the whole of the British Empire
a man who esteems more warmly than I do the union with Great Britain."
Cromwell, before the second Civil War, was still an advocate of
constitutional monarchy with Charles as sovereign. It is the course of
events, the endless chain of cause and effect, which determines the
solutions of problems that have to be resolved, and reveals men of a
stature to deal with them. Lenin knew this and was fond of quoting the
Napoleonic formula, "First engage, then see."

It matters very little then, whether Stalin was a Menshevik at first or
whether Trotsky was always a Bolshevik. Both undertook responsibilities
later on by which they can be better appreciated than by the hesitations
of their youth. Moreover there are many ways of taking sides: as master
or disciple, for practical reasons or by conviction. Koba could only be
a disciple. Everything points to the conclusion that he took a decision
not _for_ something but _against_ someone. When he followed Lenin it
would have been difficult for him to give straightforward reasons for
his position.

### 3.3

IN JANUARY 1904, Stalin escaped from Siberia and returned to Tiflis. He
lay low and spent a long time there unobserved, working in the
provincial organisation of Transcaucasia. A whole series of panegyrists
now give him credit during this period for a "bitter struggle against
Menshevism." In fact, Menshevism was then non-existent, and the Georgian
Social-Democracy "maintained its unity and had neither internal quarrels
nor splits," so writes P. Makharadze the communist historian of the
revolution in the Caucasus. The assertion is very imprudent for other
reasons, for, if judged by its results, Koba's effort had purely
negative results. The Mensheviks obtained their greatest successes in
Georgia; they won over without a contest the greater part of the
population.

In any case it is only necessary to consult the memoirs, narratives and
documents concerning socialism in Transcaucasia to ascertain that
Stalin, whether present or absent, never exercised any influence at all
on the course of events. Never at any time did he play a part of the
slightest importance. Especially significant is the detailed "report" of
A. Yenukidze to the Old Bolsheviks' Club in 1923 on the illegal printing
presses in the Caucasus. Stalin is mentioned once in sixty pages and
without eulogy. Six years later, the same Yenukidze was to write
_Fragmentary Recollections_, especially intended to affirm that his
superior in the hierarchy "literally carried on his shoulders the whole
struggle against the Mensheviks in the Caucasus from 1904 to 1908." The
_Recollections_ of S. Alliluyev, a militant workman active in
Transcaucasia and Stalin's future father-in-law, mention him
incidentally only once and that in a list. Many of Stalin's
subordinates, in their Memoirs, hardly mention the name of their chief,
and cannot impute to him a single original idea, a single notable act;
one would seek in vain any characteristic statement about him. The
copious _Histories_ of the Party, each more official than the: last,
relating to this time and place, are absolutely silent about him.

At that time there were Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, in many ways
comparable to the "chartists of physical force" and to the "chartists of
moral force," but there was neither Bolshevism nor Menshevism as yet. A
disagreement, even an insoluble one, on the editorial board of a paper,
was not sufficient to establish incompatible doctrines. Principles were
held in common, and the programme had just been adopted in common. But
the antagonism would soon become envenomed, the divergences deeper, and
the respective ideas of the two sides more differentiated.

The Congress had been the starting-point of infinitely complicated
dissensions and disputes. For more than fifteen years, ruptures, unions,
resignations and combinations criss-crossed one another. A specialised
work would be required to relate the changes, if only to indicate them
in their main outlines. Only real experts can disentangle the
committees, councils, sectional bureaux, dissident groups, leagues,
unions, co-optations, conferences where the Minority Party were in a
majority, subdivisions of sections, Bolsheviks of the Right, Mensheviks
of the Left, advocates of unity, conciliators, extreme Right, extreme
Left, adhesion or defection of national parties (Polish, Lett, Jewish),
birth and disappearance of journals of various shades and similar
titles, and innumerable sobriquets. For the purposes of this study we
must deliberately put aside detail for the main essential outlines.

At first sight the subdivision of the Party into so many sections seemed
to condemn it to impotence. But this subdivision was an effect rather
than a cause, and could be terminated under new circumstances. "A party
declares itself a victorious party by subdivision, and by its ability to
survive it," wrote Engels thirty years earlier, in explaining how "the
solidarity of the proletariat is realised everywhere by groupings of
different parties which are waging a life and death conflict, like the
Christian sects in the Roman Empire during the worst persecutions." No
section of the Socialist International suffered so many fratricidal
struggles as the Russian section, doubtless because no other was so ripe
for passing from theory to practice.

This internal struggle was not undertaken light-heartedly, and its
champions, moved by an impersonal force, were the first to suffer from
it. Lenin, especially, was profoundly affected by the results of his
tactics. The end of his friendship with Martov was very painful, and the
subsequent breach with Plekhanov caused him real grief. His wife,
Krupskaya, says that even his health was undermined. He persisted,
however, certain of the rightness of his case, and faced the adversary,
consenting occasionally to political compromises to gain time without
giving way on essentials. He had his hours of discouragement, and even
thought at one time of leaving for America. To-day Bolsheviks never
allude to episodes of this kind, as if Lenin's reputation would suffer
thereby. It is unnecessary to seek historical justification for
individual weariness, but, if it were necessary, two precedents at least
come to mind. Marat, in the full tide of revolution, thought the cause
was lost, and left France, and nearly left a second time. Cromwell
intended, if the Grand Remonstrance had not been voted, to leave
England.

How the majority became a minority and vice versa, is easy to explain.
The Mensheviks were more numerous among the émigrés; the Bolsheviks had
more supporters in Russia. The proportions were to be modified later on.
Lenin had to live through many difficult moments at Geneva in the
committees where he soon stood alone in his opinion. He had wished to
re-establish an understanding between the two parties. Plekhanov was
eager for the same thing, as were Martov and Trotsky. But, as each
understood the peace after his own fashion, their attempts merely
widened the breach: and Lenin, weary of the affair, resigned from
_Iskra_, which passed into the hands of the Mensheviks, temporarily
reinforced by Plekhanov. "_Robespierre has fallen_," said the latter.
Between the old and the new _Iskra_, there is an "abyss," wrote Trotsky.
Plekhanov left the Bolsheviks, as Trotsky was to separate himself from
the Mensheviks a year later. This was the attitude of Riazanov and other
less known men, called simply Social-Democrats. Plekhanov considered
himself "above the divisions," and Trotsky, more modest, "outside" them.

Martov wanted a party "strictly centralised" but not composed of men who
had "_resigned, whether of their own free will or not, the right to
think_." He thought Lassalle's ideas on organisation were implicit in
Lenin's and would lead to an occult dictatorship of theorists, he
denounced "mechanical obedience" in his pamphlets, the state of terror
and of siege in the Party and accused Lenin of bureaucratic formalism,
of absolutism, of Jacobinism, of Bonapartism. Axelrod, in his articles
in _Iskra_ and elsewhere, rehearsed these arguments, spoke of autocratic
centralism, and imputed to Lenin "the systematic stifling of individual
initiative," reproaching him with turning men into the "cogs and screws"
of a machine. Lenin replied in his pamphlet _One Step Forward, Two Steps
Backward_, in which he defends himself by taking the offensive.

According to him, the bureaucratic method as opposed to the democratic
is centralism against autonomy, it is the principle of revolutionary
organisation as opposed to opportunist organisation; all the accusations
of the Mensheviks were so much cover for anarchist and opportunist
degeneration. For, he said, quoting Kautsky, his favourite author after
Marx and Engels: "Democracy by no means connotes the absence of power;
it is not anarchy; it is the supremacy of the mass of the electorate
over its representatives, while under other forms of power, the
so-called servants of the people are really its masters." Jacobinism?
"If Axelrod assails the Jacobins, is it not because he has been
consorting with Girondins?" And Lenin is not afraid of the epithet, for
he is ready to give it content: "The Jacobin, bound indissolubly to the
organised proletariat, and class-conscious -- that is the revolutionary
Social-Democrat."

This definition provided food for controversy for a long time, and that
beyond the national field. Rosa Luxemburg, one of the strongest
personalities of the socialist movement, wrote a refutation which
appeared in the new _Iskra_ (No. 69). Rosa Luxemburg took an active part
in the workers' movement in Germany and Russia, and she was also the
inspiring force in the Polish and Lithuanian movements. The importance
of her works on political economy, historical criticism, and
revolutionary strategy and tactics, her strength of purpose, her ability
as a writer and propagandist, gave her weight as a controversialist. In
criticising Lenin's formula, she accused him of entertaining a
conception of the Jacobin Social-Democrat outside the proletarian
organisation, whereas "_Social-Democracy is itself the working-class
movement_." Opportunism cannot be routed by a regulation however severe:
"Nothing so surely and easily puts a workers' movement in its early
stages at the mercy of the intellectuals as its imprisonment in the
strait-jacket of bureaucratic centralisation." Kautsky, always keenly
interested in Russian questions, supported Rosa Luxemburg's view, as did
Parvus, one of the most distinguished Marxists of the time.

But the most violent, if not the most effective blows, were dealt by
Trotsky in the pamphlet, _Our Political Tasks_, in which he described
Lenin as "head of the reactionary wing of our Party" and the "dull
caricature of the tragic intransigence of Jacobinism." Leninist methods,
said Trotsky, would lead to a situation in which "_the organisation of
the Party takes the place of the Party itself, the Central Committee
takes the place of the organisation, and finally the dictator takes the
place of the Central Committee_." They would in the end impose on the
Party the discipline first of the barracks, and then of the factory.
"Rigour of organisation as opposed to our opportunism is simply another
form of political stupidity." Lenin's ex-"big stick" struck with vigour
him who had formerly guided it.

According to Trotsky all questions of the organisation of the
proletariat find their own solution in the course of the political
struggle. "The Jacobins," he wrote, "were Utopians, and we mean to be
exponents of objective tendencies. They were thoroughgoing idealists; we
are thoroughgoing materialists. They were rationalists; we are
dialecticians.... They cut off people's heads -- we illuminate them with
class-consciousness." Lenin would guillotine instead of convince.
"_Under Jacobin-Bolshevik tactics, the whole international proletarian
movement would be accused of moderatism before the revolutionary
tribunal, and the lion head of Marx would be the first to fall under the
knife of the guillotine_." Trotsky protests against intimidation in
matters of theory, against any preconceived idea of orthodoxy: "Those
who deny it are to be rejected. Those who doubt are near rejecting it.
Those who question are near doubting...." As for the dictatorship of the
proletariat, "Maximilien Lenin" and the Bolsheviks represent "_a
dictatorship over the proletariat_."

This controversy, in which Koba would have been embarrassed at having to
take part, and of which Lenin took charge alone against a galaxy of
brilliant doctrinaires and writers, is just as pertinent to-day; the
same arguments have been exchanged and developed for a quarter of a
century and recur in recent discussions, many controversialists having
changed camps. From the very beginning the Bolsheviks were obsessed by
the French Revolution to which they have continued to refer, whether as
an example to be followed or a precedent to be avoided. The germ of the
tendency which constituted at once the strength and the weakness of
Lenin's party was already discernible -- the ability to organise and to
act as a disciplined army capable of carrying out orders, but always at
the mercy of an error on the part of their leader and in danger of
sinking into an intellectual passivity contrary to their theoretical
mission as vanguard and model.

Plekhanov in the end definitely took sides against Lenin. Not that he
would have chosen to be the spokesman of a Menshevik section; the choice
did not take shape as a dilemma; the difference being between generals
without troops, so that there was no open schism, though the two
principal groups -- whose distinctive ideas were still ill-defined and
the result mainly of personal affinities -- were already acting in
complete independence of one another. But he thought he saw in Lenin a
theorist vowed to isolation, dangerous because of his narrow and rigid
interpretation of Marxism. Looking beyond their agreement at the recent
Congress, he foresaw an extreme accentuation of centralisation by the
Bolsheviks, as disastrous as the contrary excesses on the Menshevik
side. After having shared the direction of _Iskra_, first with Lenin,
then with Martov, he proceeded to edit alone his _Journal of a
Social-Democrat_, and to criticise severely both the rival factions, the
"enemy brothers." In that _Journal_ he predicted the evolution of
Bolshevism to the "_final end, when everything would revolve around one
man who will_, ex providentia, _unite all power in himself_."

### 3.4

LENIN, sorely tried by a separation which he did not think definitive,
had gained fresh confidence after securing fresh support. The most
important new supporter was Alexander Bogdanov, writer and scholar, a
highly cultured and scrupulous economist and philosopher, who brought
with him his friends Bazarov, Stepanov and Lunacharsky. Among the
faithful were also Leonid Krassin, brilliant organiser of illegal action
and audacious conspirator under the mask of his profession of engineer,
and valuable for many reasons, especially for his connections among the
liberal bourgeoisie, from whom he extracted subscriptions for the Party;
also Vorovsky, Olminsky, and Litvinov, less brilliant but devoted
auxiliaries. With their assistance Lenin decided on a prolonged
struggle. He created the periodical _Vperyod_, appealed to the humble
militant workers in Russia against the brilliant émigré leaders, and
demanded a new Congress. He had already seen former Marxists notably
Peter Struve, author of the first Manifesto, leave socialism; he had
seen the _Bund_, the first Social-Democratic organisation in Russia,
detach itself from the body of the Party; he had seen the whole staff of
_Iskra_ turn against him. He felt that he was not understood in the
International. But he could and must get back to work; there were
immense reserves among the people, there were incalculable possibilities
for the future; symptoms of the coming storm recurred in Russia, where
the proletariat, regardless of the laboratories of social science,
passed from resistance to the offensive, and demonstrated more and more
frequently in the streets.

The strike at Batoum, in which Koba took part in 1902, and its violent
sequels of demonstrations and repressions, had had reverberations in
many towns as far north as Nizhni-Novgorod. A serious industrial and
commercial crisis accompanied by severe unemployment fanned the fire of
revolution. Every economic event took on a political aspect, and aroused
republican and socialist demands. At the end of the year a strike of
unprecedented dimensions broke out at Rostov, involving all the workers.
In the summer of 1903 the petroleum workers at Baku left work, and their
example was followed by all the workers from Tiflis to Batoum; there
were strikes at Odessa, at Kiev, and in all the southern centres.
Everywhere there were conflicts with police, soldiers and Cossacks. The
workmen's societies, formed by the police agent Zubatov for the purpose
of turning the movement away from opposition to the existing regime,
broke their leading strings and rushed to join in the struggle, as Lenin
had predicted in _What is to be Done?_ Social-Democrats of the rank and
file, in spite of the quarrels among the leaders and ignoring Article I
of the Statutes of the Party, began to take part in social conflicts;
sometimes they gained control and gave them a political orientation. In
the rural districts arson threw its tragic light on the increasing
distress of the peasants, weighed down with taxes and imposts, condemned
to permanent undernutrition and periodically decimated by famine. The
emancipation of the serfs had been carried out by methods which in
practice retained the dependence of the freed serfs on the great
landowners; a special kind of feudal system still existed. There was
periodical rioting by the despairing peasants, savagely repressed by the
army. Corporal punishment was still practised in the villages as in the
army. The level of agricultural technique allowed no hope of better
crops without the restoration to the peasantry of the lands owned by the
privileged classes. The extreme poverty of this mass of consumers and
their low purchasing capacity restricted the home market and was a
further obstacle to the expansion of an industry already hampered by
heavy fiscal burdens.

In this way Tsarism paralysed the productive power of the nation and,
with the exception of the small castes dependent on the Crown, all
classes had an interest in its overthrow. The State, which with its
banks, its railways and its vodka monopoly, was the chief employer of
labour, was in constant need of foreign loans and new sources of
revenue. Interest on the debt and military expenditure absorbed more
than half the Imperial revenue. Torn by contradictions, Russian economy,
backward in spite of superiority of plant due to its recent origin, and
more concentrated than in any other country, could advance no further
without a new impulse. Hence the Russo-Japanese War.

In the past the autocracy had solved many difficulties by conquest. But
after having encountered the English in Central Asia, in the Far East it
ran up against the Japanese, who were, moreover, allied with England.
The war imposed a short respite on the revolutionary movement, but it
soon exposed the barbarism of the old regime, its impotence and its
corruption. _Defeatism_, which had already shown its head in the Crimean
War, asserted itself this time on a large scale among the liberal
bourgeoisie, the oppressed nationalities, and the socialist parties, and
among the workers and peasants. By comparison with Imperial Russia,
suffering one defeat after another, Japan appeared almost as a champion
of civilisation. This view, widespread in Europe, found singular
expression in the International in articles by the Englishman, H. M.
Hyndman, who described the Japanese victory as one of the greatest
events in history and as an event decisive for the future of
socialism....

The Manchurian disaster shook Russian "society," that is the
bourgeoisie, to its foundations. The democratic movement, emboldened by
great workmen's demonstrations, sought expression in the _Zemstvos_
(consultative provincial councils), in congresses and banquets. The
powerful evangelical criticism of Tolstoy threatened the ancient
despotism. But liberalism in Russia, lacking a solid social basis and
represented by an intelligentsia that had lost its courage, confessed
defeat before going into action. The radical intellectuals and
courageous students rallied to the workers' movement, the one real
coherent force with which Tsarism had to reckon.

Social-Democracy was not alone in claiming the organisation of the
people. A party known as the Social Revolutionaries, constituted abroad
in 1901, and composed of various groups, leagues and autonomous unions,
was about to hold its first congress. Its general tendency was that of
the earlier Populism brought up to date by Lavrov and Mikhailovsky,
somewhat influenced by western socialism, and its characteristic feature
was terrorism. In 1902, its "Fighting Brigade" had begun a series of
individual assassinations, decried in principle by the Social-Democrats,
advocates of mass action, but which nevertheless maintained the
revolutionary atmosphere, and stimulated opposition against the Tsarist
regime. Michael Gotz, Gershuni, Natanson, among its representative
figures, and terrorists like Karpovich, Balmashev, Sazonov and Kalyayev,
were worthy exemplars of the resuscitated _narodovoltsy_ tradition.
Marxists looked on these Social-Revolutionaries as disgruntled liberals,
democrats armed with bombs. The most energetic of them developed in
opposite directions, a Savinkov to the Right, a Spiridonova to the Left.

In Poland, a "Polish Socialist Party" of national struggle grew more
rapidly than the Social-Democratic Party of the class struggle; it was
closely akin to the Russian Social Revolutionaries in the vagueness of
its philosophy and its terrorist methods. In the different nationalities
subject to the Empire, nationalist revolutionary groups supported the
workers' and peasants' movement. These were _activists_ in Finland,
_federal socialists_ in Georgia, as later on there were _dachnakists_ in
Armenia and _mussavatists_ in Azerbaijan. The Japanese Government
offered money and arms to all the subversive parties in order to weaken
Russia in the rear of the armies by domestic disturbances. The only ones
who accepted were the Finnish Activists, the Georgian Federal Socialists
and the most nationalist section of the Polish Socialist Party, whose
leader, Pilsudski, even went to Japan to ally himself with the enemies
of the Russian oppressor.

In December 1904, again at Baku, a strike broke out which made the
Social-Democrats masters of the situation for several weeks and caused a
recrudescence of the workers' militancy. In January 1905, an incident at
the Putilov works led to a sympathetic strike of the whole of the
workers in St. Petersburg. There again Zubatov's legal association had
gone further than its founder intended. On January 22nd, 200,000 workmen
followed Father Gapon to lay before the Tsar a petition stating their
demands. This loyalist and peaceful demonstration, met by machine-gun
fire and Cossack cavalry charges, ended in a massacre, and turned to
revolt. There were thousands of victims. "Bloody Sunday" provoked a
general rising, a great strike in over a hundred towns. The revolution
hoped for by many generations, so often prophesied, on the altar of
which so many lives had been sacrificed, had begun without waiting for a
signal from the professional revolutionaries.

### 3.5

SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY was caught unawares, and the learned calculations of
its adepts were upset by the spontaneity of the popular explosion. The
Russian militants, without distinction of creed, threw themselves into
the movement, seeking to organise it and to instil into it a socialist
programme. The theorists of the emigration embarked more vigorously on
their controversies.

Lenin said that the immediate objective was the preparation of an armed
insurrection, even the date of which was to be fixed. Martov's reply in
substance was that a man may prepare himself for insurrection, but an
insurrection is not prepared. For Lenin the revolution could not be
prepared beforehand, but the insurrection could, "if those who arranged
it had influence on the masses and knew how to choose the right moment."
To the abstract reasoning of the Mensheviks he opposed a concrete
slogan, "Arms!" His paper, _Vperyod_, published practical advice for the
insurgents, by Cluseret, General of the Paris Commune of 1871, giving
technical instructions for the erection of barricades. By his reading
and his thorough studies Lenin was well-versed in the art of war, in the
strategy of insurrections and the tactics of street fighting. Even
before him, Plekhanov, who had studied at the Military College of
Voronezh and then at the Cadet School at St. Petersburg, had published
an article on the subject. Both were indebted to Marx, and especially to
Engels, for their ideas on civil war. The Mensheviks also, thanks to the
assistance of Mikhail Pavlovich, printed in the _Iskra_ plans for
barricades and trenches, supplemented by full explanations. Trotsky
bidding good-bye to theory and conjecture, had crossed the frontier to
be in the fighting.

At that time, when unknown socialists were lavishly expending their
energies in Russia, in strikes, meetings and demonstrations of protest,
the general staff beyond the frontier continued their battles. In April
and May, 1905, the Bolsheviks held a little congress in London attended
by twenty qualified delegates of the "hards"; the Mensheviks had a
conference at Geneva. Both assemblies attacked each other and claimed
the right to represent the Party. "There was not a single worker at the
Third Congress, at any rate not one in any way remarkable," says
Krupskaya, in her _Recollections of Lenin_. Krassin made a move in
consort with Trotsky, which shows how arbitrary the lines of demarcation
still were. Koba was not a member of the Caucasus delegation, which
included Kamenev and Nevsky, and the Georgians Tskhakaya and Djaparidze;
if he had played the part that is belatedly attributed to him by
Yenukidze, his absence would be inexplicable. The Congress, under
Lenin's influence, adopted the project of the general strike transformed
into armed insurrection, and the installation of a democratic
revolutionary government in which the Bolsheviks might take part. It
recognised implicitly the factitious, or at all events the premature,
nature of the schism by its conclusion as to the necessity of uniting
the Social-Democratic sections and groups into a single party.

The reunion of the fragments of the Party would have been all the
easier, in that Lenin had never abandoned his uncompromising democracy.
In 1904 he wrote: "We are prepared to support even a bourgeois democrat
in the degree that he conforms to democracy; we are prepared to expose
any democrat, even a Social-Revolutionary, who abandons democracy." One
reads in his pamphlet, _Two Tactics_, which was dated 1905: "Anyone who
attempts to achieve socialism by any other route than that of political
democracy, will inevitably arrive at the most absurd and reactionary
deductions, both political and economic." In the same year he defined
his conception thus: "Everyone is free to say and to write what he
believes without the slightest restriction.... Liberty of speech and of
the press should be complete." Even the Mensheviks could not have gone
further; but the divergence over ways and means was stronger than the
agreement on principles.

The immense reserves of revolutionary energy long suppressed in Russia
broke out everywhere without plan or system. Strike after strike in the
towns, rioting and pillage in the country, mutinies in the Army and
Navy, small armed outbreaks everywhere. The workmen organised defensive
and offensive detachments against the reaction and its patriotic unions,
nationalist bands, and anti-Semitic _Black Hundreds_, who incited
pogroms and massacred women and children. Among the mass of
revolutionaries who bore no label, Social-Democrats,
Social-Revolutionaries, Bundists and Anarchists preached by their
example without any opportunity of concerting their activities, and
helped one another in spite of differences in principle, in chance
encounters and in the instinct of defence against the common enemy. The
Social-Democrats formed mixed or federative committees without asking
permission of their fraction leaders.

The Government, powerless to deal with all the attacks against it,
concentrated its forces on fortifying the main positions of the existing
regime. The Army on the Far Eastern front, though defeated there, was
still strong enough to crush an unarmed people. Strikes ceased in some
industrial centres, only to break out in others. Spread over an
unlimited field, the peasants did not take action beyond their own
village. A military mutiny at the Nova Alexandria camp, in which the
Menshevik Antonov-Ovseenko came into prominence, was quickly crushed, as
were the mutinies at Sebastopol, where a leader chosen on the spot,
Lieutenant Schmidt, a moderate socialist, paid the penalty with his
life. The revolt on the cruiser _Potemkin_ in the Black Sea, organised
by the Mensheviks, remained an isolated action, and was quelled, as was
the later outbreak at Kronstadt. The revolution allowed itself to be
beaten in detail.

The insurrection stimulated by the sentiment of oppressed nationality
reached its highest point in Poland at the beginning and the Caucasus at
the end of the movement. The Warsaw strike, which was a reply to the
shootings in January at St. Petersburg, cost more than a hundred dead on
the barricades, and about a thousand wounded and prisoners. At Lodz,
later on, five hundred were killed in street fighting. Pilsudski's
_Bojowka_ (fighting organisation), consisting of squads of five
determined men, harried police and Cossacks, and carried out
assassinations.

In Georgia the general strike organised as a reply to "Bloody Sunday"
dragged in all classes of people, and developed into revolt in the
villages. The Tsarist authorities only held their own in the garrison
towns and along the railway line. There the Social-Democratic Party
guided the movement. Under the direction of its committees, the peasants
were able to create their local committees, confiscate land, replace the
officials, organise a police force and arm their militia, the "_Red
Hundreds_." At Tiflis, the workers met the provocation of Cossack
violence by organised bomb-throwing on dates fixed by the Party. In
December the whole of the province of Guria, Stalin's small fatherland,
was in the power of the revolutionaries. Social-Democracy, the only
force enjoying popular confidence, was able to intervene between the
fanatical Armenians and Tartars, incited to mutual destruction by the
Russians, and to prevent carnage at Tiflis as the Party had done at Baku
in February.

In these memorable events of the revolution in Transcaucasia there is
always difficulty in finding any trace of Koba. There is no mention of
him in most of the specialised works on the subject. In the rare cases
where his name occurs it is in lists, where there is nothing to
distinguish him from the other names. From the monograph by P.
Makharadze, for instance, published by the State Georgian press in 1927,
where the Bolshevik historian had at his disposal the _Revoliutsiis
Matiane_ (Revolutionary Annals) of Tiflis and the unpublished State
archives, it appears that in 1927 Koba was still in the background. His
pamphlet, _Sketch of the Divergences within the Party_, a mere
paraphrase in Georgian of Lenin's formulas, passed unnoticed and has not
since been reprinted. This fact, in a country where those in power are
fond of collecting their most insignificant writings, leaves no doubt of
the author's own opinion.

Moreover, the Mensheviks, for lack of opponents of any mark, dominated
Georgia. Makharadze admits it in bitter terms. "At the beginning of 1905
the Social-Democratic organisation, united up to that time, underwent a
schism as it did in Russia. But that was only half the evil, for the
directing organs of the Party passed entirely into Menshevik hands. This
circumstance made the rally of the masses to the Menshevik position
inevitable. And that is what happened." The pro-Lenin attitude of the
Caucasus delegates at the 1903 Congress had no result. Following the
example of Topuridze, the "hards" Zurabov and Knuniantz became
Mensheviks one after the other. Stalin had nothing to show for his time
and his trouble. When Jordania returned the whole of the Party adopted
his course.

Before the schism in the Party, Lenin had sent to the Caucasus a
fellow-exile named Kurnatovsky, a good propagandist whose useful work
was stopped by a fresh sentence of exile. Kurnatovsky escaped, crossed
the frontier, and died abroad. Contemporaries are unanimous in his
praise, but in the recollections we have quoted, Stalin does not mention
him, as if he never knew him. Neither does he mention Ketzkhoveli, an
energetic militant killed in the Baku prison by a sentinel, nor
Postalovsky of Tiflis. He never alludes to Krassin, who however spent
several years at Baku, where he rendered valuable service, maintained
the principal clandestine press, and fostered the Bolshevik "cell" with
literature and money. As at Tiflis and Baku, so at Kontars and Batoum he
pretends not to know most of the Social-Democrats who personified the
movement. Stalin's silences have their significance.

In 1905 the Mensheviks were in a majority in the Social-Democratic
organisation throughout the Empire. According to Nevsky they numbered
about 15,000, a third of whom were in the Caucasus, as against 12,000
Bolsheviks. Martov _(History of Russian Social-Democracy)_ puts Lenin's
followers at a substantially lower figure, and Bubnov, the most recent
and perhaps the most official of the Bolshevik historians, puts them at
8,000. In an industrial proletariat of about three millions the
Social-Democrats according to the most favourable calculations were
about one per cent, if the intellectuals are left out of account.

Nevertheless, Bolshevism and Menshevism began to develop divergence in
politics and tactics, if not yet in theory. New problems in an
extraordinarily rapidly-changing situation demanded solutions. Parties
and groups were judged by deeds, not words.

Confusion in the Russian administration gave opportunity for a
relatively free press. Liberal and socialist pamphlets abounded, and
there were many popular meetings in the universities. Conspirators of
all sorts emerged from their subterranean hiding-places to make use of
the possibility of open agitation, now tolerated in fact though not in
law. Trade unions were openly organized for the first time. An
effervescent public opinion gave opportunity for all sorts of efforts
and discussion outside the small traditional clandestine clubs.

In September a printers' strike at Moscow inspired sympathetic action in
other organisations, and new revolutionary potentialities were opened
up. By October the strike had extended to the railways, then to the
whole country, and developed into a general strike such as the world had
never seen. In many towns the proletariat erected barricades, and defied
police and soldiers. It was the culminating point of the revolution.
Under this enormous pressure, the Tsar finally retreated and promulgated
the Constitution of October 1905. Plekhanov's prediction was realised;
the first victory over the autocracy had been won by the working class.

### 3.6

IN THE course of the St. Petersburg strike the Mensheviks had proposed
the constitution of a body representing the fighting forces of the
workers and had invited them to elect one delegate for every 500
workers. In the June and July numbers of _Iskra_, the idea of the
formation of "representative organs of revolutionary autonomy" was put
forward, especially by Dan. The Bolsheviks were hostile, opposing the
notion of a "revolutionary Government" to that of "revolutionary
municipalities." Local organs of that kind, said Lenin, might prove to
be the epilogue and not the prologue of revolt. But the Menshevik
suggestion satisfied the latent desire for a "large class organisation
independent of party," the _Iskra_ formula. The strikers hastened to
nominate their representatives, who formed the "Soviet of Workers'
Deputies." its first President was the Menshevik Zborovsky. After him
Khrustalev-Nosar, a non-party socialist who afterwards joined the
Mensheviks, held the position until he was arrested. A bureau of three
members, of whom Trotsky was one, was then nominated. There were similar
bodies of soviets in the provinces, usually ordinary strike committees
enlarged, but these were of less importance.

In the absence of Lenin, who all this time was in exile, the Bolshevik
organisations in St. Petersburg failed to grasp the significance of the
political and social phenomenon which was being accomplished under their
eyes. Their one-track mind admitted no virtue outside the "Party," that
is to say, outside their narrow group, and every workmen's organisation
appeared to them as a revolutionary competitor. Also they regarded the
trade unions with indifference, if not with disdain. They demanded from
the St. Petersburg Soviet an explicit adhesion to Social-Democracy which
would have deprived it of any reason for existence. The Mensheviks,
clearer-sighted on this point and in closer touch with the masses,
worked zealously in the soviets and in the trade unions, and acquired
Incontestable influence in both. It needed Lenin's return to induce his
followers to change their attitude. His polemic with _Iskra_ did not
prevent Lenin from renouncing his formula in order to seize a new chance
in the changing situation.

It is a remarkable illustration of the fundamental vice of the Bolshevik
Party: without Lenin there would have been no Bolshevism. Not that his
section had never attracted eminent men, but the Bogdanovs and Krassins
were in turn to detach themselves from it as Trotsky and Plekhanov had
done in the past, leaving Lenin with comrades incapable of meeting an
unforeseen situation unaided.

Lenin's isolation reminds one to some extent of that of Washington, who
also had to rely exclusively on himself, and whose lieutenants, left to
their own initiative, would have compromised the common task.

Before returning to Russia, in October 1905, Lenin had written to
Plekhanov: "Our revolution sweeps away tactical divergences with
surprising rapidity. Here is a field in which forgetfulness of the past
and a mutual understanding in face of a piece of live work will always
be made easy." At St. Petersburg he founded, with Bogdanov and Kamenev,
a new paper, _Novaya Zhizn_, edited by an actress, Marie Andreyeva, with
the collaboration of well-known writers, Gorky, Balmont, Leonid
Andreyev. On their side the Mensheviks published _Nachalo_, in which
Trotsky and Parvus defended a special idea -- the "permanent
revolution." "We have always said that a revolution would strengthen and
not weaken the bourgeoisie, and would provide the indespensible
conditions for a victorious struggle for socialism," Lenin had declared
at a recent Congress of his fraction. In _Two Tactics_ he speaks of the
same idea:

>Marxists are absolutely convinced of the bourgeois character of the
>Russian Revolution. What does this mean? That the democratic changes in
>the political system and the economic and social changes which have
>become indispensable in Russia, do not of themselves signify the
>destruction of capitalism or the downfall of the reign of the
>bourgeoisie. On the contrary they will, for the first time, really
>throw open the field to the development of a European, not an Asiatic
>capitalism, thus making possible for the first time, the reign of the
>bourgeoisie as a class.

All the Social-Democrats agreed on the general definition. But
disagreements soon arose. Trotsky and Parvus thought the working class
to be the only one capable of seizing and holding power, with the more
or less active support of the peasants. Social-Democracy must then claim
the succession to Tsarism; but in the exercise of power it would
necessarily engage in socialist enterprises which could only be
consolidated by an international revolution; therefore revolution must
be uninterrupted, permanent and universal, and must be maintained by the
dictatorship of the proletariat.

But for the Mensheviks, haunted by the scheme of European revolutions,
the bourgeoisie alone could and must seize power. If the
Social-Democracy attempted it, it would meet with the fate of the Paris
Commune, Russia being as yet insufficiently developed for transformation
into a socialist State. The proletariat would therefore have to support
from outside the party of the advanced bourgeoisie, that of the
Constitutional Democrats or Kadets, created in 1905. The Mensheviks
quoted Engels in support of this proposal. "_The worst possible thing
for the leader of an extreme party is to be compelled to assume power at
a time when the movement is not yet ripe for the domination of the class
which it represents and for the measures required for that domination_."

Lenin's view was that it was the autocracy, not the bourgeoisie, that
had to be overturned, and that they had to establish, not the
dictatorship of the proletariat, but "the democratic dictatorship of the
proletariat and the peasants." For there was in Russia "an enormous
peasant and lower middle class population capable of supporting the
democratic but not yet the socialist revolution." Lenin reproved "the
absurd half-anarchist conceptions on the immediate realisation of the
maximum programme and the conquest of power for the socialist
transformation." A revolutionary dictatorship could only endure if it
had the support of the overwhelming majority of the people; the
proletariat being in a minority in Russia, Trotsky and Parvus were
merely phrase-making when they foretold its accession to political
power. The true perspective was the foundation of "a democratic republic
as the last form of bourgeois domination, and the most appropriate for
the struggle of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie." With this end in
view, the Bolsheviks should participate with the liberal bourgeoisie in
a provisional revolutionary government.

Martov said he differed very little from this general point of view, and
he praises its "realism" in his _History_, but he repelled, on grounds
of theoretical orthodoxy, the suggestion of "participation in a
bourgeois government" as compromising. Thus Lenin figured as an
opportunist, Martov as an intransigent, and Trotsky as a utopian of the
extreme Left.... Rosa Luxemburg inclined towards the thesis of the
"permanent revolution," which was severely criticised by Franz Mehring,
the historian and theoretician of German socialism. Twenty years later
A. Joffe, a former Menshevik who had joined hands with Lenin, wrote to
Trotsky from his death-bed: "I have often declared that I heard with my
own ears Lenin say that you, not he, were right in 1905. A man face to
face with death does not lie, and I repeat the statement now...."
History will give the deciding vote to the survivors of a debate which
still continues in the logomachy engendered by deceptive appearances.

The Government of Nicholas II interrupted brutally for a time the
dissertations and speculations on the "motive forces" of the revolution
by exercising the power it still retained in December, when the workers'
movement declined after a year of civil war in which the front ranks
were always occupied by the same vanguard. At St. Petersburg the Soviet,
of which Trotsky had been the indefatigable mouthpiece, was suppressed
after an existence of fifty-two days, and its members imprisoned. Before
his disappearance Trotsky had launched his _Financial Manifesto_
repudiating in advance the loans made to the Tsar "then at open war with
his people." At Moscow an insurrection begun, organised and inspired
this time by the Bolsheviks, was crushed after nine days of fighting in
which less than 2,000 workmen, 500 of whom were Social-Democrats,
resisted the garrison which had received strong reinforcements. In the
Caucasus strong reinforcements of all arms vanquished the insurgents,
and artillery put an end to the "Guria Republic." Such were the main
stages of a defeat presaging a victory to come. "Without the general
rehearsal of 1905," wrote Lenin, "our victory in 1917 would have been
impossible."

The revolution died down without being able to strike the decisive blow
because attack was not simultaneous everywhere, because there was no
consciousness of solidarity between town and country, no co-ordination
of the elemental forces unchained, because there was no general
organisation or direction. Its scattered efforts were broken by an army
in the main faithful to the old regime. But absolutism had tottered
under the shock. An embryo constitution, a sort of parliament had been
gained. The political impotence of the bourgeoisie as a class had been
revealed. Its revolutionary intellectuals had thrown in their lot with
the proletariat in the course of the struggle. All the socialist
parties emerged from the fight greater in prestige if not in numbers.
Anarchism had failed under the test of experience. Finally, the October
strike left a great example, the unforgettable lesson of the St.
Petersburg Soviet.

No theorist had foreseen the Soviets or the role they were to play in
the future. The Mensheviks could claim the largest share in their
creation, but did not make use of them to the full extent. The
Bolsheviks found difficulty in adapting themselves to the accomplished
fact, with the exception of Lenin, who, on reflection, glimpsed the
possibilities of the future. "The transfer of the leadership of the
Soviet from Khrustalev to Trotsky will be an immense step forward," he
said, not stinting his admiration of an adversary who had shown his real
stature. The provincial Soviets of Moscow, Rostov, Novorossiisk, Baku,
Odessa, etc., were most of them under Menshevik influence. That of
Novorossiisk deserves special mention for having put itself at the head
of a short-lived local republic. (Similar local republics were formed in
Latvia.) Only one, the Bielostok Soviet, was in the hands of Social
Revolutionaries and Anarchists. The forces of reaction swept away the
soviets, but their memory remained vivid in the consciousness of the
working class.

Lenin kept in the background during the 1905 revolution. He was not the
man for showy achievements; his business was persevering, effective work
for the future settlement. Moreover, the Bolsheviks in general lagged
behind except in the final episode at Moscow. The Social Revolutionaries
and Mensheviks showed themselves quicker and more energetic, more supple
and more enterprising, perhaps because less encumbered with dogmatic
theory. Plekhanov, who had become a Western European, removed from the
actual struggle, did not know what to, make of the revolutionary
happenings in Russia. The fact that he did not return to Russia and his
remark after the Moscow insurrection, "that Moscow should not have taken
up arms," are sufficient indication of his attitude of detachment from
"living work," to which Lenin had invited him. One may say, with
Lunacharsky, that of all the Social-Democratic leaders "Trotsky
undeniably showed himself, in spite of his youth, the best prepared, the
most exempt from a certain émigré narrowness, which affected even Lenin
at that time. He advanced in popularity during the revolution, when
neither Lenin nor Martov did. Plekhanov lost much ground.... From that
time Trotsky was in the foreground." In Georgia traditional
Social-Democracy had acquired and exercised an authority everywhere
acknowledged, and a new generation, among them I. Tseretelli, had arisen
to carry on the work of the group founded by Jordania.

Of Stalin there would be nothing to say if he had not been summoned, for
the first time, to a Bolshevik Conference at Tammerfors. "Summoned," for
he could not be strictly speaking the delegate of a Menshevik
organisation. It was then that he really made acquaintance with Lenin.
No minutes of the Conference exist, and there is no mention of any part,
or any speech of his. In his recollections on Lenin he makes some
characteristic comments.

>I met Lenin for the first time in December 1905 at the Bolshevik
>Conference at Tammerfors, in Finland. I expected to see the mountain
>eagle of our Party a great man, not only politically but physically,
>for I had formed for myself a picture of Lenin as a giant, a fine
>figure of a man. What was my disappointment when I saw the most
>ordinary looking individual, below middle height, distinguished from
>ordinary mortals by nothing, literally nothing. A great man is
>permitted to be generally late at meetings so that those present may be
>apprehensive at his non-arrival, and so that before the great man's
>appearance there may be cries of "Hush -- silence -- he is coming."
>This ceremony seemed to me useful for it creates respect. What was my
>disappointment to find that Lenin had arrived before the delegates and
>was carrying on the most ordinary conversation, with the most ordinary
>delegate, in a corner.

He continues in the same tone, on the same level, in the same sense. The
reader is none the wiser for it. The matter, worthy of the style,
requires no comment. One wonders how Koba could have won Lenin's esteem
but for the fact that he was able to render remarkable service and to
show his real capacity during the years following the 1905 Revolution,
years of political reaction and socialist retrogression.

## Chapter 04: A Professional Revolutionary

### 4.1

THE Revolution of 1905, says Trotsky, showed that Russia provided no
exception to the laws of history. This country with its slow and
retarded social development passed in turn through the same stages as
the most advanced capitalist States. The Slavophile theory, exclusively
based on the special characteristics of Russia, seemed to be refuted.
But, in spite of analogies throwing light on the present and to some
extent, thanks to western experience, on the future, it is still
necessary to study distinctive national traits; and especially to
consider the influences which have determined the particular historical
course followed by contemporary Russia.

Nowhere else was the State so centralised; nowhere else did it play so
important a role in economic development. "In Russia the State is
all-powerful," wrote Combes de Lestrade in 1895; he compared the social
organisation of the country to "a vast factory centralising in its
workshops the activity and working power of all its inhabitants without
exception."

The intervention of the State was looked upon as the mainspring of
industrial progress. "Peter the Great's real achievement was to make our
country, already rich in land, in men and in cereals, a country rich
also in industries"; this is the opinion of Professor D. Mendeleyev. In
the progress of industrialisation more was expected from State aid than
from private initiative.

Foreign finance, by its large investments, helped in the development of
the most concentrated industry in the world. Beside the milliards lent
to the State, eighty per cent of capital came from foreign countries.
The statistics of the time show a proportionately higher percentage of
works employing 1,000 workers than in the United States or in Germany.
From an extremely low original level, production increased by fits and
starts, more rapidly in Russia than in America. A close parallel can be
traced between the "greatest Republic and the vastest Empire in the
world," says C. de Lestrade. Industrial concentration demanded a
corresponding concentration of the working classes, whose peasant origin
and rapid growth in numbers offered virgin soil for revolutionary
theories.

The proletariat had sacrificed about 15,000 dead, 20,000 wounded, and
80,000 prisoners for its first political victories -- shorter hours of
work, higher salaries, and a _de facto_ if not a _de jure_ right to form
trade unions. More especially, its leaders had learned its strength and
its weakness, and understood the pressing need of party and trade union
organisation. All varieties of socialism flourished and won over
practically the whole working population. N. Rubakin says that in 1905-7
there were some sixty million copies of socialist works in circulation.

Social-Democracy became a great party, attaining more than 150,000
adherents in 1906, of whom half were in national groups, in spite of the
semi-illegal situation. In contrast with the "generals" who were eager
to seize on their points of difference, the working army of the
revolution exacted Social-Democratic unity, at least on the surface. The
previous year Lenin had evaded a suggestion made by August Bebel on
behalf of German Socialism and the International for fusion of the
sections, but he was obliged to swim with the stream. Experience showed
that Bolshevism could not yet claim independent existence either as a
body of theory or as a party. A Unity Congress was held at Stockholm in
1906, where the Mensheviks, with a clear majority, assumed the official
direction of the movement.

Stalin, under the name of Ivanovich, represented the province of Tiflis
at the Congress. By what subterfuge had he secured election in a
district practically entirely in Menshevik hands? In reality, he
represented only the tiny handful of local Bolsheviks, too weak in every
respect to stand up against the traditions of Georgian socialism, but
clever enough to constitute an obscure group and claim a place in the
Congress, taking advantage of the temporary spirit of conciliation. He
intervened in debate three times, with brief remarks of elementary
simplicity, which he has never dared to reprint. The first proposal on
the agrarian question, refuted by Dan in a few words, advocated division
of the land in agreement with the peasants' wishes (the Bolsheviks
advocated nationalisation of the land, the Mensheviks municipalisation).
The second, on general tactics, passed unnoticed and concluded with the
dilemma, "either the hegemony of the proletariat or the hegemony of
bourgeois democracy," quite contrary to Bolshevik views; the third, on
the parliamentary problem, advised against any participation in the
elections for the Duma, at a moment when Lenin was revising his tactics
in the opposite sense.

Nothing could show more clearly the non-existence of Bolshevism as a
doctrine except in Lenin's brain; every Bolshevik left to himself
wandered from "the line" of his fraction. But Koba's three short
speeches, assured, even cocksure, did not hinder Stalin from voting with
his friends, except on the last point, when he abstained, for -- these
men were bound together by their temperament and by the ascendancy of
Lenin rather than by ideas. Years of action in common and many crises
were required to acquire even a degree of unity in the opinions of the
"Jacobins" of the proletariat.

Nevertheless the fractions survived with their own rules and their
intermittent press, each with its interior differences, its diverging
tendencies and its dissidents. Generally speaking the Right was inclined
to adapt itself to the spontaneous popular movement, the Left to capture
it in order to direct it. Both hoped for a revival of the workers' and
peasants' offensive in the near future. The Mensheviks were the first to
admit the decline of the revolution; consequently, they wished to
initiate legal action, to support the most advanced of the bourgeois
parties and strengthen the influence of the Duma. The Bolsheviks, on the
other hand, expected an immediate revival of the revolution -- the
classic error of revolutionary optimism. They calculated on a general
strike followed by insurrection, aiming at the overthrow of the
autocracy and the summoning of a Constituent Assembly. Both saw the
necessity of political alliances for a proletariat which was still weak,
but the Mensheviks relied above all on the liberal bourgeoisie, the
Bolsheviks on the landless peasants.

Throughout the controversy, frequent references were made to the
Revolution of 1848, and the respective positions of the parties were
defined by the dates: 1847 or 1849? That is to say, the eve or the
morrow of the revolution? The Bolsheviks thought they were on the eve of
a decisive attempt (1847), the Mensheviks that they were on the morrow
of a semi-defeat (1849). The Mensheviks began to work "by European
methods," the Bolsheviks persisted in their "_specifically Russian_"
methods, that is to say, the methods demanded by the circumstances of
time and place, as interpreted by themselves.

In the Russian Revolution Lenin distinguished "two separate and
heterogeneous social wars; one within the existing autocratic-feudal
regime, the other within the future bourgeois-democratic regime." It was
necessary, he thought, to wage a triple war on the theoretical,
political and economic fronts. In view of the approaching revolt, he
studied and criticised in detail the December fighting in Moscow, how
the barricades were used, what part was played by artillery, and by the
new weapons revealed by the Russo-Japanese war, such as the hand
grenade. He recalled Marx's aphorism, _insurrection is an art_, and
therefore an art to be studied, and he urged the workers to form groups
of three, five and ten volunteers, and gave them instructions and
advice.

"The battle is near at hand," he assured them, deceiving himself as to
the proximity of the date. He emphasized the necessity of "creating a
_military organisation_ side by side with the soviets, for their defence
and for the organisation of the insurrection without which all the
soviets and all the delegates of the masses would remain powerless."
This idea was to be realised, but not till ten years later. He was
untiring in keeping his followers up to the mark.

>Remember [he said] that the day of the mass struggle is approaching. It
>will be armed insurrection. It should be as far as possible
>simultaneous. The masses must know that they are engaging in an armed,
>sanguinary, and merciless struggle. They must be animated by scorn of
>death, which will bring victory. The attack must be pressed with the
>utmost energy; the offensive, not the defensive, must be the order of
>the day, and the objective, the implacable extermination of the
>enemy....

Meanwhile he occupied himself first with the prosaic question of
participation in parliament. The first Duma scheme, boycotted by all the
revolutionary and democratic Parties, came to nothing. The second, based
on a restricted and indirect franchise in three stages, was applied. The
various socialist Parties boycotted the elections, thus assuring the
victory of the Kadets (Constitutional Monarchists). The Mensheviks, who
were disposed to take part in the electoral campaign for purposes of
agitation and propaganda, at any rate in the first two stages, had not
opposed the general feeling, but their preponderance was so great in the
Caucasus that five of their candidates, Social-Democratic, were elected
there. The Georgians were already carrying on their own policy. Jordania
and his comrades thus became the mouthpieces of the whole
Social-Democratic movement in the first Duma.

The Georgian political success made the Mensheviks regret their
abstention, and they began resolutely to advocate participation in the
elections. Lenin agreed with them. At Tammerfors he had agreed to the
boycott, but under pressure of the Conference. In one of his speeches
Stalin reports this episode:

>The debate opened, and the provincial members, Siberians and
>Caucasians, led the attack. What was our astonishment when, after our
>speeches, Lenin intervened, and declared himself in favour of
>participating in the elections, but then saw his mistake and took his
>stand with the section. We were stupefied. The effect was electric. We
>gave him a great ovation.

Lenin rarely allowed himself to be influenced by his followers. But
there were cases when local information on the temper of the people
might be allowed, for tactical reasons, to influence his judgment. On
this occasion, as was usually the case, he had reason to regret it. "We
all erred," he wrote fifteen years later in alluding to the boycott. But
at the time he refused to admit it; in giving his reasons for a change
of attitude under new conditions, he justified his past attitude. Stalin
was among those who incited the Party to commit this "error."

On the dissolution of the Duma, Lenin felt it necessary to oppose the
boycott. At Stockholm he had indicated his point of view by voting for
the proposal of the Caucasus Mensheviks for participation in the primary
elections, without any hesitation about separating himself from comrades
like Stalin, obstinate in the "error." He wrote several persuasive
articles on the subject, then carried on a fierce controversy in an
attempt to convince his section of the Party; so great an importance did
he attach to legal action, without at the same time renouncing
clandestine work. As opposed to this, conspiracy, underground plots,
terrorism, and the most dangerous armed operations showed unprecedented
development. In this new scheme Stalin found employment for his natural
gifts.

Repression had not broken revolutionary energy. While the authorities
shot rebels in the army and the navy without mercy, crushed rural
rioting by punitive expeditions on a considerable scale, the intrepid
_drujiny_ -- fighting squads of the various revolutionary parties --
continued their activities all the more boldly as the masses began to
show signs of lassitude. From their original defensive mission the
_boyeviki_ (armed militants, sharpshooters, guerillas) turned to the
offensive, following the example of the Caucasian bomb-throwers and the
Polish _bojowci_. Murderous attacks on policemen, Cossacks and
government agents, armed expropriations of public and private funds
began to multiply.

The "expropriations," forcible confiscation of funds belonging to banks,
post-offices, and store-houses, in transit by road or rail, and
sometimes of money belonging to private persons, became frequent in 1906
and 1907. The word, abbreviated as "ex," even passed into the language.
Operations of this kind were rarely executed without shooting, with
victims on both sides. But the revolutionaries had the advantage of the
offensive, of surprise attack, and of extreme mobility, and generally
succeeded in getting off scot-free from these attacks and ambuscades.
Many civil and military officials perished in surprise attacks by the
guerillas. On the other hand the _boyeviki_ prisoners ran the risk of
the gallows as the penalty of brigandage.

The object of these expropriations was to provide funds for the
revolutionary groups. The smaller "ex'es" provided for the maintenance
of the expropriators. But the matter passed more and more out of the
control of the organisations. The flying squads were mixed up with
mischievous elements which were not disinterested but indisciplined and
operating on their own account. Signs of degeneration, cases of common
assault, acts of terrorism against the inhabitants, soon threw great
discredit on the movement. Robbers and bandits, who made it their
business to hold the population to ransom rather than to annoy the
authorities made the "war of the partisans" suspect. It became difficult
to distinguish between "ex'es" of all sorts and various forms of
brigandage. The Social-Democratic Party could not overlook this
unforeseen danger.

A special resolution was passed at the Stockholm Conference condemning
robbery, the expropriation of private property and the deposits of
private banks, forced contributions, the destruction of public buildings
and railways, but admitting, under Bolshevik pressure, confiscation of
State moneys on the order of a revolutionary authority in districts
where such an authority existed. For Lenin approved the "ex es" while
condemning their "Apache deviation," provided that they were carried out
under strict Party control. The Congress had recognised "the
inevitability of active struggle against Governmental terror and the
violence of the _Black Hundreds_," the aim of which was to kill the
enemy, while avoiding any attack on the "private property of peaceful
citizens."

Thus Social-Democracy partially borrowed from the Social
Revolutionaries' tactics, which the Social Revolutionaries had
themselves abandoned after the constitutional rescript of October. The
London Congress of 1903 had voted for a motion of Axelrod's against the
Social Revolutionaries, among other things denouncing their terrorist
proceedings as adventurism. Two years later Plekhanov proposed to
associate himself with their activities and adopt their methods, but was
confronted with unyielding opposition by Martov. The Mensheviks, careful
to observe "European" methods, objected to systematic violence and to
attacks on individuals. The terrorist tradition of the _narodovoltsy_
and of their successors was continued and exacerbated in the extreme
Left wing of the Social Revolutionaries, the Maximalists, who formed an
independent league, which distinguished itself by audacious exploits.
Anarchists and Bolshevists vied with them.

"A great part of the innumerable thefts and robberies on private persons
which passed like a muddy wave over this period of depression when the
revolution was temporarily on the defensive," said Rosa Luxemburg, "were
committed in the name of anarcho-communism." This is an erroneous
statement, for all sorts of revolutionaries furnished their contingents
to the _boyeviki_ and the expropriators. In the Caucasus, where Social,
Democracy was in the ascendant, 1,150 acts of terrorism were committed
between 1904 and 1908, according to statistics published by P.
Makharadze; the Federalist Socialists and the Bolsheviks, not numerous
but very active, had a large share in them. In Latvia the
Social-Democratic Party methodically organised "ex'es," and gave
receipts for the proceeds. In Poland Pilsudski's Socialist Party, a
rival of the Social-Democrats, acted in the same way.

The anarchists had a certain number of groups and clubs but only in a
few places. "Bakunin's native country was to be the tomb of his theory,"
said Rosa Luxemburg when she was demonstrating the thesis that the
Russian Revolution was "the historical winding-up of anarchism"; but her
definition of anarchism as "the ideology of the mob" is a piece of
rhetorical exaggeration. Kropotkin, the anarchist theorist of the genera
expropriation of the bourgeoisie, of the seizure of the means of
production by the people, notably in the _Notes of a Rebel_ and in the
_Conquest of Bread_, disavowed partial and individual expropriation.
Lenin, on the other hand, approved of them under certain circumstances.
At St. Petersburg an anarchist group preached terror and the pillage of
shops under the name of "direct action," but the Bolsheviks required no
influence to induce them to act as they wished. The accusations of
Anarcho-Blanquism, launched against them by the Mensheviks, did not
dissuade them from following their own methods.

Lenin admitted that "these methods of social struggle have been adopted
by preference, even exclusively, by the most wretched elements of the
population, by tramps, the lumpen-proletariat, and by anarchist groups."
But that seemed to him inevitable at that time. "They tell us that the
'war of the partisans' brings the class-conscious proletariat into touch
with the lower strata, with rogues and drunkards. That is so. But the
only conclusion to be drawn from the fact is that these means should be
subordinated to others, and employed within reasonable limits
proportioned to the main methods of action, and ennobled by the
educating and organising influence of socialism."

He practically said that Marxism admitted the most various fighting
methods, did not invent them, but rationalised them, gave conscious
expression to spontaneously developed procedure. Hostile to doctrinaire
formulas, to the proposals of "paperscheme makers," Marxism does not
disavow any form of struggle, and; far from _lecturing the masses_, it
is a student in their school of _practice_. Therefore the "war of the
partisans" arose spontaneously as a counter-move to the exactions of the
_Black Hundreds_, the army and the police. Everything that is
spontaneous is necessary, would fairly sum up Lenin's meaning.

Under cover of this theoretical justification and in spite of the
Stockholm decisions, the Bolsheviks tried, at their own risk, to derive
advantage from the circumstances, from the warlike enterprise of the
_boyeviki_ and sometimes by complicity with those of another camp. Their
section, organised in complete independence of the regular Party
institutions, was secretly directed by a Bolshevik Centre, in accordance
with Lenin's known views on the subject of "professional
revolutionaries." Under the clandestine instructions of the _troîka_,
Lenin, Krassin and Bogdanov, it sought to procure the maximum of money
and arms.

The "Technical Bureau" of the Central Committee at St. Petersburg could
supply as many as 150 bombs a day; soldiers on their Way home from
Manchuria sold their rifles to the railwaymen. That was enough. An
organisation of "professional revolutionaries" preparing an insurrection
in the near future needed immense supplies of war material. Party
subscriptions were insignificant. Krassin and Gorky were the principal
purveyors of funds, thanks to their connections with the liberal
bourgeoisie and with literary and artistic circles; through them certain
textile capitalists, among them S. Morosov, contributed substantial
subsidies. But the revolutionary _profession_, extended to a Party, or
at all events to its officials, required more funds, and the "ex'es were
the main source of supply for the Bolshevik Centre.

Krassin was not only Finance Minister of the Section. He was in charge
of the manufacture of explosives, the purchase and transport of arms,
the courses of bombing instruction, and he inspired and supplied the
fighting squad in the Caucasus. He was arrested in Finland, and had a
narrow escape from the gallows. Later on he entered the service of the
firm of Siemens-Schuckert in Germany as a highly qualified engineer. He
was equally highly qualified for the Bolshevik illegal conspirators'
service, and with inexhaustible energy and coolness he took part in the
most "delicate" enterprises to ensure for the Party the indispensable
resources for carrying on clandestine rebel activity. Bogdanov,
historian, philosopher and economist, was closely concerned in the
_boyeviki_ operations in the Urals. Lenin directed the whole from his
distant eminence.

The year 1906 was memorable as regards "ex'es" and terrorism. At Moscow
a group of twenty Socialist Revolutionaries forced a bank in March, and
carried off 875,000 roubles in booty. At Dushet, in the province of
Tiflis, six Federalist Socialists disguised as soldiers seized in March
35,000 roubles which the Bolsheviks confiscated by a stratagem. In
Poland Pilsudski's _bojowci_ in August made a simultaneous attack in
several towns on the soldiers and the police, killing several dozen.
Polish Social-Democracy felt it necessary to protest against mass
destruction of innocent recruits. In concert with the Maximalists, the
Bolshevik "Technical Bureau" at St. Petersburg connived at the blowing
up of Stolypin's villa in August; and also at pillaging in October a van
belonging to the State Bank. The Maximalists had carried out a
resounding "ex" against a Mutual Credit Bank at St. Petersburg, the
famous coup of the _Fonarny pereulok_, which was talked about in the
press for a long time. The month of October alone witnessed 121
terrorist deeds, 47 fights with the police, and 362 expropriations. In
the space of four months 2,118 Government agents and officials were
killed and wounded, following on 2,000 casualties in the preceding
eighteen months. The General of Police, Spiridovich, described the
pillage of the State Bank at Helsingfors as an operation "only
comparable with the Tiflis expropriation in 1907."

The mysteries of these legendary exploits have not yet come fully to
light. Twenty years after, on the death of Krassin, one of the Old
Bolsheviks, the engineer G. Krizhanovsky was to write: "Even now the
time has not come fully to expose the underground activities of Leonid
Borissovich ..." But in another article, after alluding to the secret
printing presses and sapping of the Butyrky prison, he makes veiled
references to the links which bound Krassin, alias Nikitich, to the
Caucasian _boyevik_, Kamo, famous for "the pillage of a bank at Tiflis"
and certain "experimental explosions of Macedonian bombs among the rocks
of Finland." A less discreet communist historian, M. Liadov, ascribes to
Krassin-Nikitich the establishment of the laboratory where the
Bolsheviks prepared their various explosives; "it is enough to say that
the contrivance which blew up Stolypin's villa in the isle of Aptekarsky
and the _Fonarny pereulok_ bombs were made under Nikitich's supervision"
... The same writer also says: "The plans of all the expropriations
organised by the latter (Kamo), at Kvirilli, at the Treasury Dushet, in
Erivan Square, were drawn up and concerted with Nikitich." The so-called
Erivan Square affair is the same as that of Tiflis which Spiridovich
treats as a record.

The Tiflis "ex," the most "grandiose" of all, to use the current phrase,
was a masterpiece of its kind, and eclipsed all earlier efforts by its
dramatic scale and its perfect success. It constituted Stalin's
principal claim to the consideration of the leaders of the section. An
obscure provincial militant acting under the direction of the mysterious
triumvirate, a "professional revolutionary" par excellence, incapable of
promotion for brain-power in the Party hierarchy, but ready to serve its
cause by playing a steadily increasing part, Koba had found
circumstances in which he could show the temper of his steel.

Nevertheless, the obvious tendency of the "ex" to degenerate into
banditry, and the increase of corruption, led to categorical
condemnation, by a new general Congress of Social-Democracy held in
London in 1907, at which the Bolsheviks were in the majority, of "all
participation in or assistance to the operations of the 'partisans' and
'expropriations' as disorganising and demoralising." Orders were also
given that all the fighting squads connected with the Party should be
disbanded. Many Bolsheviks, alarmed at the turn the minor civil war was
taking, had separated themselves from Lenin on this issue to support the
Mensheviks. Koba was present in a consultative capacity at the Congress.
But for the "professional revolutionaries" of Bolshevism, the orders of
the section took precedence of those of the Party, and Lenin's
instructions supplanted political morality. A few days after the return
of members of the Congress from London, the Tiflis affair exploded (the
word is justified) like a bomb.

### 4.2

>Tiflis, June 26.
>
>To-day in Erivan Square in the middle of the town, and at a moment when
>the Square was swarming with people, ten bombs were thrown in
>succession. They exploded with great force.
>
>Between each of the explosions there were rifle and revolver shots.
>Chimneys, doors and windows were broken or shaken down. The Square was
>covered with debris. There were many killed and wounded. The
>authorities immediately cleared the Square and forbade access to the
>scene of the catastrophe.

THIS confusing telegram (very badly written) appeared on June 27, 1907,
in the supplementary edition of the _Temps_ and to it was added the next
day the following lines, no less obscure:

>Robbery was the motive of the Erivan outrage, related in yesterday's
>_Petit Temps_. The authors of the outrage got away with 341,000 roubles
>in a Treasury van.

The _Novoye Vremya_ of the following days reported the affair with more
detail, but still in vague terms mixed with angry comments against
"heroes of the bomb and the revolver." Eight bombs, followed by repeated
shots, were said to have been hurled on two carriages under Cossack
escort which were carrying a large sum to the State Bank (341,000
roubles, that is about $170,000 at par, more than 4 1/4 million francs).
There were three killed and more than fifty wounded, soldiers and
innocent peasants, for the Square was full of people at 10.45 a.m.; the
panic was indescribable and was accentuated by the flying pieces of
glass from the windows of shops and houses. The crowd rushed to the
shops where the doors were promptly closed. Two suspicious-looking
carriages had been noticed, one occupied by two women, the other by "an
individual in officer's uniform." The aggressors, perhaps fifty in
number, had disappeared without leaving any trace. "The devil knows-how
this robbery of unheard-of boldness was carried out," sighed the _Novoye
Vremya_. Shortly afterwards the police notified all countries of the
numbers of the "expropriated" series of 500 rouble notes.

Two women actually took part in the coup, both comrades of the
Social-Democratic Party, Patsya Goldava and Annette Sulamlidze. The
pseudo-officer was the leader of the _boyeviki_ squad in person,
Ter-Petrossian, known as Kamo. Second in command would be the more
correct description, for district operations were in charge of Koba, who
in turn obeyed the orders of the supreme _troîka_.

The extraordinary existence led by men such as Kamo illustrates the
inestimable devotion to which the Bolshevik Party in the hands of a
Lenin owed its strength. Simon (Senko) Ter-Petrossian was born, like
Stalin, at Gori, the son of Armenian parents. He was the faithful
assistant of Stalin, to whom he owed his nickname. A communist historian
might find a parallel in Rob Roy, Walter Scott's mediaeval hero: a
counter-revolutionary might compare him to Rocambole.

Before the revolution he served Social-Democracy by accepting the most
repugnant tasks, the most difficult and perilous missions. He was
arrested, escaped, took part in insurrection, and was then captured and
tortured by the Cossacks, one of whom threatened to cut off his nose; he
was made to dig his own grave, was twice brought to the foot of the
gallows. Imprisoned, set free by a stratagem, always on the run, he
conspired incessantly and was one of the pioneers in the "war of
partisans." In December 1906 he took part in the successful
expropriation at Kvirilli, he organised fighting _drujiny_, then, at
Lenin's suggestion, he went to the Balkans in search of arms but failed,
and after many tribulations he returned to the Caucasus where he created
a formidable squad of _boyeviki_.

At that time there were groups of "forest brothers" hidden in the
forests and in the mountains in revolt against authority; these men had
no principles and were a danger on the roads. The time was favourable
for the recrudescence of the ancient brigand traditions of the Caucasus.
From among these outlaws Kamo recruited the better elements, inspired
them with his own revolutionary spirit, drilled them and put them under
discipline. He himself lived on fifty kopecks a day and gave them no
more, though the Kutais "ex" brought in 15,000 roubles. But their
technique was still only mediocre. Kamo, disguised as an officer, went
to Finland to meet Lenin and Krassin, and brought back arms and
explosives to Tiflis. In a collection of reminiscences published about
Krassin it is stated that "nearly all the _coups de main_ brought off by
our famous Kamo were planned and executed under Krassin's direction. The
Tsars cleverest spy would have had difficulty in associating Krassin's
physiognomy with a friendship for the bold and famous Caucasian
revolutionary Kamo."

On his return to Georgia an attempt was made to secure at once a large
sum for the Bolshevik Centre. The coup failed. Kamo was seriously
wounded by the detonation of a bomb, and almost lost the sight of the
left eye. But in a few weeks the indefatigable fighter was about again,
and undertook a new expedition which began well but, owing to the
defection of an accomplice, ended badly. The comrades returned to Tiflis
in great distress. "The bombs," says Kamo's wife, "were only serviceable
for two or three days; they had to be used at once or there could be no
practical action for many months. Happily, that very evening a message
was received that 250,000 roubles were to be transferred to the State
Bank."

>On the following day [writes S. Medvedyeva Ter-Petrossian, whose
>narrative is worth recording, with the omission of some superfluous
>details], the cashier K. and the clerk G., accompanied by two policemen
>and five Cossacks, went to the Bank, conveying the 250,000 (?) roubles.
>From Pushkin Square, from which the Post Office could be seen, Patsya
>Goldava gave the signal agreed with Stepko Kitskirvelli: They are
>starting!
>
>The latter immediately communicated with Annette Sulamlidze, who in
>turn, passed on the message to the _boyeviki_ who were waiting in the
>Tilipuchuri Restaurant. Bachua Kupriashvili walked round Erivan Square
>unfolding a newspaper: This was the signal for preparing the attack
>awaited by comrades posted at various points -- Datiko Chibriashvili,
>Arkady Elbakidze, Vano Shimshanovi, Vano Kalandadze, Ilico
>Chachiashvili and Ilico Ebrialidze. Also Akaki Dalakishvili and
>Theophilus Kavriashvili were in readiness to hold up the Cossacks
>stationed before the doors. Finally Elisso Lominadze and Serapion
>Lomidze waited at the corner of the Armenian Bazaar and V.... Street,
>defending the road by which the expropriators were to carry off the
>money.
>
>Surrounded by horsemen the carriages drove rapidly through clouds of
>dust. The Cossacks in front were already turning into S.... Street. At
>that moment Datiko stepped forward a few paces. All the conspirators
>hurled their bombs with all their strength.
>
>Two explosions, and then another two. Two policemen and a Cossack lay
>on the pavement. The horses dashed through the escort. But the carriage
>in which the money was loaded was not blown up, and the horses dashed
>with it towards the S.... Bazaar.
>
>This was the decisive moment, and Bachua alone kept his head. He dashed
>forward to cut off the horses; and caught the carriage at the end of
>the Square. Unhesitatingly and with no thought for his own safety he
>threw a bomb between the horses' legs. The force of the explosion threw
>him to the ground. The money might once more have been saved from the
>bold _boyeviki_ but Chibriashvili came up just in time. Without paying
>any attention to Bachua, he dragged the bag of money from the carriage
>and made off in the direction of V.... Street.
>
>Where was Kamo, organiser and inspirer of the whole business? Dressed
>as an officer, still pale and hardly recovered from his wounds, he had
>been walking about the Square all the morning, keeping the public away
>by clever, mysterious remarks (his uniform prevented suspicion), so as
>to avoid useless shedding of blood. Kamo was in a carriage when the
>explosion occurred. His business was to receive the money and place it
>in safety. When he came out of G.... Street into the Square, in
>accordance with the plan of campaign, he thought the attempt was
>another failure.
>
>In any case he had to help the comrades to get away before the soldiers
>arrived-that was Kamo's first instinct. Rising in his seat, shooting
>with his revolver, uttering shouts and oaths like a real captain, he
>urged his horse towards V.... Street. And there by chance he
>encountered Datiko. The money was taken to the house of Mikha
>Bocharidze and hidden under a divan. Then it was taken to an absolutely
>safe place, the private office of the Director of the Observatory.
>
>When the soldiers surrounded the Square they found no one there.
>Luckily all the persons engaged escaped arrest. Only certain indirect
>accomplices, changing the notes abroad, were discovered with small
>sums, but the Governments refused to extradite them.

This version of the affair, authenticated by the Bolshevik Party,
completes and corrects the earlier one, but it may also need examination
and correction. There is another by Dzvali, one of the participants, in
a book by B. Bibineishvili on Kamo, with a police report and the
deposition of a witness: several statements are contradictory and the
proper names sometimes vary. It is very unlikely that a conspiracy of
these dimensions could be improvised in a few hours, and there are no
indications of the personal part played by Stalin, or of the share of
his colleague Sergo Ordjonikidze, who had just arrived on the scene.
Trotsky, alluding to this famous affair, admits that it "reflects honour
on Stalin's revolutionary determination," but in answer to the inquiry
why it should be omitted from the official biographies of that personage
he says that in this affair Stalin displayed his lack of political
sense, for the "ex'es," compatible with a mass offensive, were
degenerating into adventurism in a period of revolutionary retreat. If
the criticism was justifiable, it applied to Lenin, not to a
subordinate. Moreover if the money requirements of the Party or the
fraction justified such methods at all, considerations based on the ebb
and flow of the revolution and brought forward after a delay of twenty
years are not very convincing.

The end of the story is to be found in an article by Martov on _The
Mysterious Unknown_. At the beginning of 1908 Kamo, arrested in Berlin
under the name of Mirsky, succeeded in evading extradition by simulating
madness. At the same time the Paris police arrested Litvinov, who was in
possession of a considerable quantity of 500 rouble notes derived from
the Tiflis "ex." Various other Bolsheviks were arrested at Munich,
Stockholm and Geneva for attempting to change these notes, Semashko and
Olga Ravich among others.

The Mensheviks demanded an impartial inquiry, and the Central Committee,
under Lenin's direction, entrusted the matter to a commission presided
over by Chicherin. The latter, making rigid inquiry, found that Kamo was
preparing to pillage the Mendelssohn Bank in Berlin by bomb throwing.
Chicherin also discovered that the Bolsheviks had placed an order for
special Paper for the manufacture of bank notes. A certain quantity had
already been sent through the dispatch agency of _Vorwärts_ to Kuokkola
in Finland, where Lenin and Zinoviev were living in secret at the time.
Naturally _Vorwärts_ was ignorant of the contents of the package. The
man who provided the paper recognised Krassin as the customer from
photographs. Lenin put a stop to these discoveries by persuading the
Central Committee to transfer the inquiry to the "Bureau for foreign
countries." But the Transcaucasian Committee, having made its own
investigations, decided to exclude from the Party all the authors of the
Tiflis coup, Stalin included. No name was mentioned in public, for fear
of giving indications to the police; the same consideration prevented
any open mention of false money.

Kamo had as a companion in arms a _boyevik_ of remarkable personality,
Alipi Tsintsadze, familiarly known as Koté. The latter was in prison at
the time of the great exploit and therefore could take no part in it.
But he had many others to his credit. His memoirs on this period are not
without interest.

>After the defeat of the revolution, an era of reaction set in at the
>beginning of 1906. Comrade Arsenius Djordjiashvili was entrusted with a
>mission to kill General Griaznov, a terrible reactionary, charged by
>the Government with the suppression of the revolutionary movement in
>Georgia. There was delay in carrying out the terrorist deed.
>Koba-Stalin sent for me and said: "If within the next week
>Djordjiashvili does not succeed in murdering Griaznov, we will give you
>the job, and for this purpose you must organise selected terrorists."
>But Djordjiashvili fulfilled his mission.

These lines show what sort of business Koba conducted and help to make
his role clear: he did not himself execute operations, but directed
those who did. Koté Tsintsadze proceeds as follows:

>At this time the two sections worked in one organisation and were
>preparing for the "unity" Congress at Stockholm. Except for the Baku
>representatives the overwhelming majority of Transcaucasian delegates
>were Mensheviks. After the Congress it became clear that we Bolsheviks
>could not continue to work in one organisation with the Mensheviks. For
>my part I decided to create a purely Bolshevik club for expropriating
>State funds. Our advanced comrades, and particularly Koba-Stalin,
>approved my suggestion. In the middle of November 1906, the
>expropriators' club was organised and at the railway junction at
>Chiaturi we attacked a post office railway car, and took 21,000
>roubles, of which 15,000 were sent to the Bolshevik fraction and the
>rest to our own group to provide for a series of expropriations later
>on....

Stalin's line of conduct gradually becomes clearer. Sometimes he would
give a free hand so as to take advantage of success without being
compromised in the event of failure; sometimes he would urge on others
without directly exposing himself. Generally speaking he would take no
direct responsibility, but maintain a certain effective authority by
delegation of powers to intermediaries between the head and the lower
ranks of the organisation. He had plenty of physical courage, but it was
better to live for the revolution than to die for it.

As for Kamo his troubles were not ended. His incredible story must be
shortly told, not for its romantic interest but because of his close
association with Stalin's political career. Moreover the life of this
rebel illustrates the specific characteristics of revolutionary action
in Russia; no other Party affiliated to the Socialist International
could have produced a rebel of this type. Comparison of this
"professional revolutionary" of the Leninist school with any other
European Social-Democrat, any representative of English labour or of
trade unionism in the Latin countries shows how violent is the contrast
created by social environment and historical circumstances. It is true
that we are dealing here with an Armenian from Georgia, but one could
find the same type of men in St. Petersburg and in Moscow, in Poland and
in the Urals.

Kamo was a refugee in Berlin, and was then denounced by one of the
principal militant Bolsheviks, Jitomirsky, an agent of the Russian
secret police, and arrested after search of his lodgings; the police
found explosives and an electrical apparatus "discovered to be an
infernal machine." Imprisoned in the Alt Moabit jail, not speaking
German and pretending he understood Russian with difficulty, he was
zealously defended by the Social-Democratic lawyer Oscar Cohn, who
communicated to him a note from Krassin advising him to feign mental
disease. He carried out the incredible feat of keeping up pretended
violent madness for four years, and submitting to the treatment imposed
for it. He stamped, shouted, tore his clothes, refused food and struck
his keeper. He was shut up naked in an icy cell, but did not yield. Put
under observation in the infirmary and subjected to horrible tests, he
stood upright for four months, refused food, was forcibly fed at the
expense of several broken teeth, tore out his hair, hanged himself,
counting on intervention at the last moment, opened blood vessels with a
sharpened bit of bone, and lost consciousness in a flood of blood. The
doctors gave in, and Kamo was transferred to an asylum where his
tortures recommenced.

In order to test his pretended insensibility, needles were stuck under
his nails and he was touched with red hot irons. He bore his torments
stoically. The professors concluded that his malady was real. In 1909,
the administration handed him over to Russia, rather than provide for a
foreigner. _Vorwärts_ at Berlin, _L'Humanité_ at Paris and other
journals roused public opinion. Brought before the Council of War at
Tiflis, he took from his blouse a bird he had tamed in prison, and began
to feed it with crumbs. He was again placed under observation; and
underwent new tests sufficient to drive a sane man mad. At last, in
August 1911, thanks to Koté Tsintsadze, he achieved a marvellous escape
after having spent three months in sawing through his chains and the
window bars, nearly killing himself by falling on to a rock in the Kura
(the rope had broken), but escaped, outwitted the search for him, and
reached Batoum, where he stowed away in the hold of a ship. In the end
he reached Paris and "Vladimir Ilyich" (Lenin).

Lenin thought Kamo's health much shaken (sic), and prescribed rest. The
"Caucasus brigand," as Lenin humorously called him, set out for the
"South." At Constantinople he was arrested, but was set at liberty
through the intervention of Georgian monks of Notre Dame de Lourdes! He
dispatched arms to Russia, was again arrested in Bulgaria, but the
socialist Blagoyev helped him to escape. Arrested once more on board the
boat, with luggage filled with explosives, he was released by the Turks
and went to Greece. "Some months afterwards, by agreement with Vladimir
Ilyich, Kamo returned to Russia to procure money for the Party, which
was at that time in considerable straits."

In the Caucasus he gathered round him once more the survivors of his old
squad, and in September 1912 occurred the unsuccessful attempt on the
Kodjorsky road. Bachua Kupriashvili and Koté Tsintsadze, both of them
brilliant shots, covered the retreat by shooting down seven Cossacks,
but in vain. The _boyeviki_ were captured. Imprisoned once more in the
Metekh fortress, four death sentences were passed on Kamo.

Tsintsadze, who occupied the next cell, got a note through to him in a
lamp, and received the following reply:

>I guessed, found the letter, resigned to death, absolutely calm. On my
>grave there should already be growing grass six feet high. One can't
>escape death for ever. One must die some day. But I shall try my luck
>again. Try any way of escape. Perhaps we shall once more have the laugh
>over our enemies.... I am in irons. Do what you like. I'm ready for
>anything.

The plan could not be carried out. Kamo was doomed. But the magistrate
had a secret sympathy for this astonishing criminal, and prolonged the
formalities until the tercentenary of the Romanov dynasty. Then came the
Imperial Rescript commuting the death penalty for prisoners under
conviction to twenty years' hard labour. A vile penitentiary regime was
slowly killing the martyr to Bolshevik finance. In 1917 he was saved by
the revolution, brought back to life and a new career.

It is difficult to imagine such a man in a western industrial
environment, and it is hard to think of him as a contemporary. It is not
fortuitous that the old Bolshevik Lepeshinsky should call him a
mediaeval hero. The Russian people, wrote Leroy-Beaulieu, "may have
received a visit from Diderot, they may own Voltaire's library, but they
are still living in the age of theology.... For the great mass of the
people the Middle Ages are still a reality." The unchanging fervour of a
Kamo, his consistent passion for sacrifice, his resignation under
suffering and in the face of death derive from a mysticism which is
plainly an anachronism by any comparison with the rationalism of more
developed countries, whatever the view taken of rationalism itself.
"Marxism" has nothing whatever to do with his inextinguishable ardour.

There was a religious mentality about the little Bolshevik group at
Tiflis of which Kamo was the leading spirit. It had voluntarily
separated from the Party for form's sake after the Stockholm Congress,
which forbade expropriations. Russian socialists recalling past times
can still make its environment and its atmosphere live again. The town
in state of siege, the streets patrolled night and day, the perpetual
menace of raids by soldiers and police -- these were the conditions
under which the seven comrades led a community life, a separate "cell,"
but still maintaining their personal connections with Social-Democracy.
Their lodging was open to all comers, in a typical Georgian house with
doors and windows opening on to a long balcony; it consisted of two
rooms furnished in a primitive way, the men occupying the larger and the
two women the smaller room. They possessed a very rudimentary knowledge
of socialist theory, several of them rarely read anything, but their
devotion to the cause was boundless. Lenin, the incarnation of the Party
in their eyes, was the object of a regular cult, and they burned with
desire to distinguish themselves by some signal service. Full of
kindliness in their relations as between comrades, they could be
ferocious if they thought the interests of the Party were at stake.
Wretched conditions of life undermined their bodily health; those who
survived the repression died of tuberculosis.

Moral and social criteria of other places and other times are not always
applicable to terrorists and expropriators, whose methods could not be
grafted on a modern State. The crossed cheque, the bank transfer, more
and more in use, and the means of coercion perfected by a strong
Government, to a large extent eliminate the picturesque violence of the
methods in vogue in peasant countries. The barbarity of the Tsarist
regime engendered cruel methods of opposing it. In the shadow of
Russo-Asiatic despotism the inevitable revolutionary conflagration is
preluded by the glare of explosions. A story of Leonid Andreyev's
_Sashka Yeguliov_, giving a picture of the "ex," reflects the sympathy
felt in educated society for the rough avenging _boyeviki_. Violence
answered violence; the end desired by a whole nation seemed to justify
the means. It is hard to understand why Stalin has taken pains to
obliterate all signs of his responsibility in this matter, unless the
reason is a tardy regret for having sacrificed the lives of comrades
while he himself stood aloof. Pilsudski does not blush for the part he
played as leader of the Polish _bojowka_, and he plunged sword in hand
into terrorism.

The "fighting organisation" of the Polish Socialist Party carried out a
hundred "ex'es" on a large or small scale: Rogow, Mazowieck, Bezdany are
the most Important. Only in the last did Pilsudski personally take part,
the rule of the _bojowka_ being that each member must take part in at
least one armed attack. The affair took place in the night of September
27, 1908, on the St. Petersburg-Warsaw line at the little station of
Bezdany, where the _bojowka_ cut the telephone and telegraph wires,
seized a post-office car, terrorised the staff of the station and the
car, and were able to "work" at their ease, carrying off 2,400,000
roubles according to an official biographer, though the figure is
doubtful. From the confused accounts given in the _Novoye Vremya_ it is
impossible to extract a brief and comprehensible story. But it is true
that Pilsudski made his will before the expedition; the precaution was
unnecessary, for Bezdany was child's play compared with the Tiflis "ex."

The dissolution of the _bojowka_ was one of the reasons for the schism
of the Polish Socialist Party in 1906.The Nationalist Right, with
Pilsudski and Daszynski, were more and more absorbed in secret military
organisation. Similarly the "ex" deepened the gulf between Bolsheviks
and Mensheviks in Russian Social-Democracy. But in this case it was an
international Left which attached a fundamental importance to military
and "technical" work. On both sides the men of action tended towards
practical preparation, looking for tangible means of securing victory in
imminent civil war. The Polish Social-Democrats, opponents of the
Pilsudski Party because of their hostility to nationalism, had no
objection whatever to his lucrative proceedings, and their reputed
organiser, Leon Tyshko, employed them on mutual account with Lenin.

The money question, the invariable corollary of the idea of professional
revolutionaries, gradually assumed a disproportionate place in the life
of the Social-Democratic émigrés, which had undergone changes after the
defeat; it envenomed the relations between the two sections of the
Party. If the Bolsheviks were able to secure a majority in 1907 it was
largely due to the enormous resources obtained by the "ex'es" which made
it possible for them to maintain a legion of militants, to send
emissaries to all quarters, to found journals, to distribute pamphlets,
and to create more or less representative committees. The Caucasus was
not the sole source of revenue. An ex-boyevik from the Urals, Sulimov,
relates in his memoirs that his group paid to the Bolshevik Central
Committee 60,000 roubles; 40,000 roubles to the Regional Committee,
providing, among other things, for the publication of three newspapers;
and in addition subsidised the journeys of delegates (certainly
Bolsheviks) to the London Congress, paid for the course for instructors
in fighting at Kiev, the, school for bomb throwers at Lemberg, the
traffic in contraband, etc. Although the revenue of the Party central
organisation did not exceed a hundred roubles a month in bad years, the
Bolsheviks had considerable sums at their disposal, though never enough
for their needs. They sent, for example, a thousand roubles a month to
their St. Petersburg organisation, and five hundred to Moscow. The
Mensheviks, obstinately attached to European legalism, reduced to
relying on the infinitesimal subscriptions, could not fight on equal
terms with competitors who had no scruple; nor submit to the rule of a
factitious majority. There was no discipline, and two parties wore one
another down within the Party, which was doomed to break up anew into
new fractions and sub-fractions.

### 4.3

STALIN had seen Lenin for the second time at the Stockholm Congress, but
his recollections of the meeting contain nothing worth quoting. The
third meeting was at the London Congress in 1907, and there is nothing
interesting in Stalin's narrative of that; he confines himself to
expressing unbounded admiration for Lenin, who was unperturbed by his
success. There was nothing to be excited about in a precarious majority
of a few votes, when one knew at what price and by what means it had
been secured. If Lenin had only merited praise of this kind, his name
would long since have been forgotten.

The Party had undergone great changes during the revolution; it had
developed in numbers, in experience, and in political maturity. At the
Stockholm Conference there were 36 workmen and 108 intellectuals, who
represented 343 prosecutions for political crime, and 286 years of
prison and deportation. At London there were 116 workmen, and 196
intellectuals and others. The statistics state that these included 56
"professional revolutionaries" and 118 delegates "living at the expense
of the Party" (without indicating how many militants of this class there
were in Russia). The delegates had against their names 710 prosecutions,
834 years in prisons, fortresses, and deportation, of which 597 years
had actually been served, and 120 escapes. Finally, in a single year the
Mensheviks had increased their membership from 18,000 to 43,000; the
Bolsheviks from 13,000 to 33,000; the total number of Bundists (33,000),
Poles (28,000), Letts (13,000) had doubled.

The London Church in which the Congress held its thirty-five sessions
was the scene of stormy debates. Trotsky escaped from Siberia, took up a
"centrist" position, and was almost the only conciliator between the two
nearly equal sections (the Bolsheviks supported by the Poles and Letts,
the Mensheviks by the Bundists). "What has the schism done for you?" he
asked the two sides. "To do the same thing side by side, to march on
common ground and mutually tread on one another's toes. And what is the
result? You are compelled to reunite, first on a federative basis, and
then in a congress of unity." He proceeded to conjure up the danger of a
future schism with a succession of alternating unions and separations.
His relations with the Left were still strained (the President even had
to call him to order for having accused Lenin of hypocrisy), but there
appeared to be a basis for a political rapprochement. He had the
satisfaction of hearing a speech from Rosa Luxemburg which came very
near his own conception of the "permanent revolution."

A new feature in the Congress was the appearance of a "parliamentary
section," who criticised the Bolsheviks severely. After the brusque
dissolution of the first Duma, followed by the Vyborg Manifesto, by
which all the democratic parties repudiated in advance the debts
contracted by Tsarism without the assent of the national
representatives, the Party had taken part in the electoral struggle in
spite of the unfavourable conditions created by the electoral property
qualification. Internal discord at once appeared on the question of the
tactics to be followed with regard to the Kadets. "Strike together, but
march separately," Marx's formula, rediscovered by Plekhanov and adopted
by Lenin, did not quite solve the problem.

Martov proposed to support liberalism in cases where the choice lay
between it and reaction, and to conclude an electoral agreement, even in
the primary elections. Lenin consented to understandings of this kind
_except_ in the primary elections, advocating as more advantageous a
left bloc, with the _Trudoviki_ (Labour), or with the Social
Revolutionaries as occasion offered. The Central Committee, and also a
Party Conference held in Finland (November 1906) had adopted the
Menshevik view. A "Red" Duma succeeded the Kadet Duma; fifty-four
Social-Democrats entered Parliament, of whom two-thirds were Mensheviks
and one-third Bolsheviks. In Georgia Social-Democracy triumphed over all
its adversaries and rivals.

Under the perpetual menace of dissolution and in the absence of real
parliamentary immunity, the parliamentary fraction had a difficult task,
and their courage and goodwill failed to solve all the difficulties. In
their illusions about the Kadets, "His Majesty's Opposition," and their
prudent language, they ill-reflected the combative state of mind of the
active majority of the Party. Lenin criticised them severely.
Tseretelli, Leader of the Duma, and Rapporteur to the Congress, had
declared: "The struggle for freedom cannot be conducted without some
sort of coalition with bourgeois democracy." Lenin accused him of
reformism, and reproached the deputies with inclination to bourgeois
parliamentarism. Trotsky, who agreed to some extent with the Bolsheviks
on the principle but objected to their tone, spoke against them, and
drew down on himself the reply from Lenin: "It is not wise, nor worthy
of a working-class party, to conceal differences."

The majority of the Bolsheviks voted against Axelrod's proposition for a
"workers' congress," for summoning all the socialist parties and
workers' groups in one large assembly, a first step possibly towards a
kind of Labour Party on the English model. They secured the adoption of
a motion which gave Social-Democracy a directing role in the trade
unions (only recently formed in Russia and usually by socialists), and
established organic connection between them and the Party. But on
questions of internal management they could not secure a majority; in
the new Central Committee they had a majority of only one vote, and that
an uncertain one. The Bolshevik Centre continued to exist in secret,
directing the "war of partisans," and the expropriations which the
Congress had just forbidden.

Stalin saw Trotsky for the first time in London but Trotsky probably did
not notice him. The leader of the St. Petersburg Soviet did not make
chance acquaintances, or make friends except on the basis of real
affinities. Outside of the Caucasus, Koba was unknown except by a very
small circle of Bolsheviks. He did not speak at the Congress. He had
succeeded in getting a seat as representative of the Borchalo district,
where no branch of the Party existed, but with less success this time;
the authorised delegation from the Caucasus protested against this
fabrication, and Koba remained only on tolerance and without the right
to vote. A "true Bolshevik" did not bother about a detail like that. The
Tiflis affair soon showed how much Koba cared about the Congress, its
orders and its resolutions.

The official biography relates that Koba directed the _Dro_ (Times) at
Tiflis in 1906, and in the following year the _Bakinsky Rabochi_ (Baku
Workman) at Baku. He also wrote a series of articles on _Anarchism and
Socialism_ which have remained unknown. These small local journals,
whose editors simplified and diluted Lenin's writings, had an ephemeral
existence of a few weeks; as for the articles in question they are not
reprinted. Stalin did not then pretend to any rank as a theorist and
writer. His more modest aim was to procure control of the Bolshevik
group at Baku, outside Georgia, where he felt he could get no further.
After so notorious a defiance of a decision of the Congress, his
exclusion from the Party at Tiflis was inevitable; prudence counselled a
speedy change in his held of action. Baku was the nearest place, and one
of steadily increasing importance.

The ancient Perso-Tartar town, now blackened with naphtha, grew like an
American city. Its population rose from 14,000 in 1865 to 112,000 at the
1897 Census, and it now numbers 446,000. In odd contrast with the
petroleum wells, it has kept its mosques and minarets, its vast oriental
bazaar, and labyrinth of sordid streets crowded with Muslims, and its
temple of the Fire Worshippers, guarded by a Parsee. The petroleum
wells, which produced 340,000 _poods_ in 1862, were already yielding
636,000,000 in 1902 and attracted a wretched and illiterate proletariat
of Turks, Persians, Armenians and Russians, whom the two opposed
Social-Democratic groups each sought to dominate.

After the departure of Krassin and then of Knuniantz, who joined the
Mensheviks, the outstanding militants of Lenin's fraction were S.
Shaumian and P. Djaparidze. The latter (who must not be confused with
his namesake, Artshil, deputy to the Duma), devoted himself to trade
union work. Stalin, who competed with Shaumian for pre-eminence in the
Party, determined to oust him. The two men were soon at daggers drawn.
"Between the two there began a long struggle, pushed to such length that
the Baku workmen _even suspected Djugashvili of having denounced
Shaumian to the police_ and wanted to bring him up before a Party
tribunal. He was saved by arrest and exile in Siberia." This episode,
known to old militants and related in the article in _Brdzolis Khma_,
already quoted, has never been cleared up. The dates are uncertain, but
it is a fact that Shaumian's arrest was attributed in Party circles to
denunciation and that Koba was suspected.

There is nothing to prove the accusation. Such proofs hardly ever exist.
But are the moral presumptions sufficient to support the terrible
suspicion? Accumulated indications may perhaps lead to certainty. What
is certain and significant is that Stalin's own comrades should have
thought him capable of giving up a brother-in-arms to rid himself of a
rival. For the second time he was accused of intrigue and greed of
power, and the accusation does not come from the enemy, but from the
ranks of the Party and the fraction. Whether deserved or not, the
assumption was made.

To this period also belong certain special practices only vaguely
referred to by Bolsheviks to-day -- manoeuvres for the extortion of
funds _(vymogatelstvo)_ for the Party treasury by various methods of
pressure on the employers in the petroleum industry. For the same reason
it would be premature to seek to verify certain stories put about by
those who saw much of Stalin at Baku, among others those relating to the
Sakvarelidze false money affair. To note them even without mentioning
names would be to reveal the sources and jeopardise the liberty of those
who committed the indiscretions. The silence imposed on Stalin's former
fellow-workers in prison or in exile is eloquent enough in a country
where the most detailed and unreserved memoirs are published.

Even Koba's own writings are systematically suppressed. Trotsky has
stated that "During the whole period of the reaction, from 1907 to 1911,
there is not a single document available, whether article, letter or
resolution, in which Stalin has expressed his opinion on the actual
situation or on the future. It is impossible that such documents should
not be in existence. It is impossible that they should not have been
preserved, if only in the police archives. Why are they not published?

More interesting information on the Koba of these days has been
published abroad by the Social Revolutionary Vereshchak, who presided
over the Soviet of soldiers of the Tiflis garrison. How much confidence
can be placed in it? Simon Vereshchak had a faultless moral reputation
in various revolutionary circles; the Bolsheviks themselves gave
indisputable proof of it by reproducing his recollections, in their own
fashion, in _Pravda_, the official Party organ. Under the heading of
"Certified Correct," and, exceptional circumstance, twice over, on
February 7, 1928, and December 20, 1929, the paper published a
feuilleton by Demian Biedny, a close friend of Stalin's, in which
extracts from Vereshchak alternate with a commentary by the Bolshevik
writer. "Certified Correct," said _Pravda_, by way of emphasising and
confirming the passages which seemed to them likely to enhance their
master's reputation. But a simple comparison of Vereshchak's memoirs
with Demian Biedny's feuilleton reveals a clever, deceptive selection,
which gives an inexact impression of the document in question. The
source only has to be consulted to re-establish the truth and learn more
about the real Koba.

He had been arrested in March 1908, after Shaumian, then imprisoned in
the Bailovskia jail before being exiled for two years under surveillance
to the province of Vologda, north of Moscow. He spent eight months in
prison, where Vereshchak knew him well. Prison was a good place for
estimating character for many reasons. In the Baku jail, intended to
accommodate 400 prisoners, but at that time occupied by more than 1,500,
the "politicals" had their own economic commune and a doyen assisted by
a commission on which Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries
had equal representation. Vereshchak was a member of the commission, and
was thus able to collect biographical information about Stalin which at
all events reflected current opinion. It is easy to discriminate between
facts and comments.

According to Vereshchak, the young Djugashvili had been excluded from
the Seminary for being a member and leader of a clandestine socialist
club: "His comrades in the club say that soon after his expulsion, they
were in turn expelled. After an interval it was ascertained that the
expulsions were the result of, a _denunciation conveyed by Stalin_ to
the Rector. In the subsequent explanations with his comrades he did not
deny the accusation, but _justified the action_ by saving that the
expelled students, who lost their claim to the priesthood, would become
good revolutionaries." A parallel is suggested between the two
denunciations, for Vereshchak evidently knew nothing of the Shaumian
affair, which he does not mention. If this is a coincidence of error, it
is a disturbing one.

In prison Stalin was admitted without difficulty to the prisoners'
commune. The jail, says Vereshchak, "was a revolutionary school for
propaganda and fighting purposes. Among the leaders of groups and clubs
Koba professed his Marxian principles." The newcomer was cautious in
speech and not very communicative. "While the 'politicals' tried not to
mix with ordinary criminals, and specially warned their younger members
against doing so, Koba was always to be seen in the company of
murderers, blackmailers and robbers.... He was always impressed by men
who had brought off an 'affair.' He looked on politics as an 'affair'
requiring dexterity. He shared a cell with the two forgers of 500 rouble
notes, Sakvarelidze and his brother Niko, then a Bolshevik." Vereshchak
describes Koba as given to formal controversies.

>The agrarian question was at that time exciting hot discussions, in
>which the antagonists sometimes came to blows. I shall never forget an
>agrarian debate organised by Koba at which his comrade, Serge
>Ordjonikidze ... brought home his conclusion by striking his fellow
>speaker, the Socialist Revolutionary Ilya Kartsevadze, in the face, for
>which he received a thorough thrashing from the Social Revolutionaries.
>
>Koba's personal appearance and his rudeness in controversy made him an
>unpleasing speaker. His speeches lacked wit and his statement of his
>case was dry. His mechanised memory was astounding.

He was always ready to quote Marx, and so impress the young and
ignorant. In Transcaucasia he seemed a sort of local Lenin.... "His
remarkable lack of principle and his practical cunning made him a master
of tactics." He hated the Mensheviks, whose arguments he was incapable
of meeting. "_All means are justified against them_," he said.

When the whole prison was nervously excited on account of a midnight
execution, Koba would sleep or quietly recite in Esperanto, the future
language of the International, he thought. As for solidarity among the
prisoners, "he never proposed any measures of protest, nor did he resist
the most extreme or ridiculous treatment.... He did not instigate
revolt, but he supported the instigators. That made the prisoners look
on him as a good comrade." One day (Vereshchak is certainly wrong here
in his date), the politicals were thrashed by a company of soldiers.
"Koba walked along under the blows of the butt ends of rifles with head
unbent, with a book in his hands." This is the phrase to which _Pravda_
paid homage.

Another point, "partly explaining perhaps why Stalin remained so long
obscure," was "his capacity of secretly urging others to action while
himself remaining aloof." This confirms the description given of his
conduct during the "expropriations." One day a young Georgian was
cruelly struck down in a corridor of the prison on account of a rumour
accusing him of being an _agent provocateur_; the body covered with
blood was taken away on a stretcher. It was asserted that no one knew
anything of the victim or of the accusation. "A long time after, it
became clear that _Koba had originated the rumour_." How can one help
recalling the two earlier anonymous denunciations?

On another occasion the ex-Bolshevik Mitka G -- stabbed to death a young
workman, unknown to him, in the belief that he was a spy. Now the
execution of a traitor or a spy on the initiative of an individual has
never been permitted in revolutionary circles; there is a rigid rule
requiring group responsibility. For a long time the affair remained
obscure. "At last Mitka let it be known that he thought he had been led
into error. The instigation came from Koba." A fourth incident of this
kind, which justifies the following remarks by Vereshchak, and confirms
many other statements.

>This aptitude for striking secretly by the hands of others while
>remaining in the background himself showed Koba as an astute intriguer,
>using all means to gain his end and escaping the penalties and the
>responsibility for the actions in question. This characteristic of
>Stalin's was displayed in all his "affairs." In the organisation of
>forgers issuing 500 rouble notes, in the notorious robberies of State
>funds, Koba's hand was felt, but he was never implicated in the
>prosecutions, although forgers and "expropriators" had been imprisoned
>with him. Moreover he insolently assailed the Social Revolutionaries
>for terrorism and expropriation.

Such were the essential data which _Pravda_ was so imprudent as to
"certify correct," under the censor's scissors, thanking the author for
"having in spite of himself traced, though in faint lines, the living
portrait of a true Bolshevik." These data, indeed, complete and confirm
the observations already made. Certain characteristics emerge from the
picture. The first is a "will to power" disproportionate to the will to
know, almost attenuating the Nietzschean conception of the end of man to
material and practical requirements, ignoring the various forms of
intellectual activity, analysis and synthesis and aesthetic
appreciation, serving the instinctive rebelliousness of a man who had
never been reconciled to his environment (the spirit of revolt not
always finding expression in the concept of a loftier humanity or of a
rational organisation of society). The second characteristic is a narrow
realism, efficacious within strict limits; and with it a lack of
appreciation of theory or of general ideas -- a temper of mind inherited
from his peasant ancestors. The third is a religious education overlaid
with a travesty of Marxism consisting of elementary formulae learned by
heart like a catechism, and lastly oriental dexterity in intrigue,
unscrupulousness, lack of sensitiveness in personal relations, and scorn
of men and of human life. Koba, more and more a professional
revolutionary, felt himself to be hard and cold as the steel from which
he adopted his name.

In July 1909 he escaped from Solvychegodsk, in the province of Vologda,
where he had been sent to live under surveillance, and lived in hiding
at St. Petersburg with Savchenko, quartermaster of the regiment of Horse
Guards. Flight was easy for exiles of this category, only subjected to
obligatory residence in a certain place, and to report periodically to
the authorities. A month later he returned to Baku, and resumed his
subterranean political activity until March 1910, when he was again
arrested and, after some months in prison, sent back to Solvychegodsk
for five years. There, in a sparsely populated forest region where there
were many exiles, "he helped to form a Social-Democratic organisation,
delivered lectures, and trained propagandists," if one can trust the
account of V. Nevsky. In fact nothing is known of his existence in
exile, and the vague statement in the dictionary adds nothing to the
original sources of information. A police dossier shown at an exhibition
at Veliky-Ustiug under the heading "conduct," notes to his advantage,
"rude, insolent, disrespectful to the authorities."

The period of his activity in the Caucasus was at an end; exclusion from
the Party practically drove him from Georgia, and Baku was too hot for
him. What did he leave behind him in the town? "A citadel of
Bolshevism," replies his official biographer. A flagrant inexactitude.
The "citadel" dissolved rapidly into fusion with the Mensheviks. Another
revolution was required to reconstitute a Bolshevik group at Baku.

In the spring of 1911, Koba fled again, and went to St. Petersburg,
where he went by the name of Ivanov, spending his nights at the lodgings
of his friend Todria. On September 10th of that year, he was arrested,
spent some weeks in prison, and was exiled for the third time, on this
occasion for three years, to Solvychegodsk. Shortly afterwards he
escaped again; at the end of 1911 he returned to St. Petersburg. The
official biographies are not in detailed agreement, but the errors and
contradictory statements are unimportant. It is only necessary to note
the relatively light sentences and the slightness of the surveillance,
indications that the police did not regard Koba as very dangerous. The
revolutionaries in the "dangerous" category were more severely treated
and better watched.

In February 1912, a decision taken by a small committee abroad made Koba
a member of the Central Committee of the Party. What explanation is
there for the rapid advance to the supreme controlling organ of the
Party of a man who had been expelled from it? It is that the Party at
this moment was not one, but two. Trotsky's fears were justified; a new
schism had thrown the "enemy brothers," henceforward not brothers at
all, into violent opposition. Lenin had gathered round him his
"professional revolutionaries" and had chosen the most faithful of them
as his "group of clandestine organisers." Stalin filled his
requirements. There were as yet no definitive boundaries, and many
Social-Democrats crossed the line from one to the other, but Bolshevism
and Menshevism were crystallising into irreconcilable systems.

### 4.4

IMMEDIATELY after the London Congress, the Red Duma had been dissolved,
the Constitution derided, and the Social-Democratic deputies, with
Tseretelli at their head, imprisoned and deported. This _coup d'état_ of
June 1907 may be said to indicate the end of this phase of the
revolution. The country made no protest. Lenin, who had up till then
insisted on keeping armed rebellion on the programme, could no longer
hope for an immediate union of workmen, peasants and soldiers in
victorious insurrection, and resigned himself to the reality; reaction
was general and profound, and would be more so. He recognised the fear
and apathy of the masses. All the socialist parties were exhausted,
disorganised and disabled. Repression hastened the decline of the
workers' movement; journals were suppressed, printing offices closed,
trade unions prohibited and persecuted. Social-Democracy was not the
least seriously affected. Zinoviev admits that "it may be said plainly
that at this unhappy period the Party as a whole ceased to exist."

Tsarism enjoyed a respite largely due to the international situation. In
the game of European alliances, Imperial Russia, in spite of the
disastrous war in the Far East, was an important, though over-estimated,
factor. Loans made by French capitalism, deaf to the warning of the St.
Petersburg Soviet and to the Vyborg Manifesto, contributed substantially
to the consolidation of the autocracy. The Prime Minister, Stolypin,
though he kept the gallows busy, also prepared his agrarian reform,
facilitating the formation of a class of small rural proprietors in the
hope of disarming the simmering peasant revolt. "Agrarian Bonapartism,"
said Lenin. After two years of famine the harvest of 1907 and the
exceptional plenty of the two following years gave a strong impulse to
agriculture, in the midst of the industrial crisis.

The revolution, conquered, did not admit defeat, but resistance was
maintained only by the conscious few. Socialist organisations of all
shades lost members in less time than it had taken to enrol them.
Retreat, discouragement, decadence and disintegration are the terms
which recur on each page of this chapter of social history. Indifference
in political matters, a renaissance of religious mysticism, eroticism in
literature, scepticism and pessimism, all of them phenomena caused by
the disorder following defeat and despair, created an atmosphere
unfavourable to Social-Democracy. In addition to losses in physical
strength, the Party was entering on an era of demoralisation and
disintegration of its forces and its central organisation.

Lenin, in choosing his "professional revolutionaries," had sought
courage rather than intellectual gifts. This enabled him to create a
skeleton organisation, carefully graded and disciplined, to use for his
own ends energy such as that of the fighting squads which the Mensheviks
were neglecting; he was able to summon to Helsingfors a conference of
his technical and military experts, who formed the embryo of a Red
Guard. But any such "active" militant, useful to some extent in the
hands of an experienced chief, tended to become "passive" when left to
deal on its own initiative with a situation requiring political
intelligence and an historic sense. So long as the "best man" was not
definitely imposed on his subordinates, to handle the instrument in the
best interests of the cause, he wasted his energies in securing
recognition of his authority, and waging a constant struggle to maintain
it. Without him the phalanx was a body without a head. To leave it to
lieutenants was to invite disaster.

Shortly after the London Conference, Lenin found himself in opposition
to his own fraction, and his success at the recent Congress was shown to
be illusory. At the Party Conference held at Vyborg in July there came
up again the question of participating in the elections, this time to a
Parliament in which representation of the workers would be practically
wiped out under the altered laws. The Bolsheviks wanted a boycott, with
the exception of Lenin, who did not hesitate to vote with the Mensheviks
in favour of participation, and had no support; he was alone in his
group, says Kamenev, or almost alone. Koba, a fervent "boycottist," was
not present, but Zinoviev and Kamenev were there to voice a
pseudo-revolutionary intransigence on the morrow of the revolution. The
most serious aspect of the matter for Lenin was the conflict with his
closest colleagues, Bogdanov and Krassin, members of the secret
Bolshevik Centre known as the "Little Trinity." It was the beginning of
a bitter internal struggle among the Bolsheviks.

The "Black Duma," the third, only included fifteen Social-Democrats,
most of them Mensheviks. The Georgians had once more surpassed all
expectations, and their deputies, Chkheidze and Gueguechkory became the
most prominent spokesmen of socialism in Russia. The character of this
Duma is well described in the famous words of the Minister Kokovtsev:
"Thank God, Parliament is no more." But, said Lenin, that was no reason
for not trying to get into it. The "boycottists" became either
"ultimatists," advocating the dispatch to Social-Democratic deputies of
an ultimatum imposing on them the orders of the Central Committee, or
"otzovists," advocating their withdrawal. Lenin, at odds with this Left
of the Left, manoeuvred carefully before deciding on open war. Martov
notes in his _History_ that Lenin associated himself with the
"ultimatists" twice, in 1907 and in 1908. Finally he made a stand,
refusing even to recognise "ultimatumism" as a legal form of Marxism. He
called its adherents "Mensheviks turned inside out," while they accused
him of Menshevism pure and simple and called him a renegade.

On the Menshevik side the position was no better. The majority, with
Potressov and Larin, wanted to "liquidate" the Party as moulded by
pre-revolutionary circumstances, to make an end of "illegal" action, to
found a new Party adapted to new conditions, and to keep it on "legal"
lines at all costs. They were the Right of the Right. Martov and Dan,
attracted at first by this tendency, sought to put "legal" action first,
without categorically condemning "illegal" work, which would, they
thought, die a natural death. Plekhanov represented a third Menshevik
position, the nearest to Lenin's, definitely favourable to the
maintenance of the clandestine Party.

Lenin, logical in his own standpoint, wanted to combine "legal" with
"illegal" action, laying most stress on the second. The Left, inspired
by Bogdanov, demanded a return to the earlier conspiratorial methods and
abandonment of trade unionism as well as of Parliament. Trotsky, at the
head of an intermediate group, professed himself to be "neither
Bolshevik nor Menshevik, but revolutionary Social-Democrat," and aimed
at reconciling the irreconcilable. Lenin was soon confronted in his
section of the Party with a Right Wing, unionist and conciliatory,
advocating any sort of compromise with the Mensheviks and acting on the
advice of Nogin, Rykov and Sokolnikov. In addition to all these
divisions there were the national groups -- Poles, Letts, Bundists --
leaving out of account minor complications; such was the situation among
the leaders of a Party which claimed to be the natural guide of the
proletariat in matters of theory. Under the circumstances it is
comprehensible that a man like Riazanov should stand aside and prefer to
devote himself to editing the posthumous works of Marx and Engels.

It is impossible here to follow up the divisions of Social-Democracy in
their various proceedings, general conferences and sectional meetings,
learned theories and transcendental considerations -- a theme arduous
for specialists. The essential is to watch those of the leaders who
influenced the events which transformed the unknown Koba into the
surprising Stalin, and to know what were the results of their agreements
and disagreements. For the same reason we shall abstain from recalling
the changing fortunes of competing papers and reviews. In this mass of
detail there is nothing valuable for future generations.

In 1908 Lenin had asked Trotsky to collaborate in the _Proletarian_, a
Bolshevik paper, and had been met with a refusal. In a letter to Gorky
he called this attitude a _pose_. In later controversies he called
Trotsky a _poseur_ and a "phrasemaker," words expressing his dislike of
fine words and magniloquence, so alien to his own sober diction. Trotsky
thought he was more useful outside the Party divisions, and played a
lone hand in his _Pravda_, waiting for an opportunity of reunion. At the
end of the year, a Party conference had condemned both the Right and the
Left wings, acting under the influence of Lenin, who was determined to
"liquidate the liquidators" and to fight those of his old disciples who
had become "liquidators of the Left." A Bolshevik committee in 1909
confirmed the tactics of "war on two fronts." Moreover, while the Left
demanded the continuance of conspiratorial and terrorist methods, Lenin
secured the disavowal of "fighting methods degenerating into pure
adventure," the dissolution of the last fighting units, and the
exclusion of belated "expropriators." When he thought tactics and
methods were out of date he did not hesitate to strike hard if he failed
to convince those who moved too slowly; he sometimes ignored his own
earlier instructions. That did not prevent him, as we have seen, from
sending Kamo in 1912 to the Caucasus, to risk his life on the road to
Kodjor....

This attitude meant rupture with the Left. Lenin lost not only Krassin,
but Bazarov, the economist, Pokrovsky, the historian, Gorky, the great
writer, and lesser auxiliaries, Alexinsky, Liadov, Menzhinsky,
Lunacharsky and Manuilsky. But he was not the man to shrink from losses
entailed by hopeless disagreement with his ideas. It was essential, to
use his own expression, to show "steadfastness in the struggle not only
on the holidays of revolution but on the ordinary week-days of
counter-revolution." He reproached the Left with "repeating a formula
divorced from the series of circumstances which had produced it and
assured its success, and applying it to conditions essentially
different." During the revolution, he said, we learned to "speak
French," now we must learn to "speak German," that is to say, to follow
up the heroism of the revolutionary period by patient organisation
appropriate to the new situation.

He remained an impenitent "Jacobin" of the proletariat, with an
unreserved admiration for the "great French Revolution whose vitality
and powerful influence on humanity is demonstrated by the wild hatred
which it still provokes"; he was haunted by the French national
tradition of 1793, "perhaps the final model for one order of
revolutionary methods." But the hour for Jacobin methods had not yet
sounded in Russia. Meanwhile, after having "spoken French," and advised
"speaking German," he never ceased "speaking Russian," sounding all
possibilities, weighing opportunities, calculating the chances of
keeping the Party on the right track, avoiding alike belated or
premature insurrection inspired by romantic motives, and constitutional
and parliamentary illusions.

Always to "speak Russian," even when borrowing theory and practice from
other revolutionary movements, this was the secret of his superiority
over his adversaries. He was a disciple of Marx, but undogmatic, eager
in the pursuit of science and knowledge, always alive to the teachings
of experience, capable of sincerely recognising, surmounting and making
good his errors, and consequently of rising above himself. Endowed with
the temperament of a leader, and with a sure sense for the real and the
concrete, he had in addition Russian intuition. When Trotsky, Axelrod,
Martov and Dan, impressed by the continuous growth of socialism and the
numerical strength of the trade unions in Germany, advocated the
"Europeanisation" of Russian Social-Democracy, a radical change in
mentality, Lenin, who had earlier told the Mensheviks enamoured of
parliamentarism _not to copy German models_, replied that the character
of any Social-Democracy was determined by the economic and political
conditions of a country. No one had more respect for the original
methods of a workers' party, and he did not wish to model the Russian
revolutionary movement on any other, but was willing to learn something
from all schools. He took part in the International Socialist congresses
at Stuttgart in 1907, and at Copenhagen in 1910, but abstained from
laying down the law to anyone, reserving his criticisms for the
"Girondins" of his Party.

In the common parlance of political topography, Trotsky belonged to the
Centre, from which point of vantage he reproved Right and Left
extremists; his standpoint bore apparent similarity to Lenin's; in
reality it was quite different. The latter opposed both Wings, and ran
the risk of detaching them from the Party, while the former dreamed of
conciliating all groups, directing his main attack on the Bolsheviks as
being the most serious obstacle to unity. Trotsky denounced Lenin's
"sectarian spirit, individualism of the intellectual, and ideological
fetichism." He maintained that Bolshevism and Menshevism had not struck
deep root and were rivals for "_influence over a proletariat still
politically immature_." Martov compared the Leninists to the American
socialist sect of Daniel de Leon and regarded the Russian experiment as
a "victory of Blanquist and anarchist ignorance over Marxian science";
he ascribed to the Bolsheviks the responsibility for Russian Social
Democracy's having learnt "to 'speak Russian' too exclusively and of
neglecting to 'speak European.'"

Lenin's reply was: "Yes, the Russian proletariat is much less mature
politically than the western proletariat. But of all classes of Russian
society, the proletariat showed the highest degree of political maturity
in 1905 to 1907." He held his ground against his two opponents,
developing the following argument: "Martov and Trotsky confound
different historical periods in comparing Russia, which is only now
completing its bourgeois revolution, to Europe where it is long since
over." But above all he concerned himself with Trotsky, whom he
condemned. To summarise Lenin's own words, Trotsky's sonorous and empty
phrases were those of a Tartarin de Tarascon, he was accused of hole and
corner diplomacy, of the methods of a procuress, and of wishing to
stifle discord instead of searching out its causes, of following the
principle of "live and let live." At the International Congress at
Copenhagen, in alliance with Plekhanov, always hostile to Trotsky, he
tried to induce the Russian delegation to censure him as guilty of harsh
criticism in _Vorwärts_ (August 1910), of both Mensheviks and
Bolsheviks, the latter for the expropriations; but Riazanov and
Lunacharsky intervened with success to prevent it.

Thus relations between the strongest personalities in the Party were
envenomed, in spite of their agreement on the faults of the Left and
Fight Wings. In January 1910, the Central Committee met to make a final
attempt to secure internal peace. Eight fractions were represented,
without counting minor groups. The principal personages achieved a
compromise on the basis of repudiating the faults of the "liquidators"
on both sides, of reorganising the central organisation and the press.
The Central Committee was to be transferred to Russia, with a bureau
abroad, and Trotsky's _Pravda_ became its official organ. But these
decisions were violated by all sections who resumed their liberty of
mutual attack. An inexplicable state of things if only the arguments
exchanged in public are taken into account, but quite comprehensible to
anyone knowing the real reasons kept secret outside the Party. These are
to be found especially in a pamphlet of the time, _Saviours or
Destroyers_, in which Martov recapitulates a long series of grievances
against the Bolsheviks, and sets out the facts too long unknown except
to a few initiates.

Martov's views are disputable, and have been abundantly discussed, but
no doubt has been cast on his veracity, even by his most impassioned
opponents. Krupskaya, in her _Recollections_, testifies to the great
esteem which Lenin always had for him, even in the midst of the fiercest
factional disputes. Martov was an extremely sensitive man, who, "thanks
to the delicacy of his perceptions, could comprehend Lenin's ideas and
develop them with great ability," she wrote, and Lenin "renewed
relations with him whenever he came into line at all." During the War of
1914, Lenin said in public that the _Goloss_, in which Martov wrote, "is
the best socialist journal in Europe" and often expressed the desire of
coming to an understanding with his old comrade of St. Petersburg.
Trotsky calls him "one of the most tragic figures of the revolutionary
movement, a gifted writer, a resourceful politician, a man with a mind
brilliant but not sufficiently virile, clear-sighted, but lacking in
will-power." However that may be, the sincerity and truthfulness of his
testimony cannot be contested. Moreover, other sources provide details
and facts which confirm his allegations.

The pamphlet reports incidents arising inside the Central Committee
which made even a minimum of harmony impossible. Discord began over the
"Anarcho-Blanquism" of the Leninists, "the product of the contradictory
conditions of development of the Russian working-class movement," the
advantageous effect of which during open civil war as stimulating
revolutionary energy is not denied by Martov. But the infractions of the
resolutions passed by Congress on the terrorist activity had fatal
consequences in the end. Expropriation developed into brigandage, and
compromised the Social-Democratic Party, introducing the seeds of
failure and disintegration. The funds seized were not used only for
arms, but in the interests of a faction and sometimes even for personal
ends. The pro-Bolshevik committees in Russia, accustomed to live on
funds provided by their organisers, disappeared as resources declined.
The Bolshevik Centre exercised a regular occult dictatorship, thanks to
its unauthorised ramifications and its funds, behind the back of the
Central Committee, even though that Committee had a Leninist majority.
Lenin was the centre of "an Order of Jesuits" within the Party,
professing the cynical amoralism of Nechayev. The money question was
disastrous. The Bolshevik Centre went so far as to "expropriate the
Central Committee" of an immense sum earmarked for the Party. A series
of scandals occupied the Party leaders. A Bolshevik named Victor
defrauded the trustees of a considerable legacy, the possession of which
was disputed between the two sections after the testator's death. The
division of the money between the relatives of the testator and the
Party was made the occasion of fresh threats from Victor, who wanted to
deprive the heirs of their share. The affair had to be submitted to a
commission nominated by the Social Revolutionary Party, as being
neutral. The Bolshevik Centre was accused by the _boyeviki_ of the Ural
District (the Lbovtsy, from the name of their leader Lbov) of having
taken their money improperly; the detachment of partisans at Perm had
made an agreement with the Bolshevik "Technical Military Bureau" for a
consignment of arms, paid for in advance, while the Central Committee
had dissolved the said Bureau, which did not deliver the arms and
refused to refund the money. Then there was the Tiflis "ex" and its
repercussions, the difficulties raised in the Party by the _camorra_ of
those who changed the expropriated 500 rouble notes, and the arrest of
various accomplices (Litvinov and Semashko), and the discovery at Berlin
of Kamo's infernal machine. The Central Committee had to decide to
destroy the remaining notes to circumscribe the danger. On top of this
came the forgery affair, for which the paper bought by Krassin had been
detected by the Reichsbank. There was also a case of an _agent
provocateur_, many other suspicious cases, and a story of falsifications
by Zinoviev. Added to all this were personal quarrels pursued to the
point of folly, requiring investigation committees, juries of honour,
and party tribunals.

These interminable discords, which had nothing to do with differences on
theory, assumed alarming proportions in a period of political and social
depression in which incidents took on the aspect of events. The quarrel
over the inheritance, with its unexpected complications, attracted
excessive attention, and aggravated misunderstanding. Private
correspondence of this period, some of it published, gives evidence of
this. Later writings by Trotsky frequently quoted in controversy, allude
to "an expropriation within the Party," and to "dirty money" extracted
from Kautsky and Clara Zetkin by the Bolsheviks. It is always the old
tale.

The matter might be dismissed, if the eternal and disgusting question of
cash had not acquired so much importance for international Bolshevism. A
student, Nicholas Schmidt, the son of a rich furniture manufacturer, who
had joined the Social-Democracy, died in prison, leaving to the Party a
large fortune which he had inherited from V. Morosov. The Bolsheviks, as
interested persons, sent to Moscow to supervise the transfer; one of
their members, a lawyer, who betrayed his trust, entered into relations
with the testator's eldest sister and secured for the Bolsheviks only a
third of the estate. Another emissary, Victor (Taratuta), married the
younger sister, and threatened her pro-Menshevik relations with
energetic action by the Caucasian _boyeviki_ if the whole sum was not
paid over. There followed a complaint to the Central Committee,
intervention by Martov, arbitration, conflicting claims, etc. The last
slice of the booty, entrusted to Kautsky, Clara Zetkin and Franz Mehring
pending a final settlement, fell into the hands of the Bolsheviks,
always more successful than their rivals in this sort of thing.

Other issues arise in this doubtful business. The Social-Democrat
Voytinsky relates, at second hand, that Lenin was supposed to have
justified the employment of this man Victor by remarking: "He has this
advantage, that he stops at nothing.... Would you for the sake of money
have been capable of allowing yourself to be kept by a rich bourgeois
woman? No. Nor would I, it would have been beyond me. But Victor did it.
That man is irreplaceable." These words are unconfirmed but they are
none the less plausible for that. In an article on the elections Lenin
had written, paraphrasing Chernishevsky: "A man who is afraid of soiling
his hands should not go into politics. The simpletons with white hands
only do harm in politics...." Nevertheless, his political amorality was
always subordinated to a higher social morality, expressed later on in
his formula: "Morality is that which helps to destroy the former society
of exploiters." He did not admit _any_ kind of action under _any_
pretext: "Would it be sufficient to allege an excellent aim or a good
reason to justify participation in any abominable deed?" His criterion
was the _efficiency_ of any course from the point of view of the general
interests of the proletariat and the progress of the socialist
revolution. He never lost sight of his principles, and when he broke
with Bogdanov, it was because philosophical differences seemed to him
more important than the practical utility of work in common. But as he
was not infallible, and as he was alone in his group in considering
temporary expedients in their historical framework, his example was
pernicious to mediocre imitators. Hence the reprobation of Trotsky,
Martov and others and the frequent allusions to Nechayev, forerunner of
the expropriators and comrade of Bakunin, whose strange _Catechism_
might have served the Bolsheviks as a manual for pseudo-revolutionary
immorality.

### 4.5

OPEN differences in theory ran parallel with dissensions behind the
scenes. The Left, under the direction of Bogdanov, had its own paper,
_Vperyod_, supported by an anonymous group who cherished the hope that
they were creating an art, science and philosophy of the proletariat.
They even evolved a project for utopian religion "without God," which
Lenin undertook to fight as a materialist, following Plekhanov. On this
occasion Plekhanov, with his great reputation in Russia as a
controversialist, resumed his pen to refute Bogdanov's
"empirio-criticism." Lenin, who was inadequately versed in philosophical
questions, began to study them with enthusiasm, even neglecting his
paper, in order to find a reasoned basis for his criticism. This
scrupulous conscientiousness in intellectual work was an essential
characteristic, and differentiated him from his immediate associates.
Bogdanov and Gorky had founded a school of socialism for Russian workmen
at Capri, then at Bologna; Lenin created one at Longjumeau, near Paris,
one pupil of which had a successful career, Serge Ordjonikidze.

In spite of profound tactical differences, and after having declared
Plekhanov to be beneath consideration as a political leader, Lenin tried
to come to an understanding with his former master, who replied: "I also
think that the only means of bringing the present crisis in the Party to
an end is a rapprochement between the Marxist Mensheviks and the Marxist
Bolsheviks" -- but he deferred the interview. Plekhanov clearly divined
the real intention. He said: "Lenin wants the unity of the Party, but he
understands it as a man understands unity with a piece of bread; he
swallows it." Trotsky had his own ideas about unity, allying himself
both with 'Right and Left to bring the Bolsheviks to a compromise. Rosa
Luxemburg demanded a general conference called at the request of the two
principal sections.

In Russia the militants, and especially the workers, hardly understood
these complications at headquarters. A letter from Koba written in 1911,
interprets their attitude with good sense:

>We have heard talk of the storm in a teacup abroad, the Lenin-Plekhanov
>bloc on the one hand and the Trotsky-Martov-Bogdanov bloc on the other.
>So far as I know the workers favour the first. But, generally speaking,
>they begin to look with scorn on doings abroad. Let them do what they
>like; as for us, if a man has the interests of the movement at heart
>and does his work the rest can be arranged. That is the best way in my
>opinion.

Such was the view of the ordinary Bolshevik, weary of seeing hairs
quartered. Trotsky tried in vain, after the event, to define this state
of mind as "indifference to theory," and the "myopia of the practical
man." Other statements of Stalin's may be set against this, but it would
be an error to take the political quarrels of the emigration for serious
controversies or demand from the rank and file a contribution to the
investigation of "empirio-monism."

Nogin's biographers say that he went in 1910 to Baku to ask Koba to
enter the reorganised Central Committee; there is no indication of the
result. It was evidently impossible for an expelled member of the Party
to become a member of the Central Committee without being readmitted, at
least so long as the facade of unity was maintained.

This deceptive appearance was about to disappear. Life in common was
becoming intolerable; the two sections paralysed one another. Moreover,
the situation in Russia was developing rapidly. Signs of effervescence
appeared, as at Tolstoy's funeral. There were indications of new life.
The industrial crisis came to an end and the renewal of production
stimulated the working classes. There were new opportunities for
socialist activity. Trotsky, always looking forward, had written some
months earlier: "To-day, through the veil of the black clouds of
reaction, we can discern the victorious gleam of a new October." Lenin,
with his finger on the political pulse of Russia, wrote in his turn:
"The Russian people are awakening to a new struggle, and are going
forward to a new revolution." Each of them took the initiative in
calling a Social-Democratic Conference. Lenin's was held at Prague in
January 1912; it unceremoniously assumed Congress powers, and nominated
a Central Committee. The Bolshevik Party was constituted at last.

The new "usurping" Central Committee consisted of seven members, among
whom were Serge Ordjonikidze, and immediately enlarged itself by adding
two members by co-optation; Stalin was one of these. The Mensheviks had
excluded this "professional revolutionary" the Bolsheviks advanced him.
Unknown to the Party of which he was the instrument, he became one of
the leaders solely by the decision of the other leaders. He was never
elected; at all stages from the local and provincial committees in the
Caucasus, up to the supreme All-Russian Committee he rose patiently and
gradually in the hierarchy of the organisation without requiring the
confidence of the masses or thinking of responsibility to them. He
belonged exclusively to the "clandestine group of organisers" who
imposed him on the organised. The Party knew nothing about him at the
time of his nomination and was to remain in ignorance for a long time.
Lenin tried in his editorial note to attract attention to Koba's
contributions in his _Social-Democrat_, but only a few dozen copies
penetrated into Russia. In contrast to a Trotsky, independently
developed, ripened in dispute and in controversy with Plekhanov, Lenin,
and Martov, and associated with the representatives of international
socialism, Stalin was a product of the Party, grown up under its
tutelage; but this was only a section of the Party which was itself
incorporated in the directing organisation.

The Central Committee, which was to sit abroad, at once appointed an
"executive bureau" for Russia. Koba and Serge, fellow-workers in the
expropriating operations, were members, "with allowances of fifty
roubles a month," says a police report. They showed themselves apt in
the execution of the orders which Lenin, himself practically the Central
Committee, was authorised to give them. Stalin sometimes wrote in the
St. Petersburg _Zviezda_, and brought some obscure assistance to the
foundation of _Pravda_ when the opportunity arose for the legal
publication of a Bolshevik paper. The awakening perceived by Lenin was
clearly evident after the massacre of the Lena strikers, which gave rise
to protests and sympathetic strikes. The following First of May was the
occasion of a great demonstration. The new _Pravda_ appeared at a good
moment. Supported by workmen's contributions, it met a real need for a
daily socialist paper; its existence was better assured by humble
voluntary sacrifices than was the case in earlier enterprises based on
the proceeds of expropriations or the gifts of capitalists.

It is significant that histories of the Bolshevik Party by Zinoviev,
Nevsky, Shelavin, Yaroslavsky and Bubnov do not mention Stalin in
connection with _Zviezda_ and _Pravda_. A specialist work by Olminsky on
these two papers does not attribute to him any part in their foundation
or management. There is only one trace of his hand, with a note
indicating occasional contribution by him. The part assigned to him by
the official biography prepared by his own secretary under his dictation
is therefore pure fiction. On the tenth anniversary of _Pravda_, out of
about forty articles commemorating its editors and various militants,
two or three only mention Stalin, and that without saying anything of
interest about him. He may have been useful in circulating the paper,
though he was occupied with subordinate tasks and unable to write in an
interesting fashion. "Editing" with the Bolsheviks has always meant
management rather than editorial work; a good "editor" in their parlance
means a man who sees to the strict execution of the instructions of the
"clandestine group of management." Stalin was in hiding at St.
Petersburg in the house of the Duma Deputy, Poletayev, whose
recollections give no important information. In April of the same year
he was arrested, condemned to three years in Siberia, and sent to the
Narym district, in the Tomsk province, whence he escaped in September.

During this period several Social-Democratic fractions hostile to the
Bolsheviks, answering a summons from Trotsky, had held a "unity"
conference at Vienna in August 1912. The "August bloc," heterogeneous
and negative in character, had no vitality and no future. Its effect was
to exacerbate the relations between Lenin and Trotsky. Their most
virulent controversies belong to this period. They do not contribute
anything to the intellectual content of Bolshevism, but to ignore them
altogether would be to suppress an element necessary for the
comprehension of later crises in the Party.

Lenin denounced Trotsky for a policy of self-advertisement, for lack of
principle and for adventurism. These were his actual expressions:

>People like Trotsky with their resounding phrases about Russian
>Social-Democracy, are the plague of our time.... Trotsky to-day
>plagiarises the ideology of one fraction, tomorrow of another, and then
>declares himself above all the fractions.... It is impossible to
>discuss principles with Trotsky, for he has no definite conceptions.
>One can and should discuss with convinced adherents of the Right and
>the Left, but not with a man who plays at concealing the faults of one
>to the others; he is to be unmasked as a diplomat of the basest
>metal ... Trotsky has never had any political colour; he comes and goes
>between the liberals and the Marxists, with shreds of sonorous phrases
>stolen right and left. Not all is gold that glitters. Trotsky's phrases
>are full of glitter and noise but they lack content.

Trotsky's views on Lenin were not less drastic: "professional exploiter
of all the backward elements in the Russian workers' movement" and past
master in "petty squabbling." In the letter to Chkheidze containing
these words, Trotsky foresees the destruction of the very foundations of
Leninism, which is "incompatible with the organisation of the workers
into a political party, but flourishes on the dungheap of sectionalism,"
after having stated that "the whole edifice of Leninism to-day is
founded on lies and falsifications and carries within itself the poison
germ of its own decomposition."

This exchange of compliments went on simultaneously with professions of
mutual tolerance, whose sincerity is only on a par with their absolute
inanity. "_A Party may include a whole spectrum of colours, in which the
extremes may be absolutely contradictory_," said Lenin, when he parted
with Bogdanov, whom he would not have in his fraction, but whom he did
not wish to drive out of the Party. He thus transposed into the
socialist movement his democratic convictions, which he summed up in the
concise axiom: "Outside democracy, no socialism." And after the
definitive schism, Trotsky was to write:

>In a large Marxist community embracing tens of thousands of workmen, it
>is impossible that divergences and discords should not exist. Every
>member of the community has not only the right but the duty of
>defending his point of view on the basis of the common programme. But
>in fulfilling that duty none should forget that he is dealing with
>differences among a band of brothers.... Discipline and cohesion in the
>struggle are inconceivable without an atmosphere of mutual esteem and
>confidence, and the man who fails to observe these moral principles,
>whatever may be his intentions, is undermining the very existence of
>Social-Democracy.

As for passing from words to deeds, no one took the step. Attempts at
general unification were futile. Trotsky recognised the fact, and went
to the Balkans as war correspondent for a Kiev newspaper. There he
studied military questions, not without profit for the future, and
formed a close friendship with Christian Rakovsky, the leader of
Romanian socialism, and one of the most attractive figures in
international socialism. Lenin, foreseeing the approach of a
revolutionary upheaval in Russia, left Paris for Cracow, where
communications across the Austrian frontier were easier and more rapid.
Stalin, escaped from Siberia, joined him there in December, 1912, for
the Bolsheviks were to hold a meeting of the Central Committee.

Nothing would be known of Koba's brief sojourn in the Narym district,
but for the opportune chance that Vereshchak met him at the village of
Kolpashovo. Among the exiles there were Sverdlov, Lashevich and Ivan
Smirnov. There was one escape after another, and Koba in his turn
departed by boat, "almost openly, via the province of Tobolsk." In
Siberia he had as a comrade a Social Revolutionary, Surin, who was later
discovered to be an _agent provocateur_. In a Shanghai paper the singer
Karganov, a former Social Revolutionary, published some Siberian
reminiscences in which Stalin appeared as defending a common thief, as
an anti-Semite, and as friend of the local commissar of police. For the
latter connection he is said to have been brought before an exiles'
tribunal. The article is wrong in its chronology at all events, but it
confirms information already collected on Koba's personal predilections,
though it adds little that is new.

After the meeting of the Central Committee he spent some months at
Cracow and Vienna in 1913. Lenin, anxious to educate his co-workers, and
to specialise them, provided him with the outline of a study on _The
National Question and Social-Democracy_, and helped him in the work
which was published in the review _Prosvyeshchenye (Instruction)_. This
is the first article signed Stalin. Having become a politician on the
Russian scale, Koba adopted, with secret satisfaction, a name with a
Russian ending which expresses his master quality -- hard as steel.
Rupert called Cromwell's men "Ironsides." Augustin Robespierre drew his
brother Maximilien's attention to the young Bonaparte as "an iron
soldier." Stalin did not wait for anybody to confer his metallic
pseudonym.

Lenin thought him a suitable person to deal with the question of
nationalities, since he came from a country where Georgians, Tartars and
Russians ought to live at peace. "We have here a wonderful Georgian who
is writing for _Prosvyeshchenye_, a great article containing all the
Austrian and other material," wrote Lenin to Gorky. Stalin did not know
any foreign language (even his studies in Esperanto remained fruitless),
and the "Austrian material," with the possible exception of Otto Bauer's
book in the Russian translation, was evidently derived directly from
Lenin, together with the general ideas. His article is the work of a
diligent pupil, good for a man of his education, but it passed
unnoticed; even in 1923 Saveliev took no notice of it in the article he
wrote on _Prosvyeshchenye_.

The question of nationalities, that is, the question of subject peoples
and the ruling races, was most important at that time in Russia, where
the revolutionary struggle was complicated by claims for independence or
for autonomy by subject peoples. International Social-Democracy had no
single definite opinion on the subject. The very existence of national
socialist parties, Polish and so forth, while a single party grouped all
the peoples of the Caucasus, shows the complexity of the problem in
Russia. The Austrian Marxists, directly interested in the question,
merely demanded national cultural autonomy within the established
territorial limits, including all classes, without imposing on the
workers any obligation to organise themselves as workers without
distinction of nationality. Lenin maintained the right of
self-determination up to and including separation, but at the same time
he inculcated in all workers the duty of organisation for trade union or
political purposes in a single group in each country irrespective of
nationality. This is the thesis he had given Stalin to develop. Rosa
Luxemburg thought it contrary to working-class internationalism, and
considered Poland as too closely connected economically with Russia to
think of separation.

On his return to St. Petersburg, Stalin, charged with the "direction" of
the small group of Bolsheviks in the Duma, or more exactly with the
transmission to them of Lenin's instructions, lived in hiding in the
houses of the deputy Badayev and of the workman Alliluyev. The fourth
Duma, elected in 1912, included thirteen Social-Democrats, of whom only
six were Bolsheviks, but the latter certainly represented a majority
among the workers. Identical programmes did not prevent schism between
the two sections, as desired by Lenin -- and by others, as they were one
day to learn. The Prague Conference had adopted three essential demands:
a democratic republic, the eight-hour day, confiscation of large estates
-- these were also the Menshevik demands. Chkheidze and Chkhenkeli, both
Georgians, were the most popular orators in the Duma. The Bolshevik
deputies, unable to take a line of their own or to formulate the Party
programme, read from the tribune documents drawn up by Lenin at Cracow.
The strong-fisted Stalin was there to keep them on "the line" traced by
their leader. Lenin did the thinking for all of them.

Stalin's task was soon over. In February 1913, that is at the end of a
few days, the police arrested the mentor at a "literary evening." After
a few months in prison he was deported to the Turukhansk district,
Martov's former place of exile, north of the Arctic Circle. This time
the penalty was serious, Stalin was not to escape. His rank in the Party
meant a correspondingly strict surveillance. He had been denounced by
the Bolshevik leader in the Duma, the principal reader of Lenin's
parliamentary speeches, the workman Malinovsky, a member of the Central
Committee and at the same time agent of the _Okhrana_ who submitted the
speeches before they were read to the Police Department.

The Russian political police did not only maintain spies and _agents
provocateurs_ in the revolutionary organisations; they controlled the
parties, groups and men in different ways, sometimes upsetting their
plans by encouraging quarrels over theory. The break of Plekhanov and
his comrades with the Peoples Will had been encouraged by the secret
agent Degayev, who had been sent to persuade Tikhomirov to
intransigence. The priest Gapon, hero of the Bloody Sunday of 1905,
became an agent of the _Okhrana_, and was executed by order of the
Social Revolutionary Party. The "fighting organisation" of this party,
in the hands of the _agent provocateur_ Azev, served police and
Government plans at the same time that it was preparing plots for the
assassination of grand-dukes and of the Tsar himself. Stolypin was
killed by a terrorist police officer. The Bolshevik Party was infested
with spies from top to bottom: Malinovsky, Jitomirsky, Romanov, Lobov,
Chernomazov, Ozol, the best known, were "responsible militants." At the
secret minor Bolshevik Conference in Prague of twenty-eight delegates
present, there were at least four identified afterwards as
_provocateurs_. The ample and detailed information supplied by police
documents and circulars provide a remarkable historical documentation
which no investigator can afford to miss. The varying configuration of
the fractions of Social-Democracy is pictured in them with photographic
accuracy. Spies had first-hand information.

It was not only the wishes of Lenin which had split the
Social-Democratic Group in the Duma. General P. Zavarzin writes in his
_Memoirs of a Chief of the Okhrana_: "Malinovsky continued his secret
collaboration under the direction of the Head of the Police Department,
S. P. Bieletzky, who advised him to provoke a split among the
Social-Democrats sitting in the Duma, in order to reduce this fraction
which had thirteen members. Malinovsky followed this counsel and
obtained the wished-for result, without awakening the least suspicion
among his comrades...." But a suspicion more and more concrete took
shape in the minds of Bolsheviks like A. Troyanovsky and among the
Mensheviks who demanded an inquiry from the president of the Bolshevik
parliamentary fraction. Lenin replied defending Malinovsky and calling
on Martov to repeat his "calumnies" in Switzerland so as to stand
responsible for them before "the tribunal of the free Helvetian
republic." Lenin placed unlimited confidence in Malinovsky. In July 1913
at Poronino, in Galicia, where Lenin had hired a country house, there
was a meeting of five members of the Central Committee: Lenin,
Krupskaya, Zinoviev, Kamenev and Malinovsky. Malinovsky knew everything.
In view of recent arrests of Bolsheviks of the foremost rank, a small
committee of three members invested with full powers, was charged with
selecting trustworthy persons. Krupskaya and Kamenev retired; Malinovsky
remained in the supreme trio. Among the decisions reached was one
relating to the proposed escape of Sverdlov and of Stalin, both of them
in exile near Turukhansk. The _Okhrana_, immediately warned by
Malinovsky, of course took steps to prevent it. In September-October a
new conference of eighteen delegates and four invited members met near
Poronino. Two reports found in the Ministry of the Interior give
detailed minutes of it; Malinovsky, who was again present, was nominated
as Lenin's deputy to the International Socialist Bureau. He had no
opportunity of fulfilling his mission.

In July 1914 the International Socialist Bureau summoned all fractions
to Brussels with a view to ending the multiplicity of fractions in
Russian Social-Democracy. Plekhanov, Rosa Luxemburg, Axelrod, Martov,
Trotsky, Chkhenkeli, Alexinsky, Zurabov, Lapinsky, etc., took part in
the session, which Lenin avoided, though as usual he had a long
memorandum read by Inessa Armand demanding the recognition of the
Bolshevik Party as an authorised section of the International.
Vandervelde and Kautsky had difficulty in soothing the indignation of
the Russians present, and Plekhanov so far forgot himself as to speak of
Lenin as a thief anxious to secure the cash-box, which made the
President ask him to sit down (at least so it is stated in a note by the
_Okhrana_); in any case this was certainly the tone of the disputes. If
Malinovsky had not been kept in Austria to clear himself of early
suspicions (Lenin saved him once more in 1917), he would have been
chosen to read the Bolshevik document after first forwarding a copy of
it to St. Petersburg.

Unanimously, with the exception of the Leninist and the Lett delegates,
the Brussels Conference invited all Russian Social-Democrats to surmount
their divisions and to achieve unity. That would not suit the _Okhrana_.
A Police Department circular soon sent instructions enjoining "all the
secret members of the various Party organs to defend urgently, with
firmness and perseverance, the thesis of the absolute impossibility of
any fusion of the Bolsheviks with the Mensheviks." Lenin, for reasons
which the _Okhrana_ could not understand, was apparently of a similar
opinion. But he did not despair of reaching relative unity by his own
means, by assembling under his command the scattered forces of the
movement.

Stalin, silent and gloomy, relegated to the forsaken hamlet of Kureyka,
hunted foxes in the Siberian _taiga_ and wild duck in the monotonous
_tundra_.

## Chapter 05: The Revolution

### 5.1

THE War broke the workers' revolutionary movement in Russia just as it
was reviving. Its power and energy had been revealed by strikes and
barricade fighting in St. Petersburg during M. Poincare's visit in
July 1914\. As everywhere else, mobilisation and the state of war stifled
at first all tendencies to open opposition. The policy of the great
socialist parties of the belligerent countries in rallying to the "union
sacrée" caused profound disturbance in the various strata of Russian
socialism.

Nevertheless, Mensheviks and Bolsheviks in the Duma agreed without
difficulty on a common declaration, though in equivocal terms, refusing
to vote war credits. Their rapprochement was soon ended by the
differences between the émigré theorists.

Plekhanov, influenced by Jules Guesde, adopted the patriotic point of
view in favour of the Allies as champions of democratic progress against
the reactionary Central Empires. Thus he broke irretrievably with the
socialist revolution. This was also the attitude of many
Social-Democrats, especially among the Mensheviks and Social
Revolutionaries. Some Bolsheviks, won over by the general state of mind
in France, joined the army as volunteers. Even anarchists, following the
example of Kropotkin, to whom the heritage of the French Revolution
appeared to be menaced by "German militarism," put the necessity of an
_Entente_ victory before their anarchist principles.

But Lenin, opposed to "defensism," immediately declared for "defeatism"
in its extreme form, unconditional and pushed to its final consequences.
In his _Social-Democrat_, his pamphlets, his manifestoes, he
characterised the world struggle as a "war of capitalist brigandage," a
"war between slaveholders for the division of the slaves and the
strengthening of their chains," a "war between slave-raiders in dispute
over their 'cattle.'" From this standpoint he urged the socialists of
each country to contribute to the defeat of their own Government, to
encourage fraternisation on all fronts, to "transform the Imperialist
War into a Civil War." With Rosa Luxemburg and Martov he had secured the
adoption at the International Socialist Congress at Stuttgart in 1907 of
a motion for "utilising the economic and political crisis engendered by
war for agitation among the lowest stratum of the population and to
precipitate the fall of capitalist domination"; he took the resolution
seriously, not retreating from what he had then proposed. In any case
the defeat of Russia, that is to say, of Tsarism, was in his eyes the
"lesser evil."

Alone in holding a point of view so definite and so directly contrary to
any other, he called the "defensists" the "Tsar's Socialists" as Marx
had called the followers of Lassalle, "Socialists of the King of
Prussia," and, joining battle on the European arena, he denounced the
bankruptcy of the Workers' International, abused all the patriotic
socialists as traitors, condemned the socialist pacifists and the
platonic internationalists as being stained with chauvinism and more or
less conscious accomplices of the former. For him real solidarity of the
proletariat implied hostility to national defence under the given
conditions, without distinction of camps, and demanded revolt both
against war and the bourgeois regime. Finally he demanded the foundation
of a new International. Throughout the War he continued to develop these
themes, which separated him for ever from all other socialists. But he
persisted no less in declaring himself an incorruptible democrat:
"Socialism is impossible without democracy, in two senses; (1) the
proletariat cannot accomplish the socialist revolution if it is not
prepared for it by the struggle for democracy; (2) Socialism victorious
cannot maintain its victory and lead humanity to the extinction of the
State unless it fully realises democracy."

Between the two extremes of "defensism" and "defeatism" there were many
intermediate stages of opinion. Trotsky and Martov, with most of the
leading personalities in revolutionary internationalism -- Rosa
Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht, Franz Mehring, Rakovsky and Riazanov --
declared against national defence, but in favour of a peace without
victors or vanquished; they had no intention of breaking with socialists
like Kautsky, who remained verbally faithful to the common principles,
while adopting a practical compromise with the partisans of the "union
sacrée." Trotsky supported the demand for a peace without reparations or
annexations, with national self-determination, and sketched the outline
of a United States of Europe. Lenin mercilessly attacked these
"Centrists" of all shades and harassed them with criticism and appeals;
he reproached them with hesitation, equivocation, eclecticism, and
compromise, though for tactical reasons he spared Rosa Luxemburg and
praised the exemplary courage of Liebknecht. He was uncompromising in
regard to Trotsky above all, precisely because Trotsky was politically
so close to him.

As for Stalin, it was impossible to know what he was thinking during
these years of exile. Deprived of Lenin's guidance, did he share the
ideas of his leader? The gap in his biography, the complete absence of
documentation, the disappearance of every vestige of correspondence or
signs of intellectual activity on his part are significant. In this
connection and from the Bolshevik standpoint which Stalin claimed to
represent, Trotsky was justified in asking for a reckoning:

>It is impossible that in four years Stalin should have written nothing
>on the essential question of the War, of the International, or of the
>revolution.... It is clearly true that if a single line of Stalin's had
>advocated the necessity of "defeatism" or the need for a new
>International, that line would long since have been printed,
>photographed, translated into all languages and enriched by learned
>commentaries by Academies and Institutes. But such a line is not to be
>found.

Stalin has not only suppressed his writings of this period, but sees to
it that they are not brought forward by anyone else. In the voluminous
collection _Katorga y Ssylka (Fortress and Deportation)_, a review
devoted to former prisoners and political exiles, whose pages are open
to the slightest recollections of the survivors of the Tsarist terror,
especially if they can mention an important personage, Stalin's name
does not occur.

Other historical publications, full of documents and memoirs, fail to
mention him. The case is unique in Russia, and justifies the most
unfavourable deductions.

In default of political indications, there is a reticent statement on
Stalin in Siberia by his comrade in exile, Sverdlov, one of the
principal non-émigré Bolsheviks. According to letters of his published
before Stalin's rigorous personal censorship was imposed, relations soon
became difficult between the two exiles at Kureyka. They lived in the
same peasant's hut and hunted together. At first Sverdlov liked Stalin
as "a good companion, but found him too individualist in daily
intercourse." Soon "we knew one another too well," he wrote; "in exile
and prison conditions the naked man appears in all his meanness." They
ended by separating, and saw less and less of one another. Sverdlov got
a transfer to another place in the district; without exactly formulating
grievances against Stalin, his correspondence shows the latter as
impossible to live with.

Stalin ended by being isolated, occasionally seeing, and that at long
intervals, Spandarian, an Armenian Bolshevik who has not published any
memoirs. One of his present subordinates, Shumiatsky, who was an exile
in the same colony, describes him as a "defeatist" from the first, and
in a pamphlet on Turukhansk he has described the solitary hunter and
fisherman equipped with a variety of nets, hawks, guns, traps, snares
and baskets.... "He cut wood, cooked his food, and found time to work at
his writings." These must be the writings which Trotsky asked for so
insistently. But Sverdlov says he does not even know whether Stalin did
the least bit of intellectual work in exile.

A letter from Lenin in November 1915 which asks for Koba's real name
shows that if Stalin's name was forgotten his strong personality was
not. Perhaps the question concerned some scheme of escape. But a careful
watch was kept on the Kureyka trapper. In 1917 Sverdlov mentions twenty
exiles in the district who were called up for military service; Stalin
was on the list but the infirmity in his left arm saved him.

Russia must have been in great straits for men before avowed
revolutionaries were summoned to the army where they would certainly
preach indiscipline. More than fifteen millions of men had been
mobilised. But the losses were disastrous; want of arms and munitions,
an inadequate munitions industry, disintegrated transport, fraud in
provisioning the army, incapacity in the High Command, bureaucratic
paralysis, and administrative corruption, drove the army to slaughter.
In 1917 the dead already numbered two million and a half; there were
three million wounded and prisoners. Hospitals and ambulance stations
were overflowing with the sick. Waste of human life could not compensate
for the moral and material inferiority of the troops, the disorder and
debauchery in the rear.

The longer the War went on, the less comprehensible were its aims to the
people who were its victims. Patriotic enthusiasm was dead, suspicion
haunted the regiments renewed after each defeat, irritation and despair
preyed on the exhausted soldiers, "blind martyrs," weary of fighting
with bayonets against machine-guns and urged on by flogging; there were
more than a million deserters and mutineers in 1917.

At home the position of the autocracy was no better; the fall in
agricultural production due to the successive levies of millions of
adult labourers, the deterioration of the railways, the requirements of
the armies, profiteering and blockade little by little paralysed the
provisioning of the towns. Fuel and raw material were lacking in the
factories, most of which were on war work. Anarchy in the administration
prevented any rational utilisation of resources. In the _Zemstvos_ and
in various charitable organisations, "enlightened society" tried in vain
to make good the State failures. Depreciation of the rouble and the rise
in prices reduced wages, and made life more and more difficult for the
workers who were driven to strike in self-defence. Statistics show an
increasing number of strikes; police reports give reiterated warnings of
revolution. Exasperation in the army was matched with general hostility
to Tsarism.

At the same time, Court scandals and the blind policy of the reigning
_camarilla_, shook the last supports of the regime. The degenerate
sovereigns, surrounded by adventurers, charlatans and madmen, dominated
by a drunken and lascivious monk, discouraged their most faithful
servants. In spite of the most disinterested advice and the most
alarming symptoms, Nicholas II defended the stupid measures of his
chosen Ministers against the wishes of a Duma, which was itself a
reactionary body. In vain the parties of the Right loyally denounced
"occult forces," corruption and treason in the ruling cliques. Even
members of the Imperial family resigned themselves to participation in
palace plots to depose the Tsar to save the monarchy. Grand-Dukes and
generals were preparing coups d'etat. The assassination of Rasputin was
merely a sinister auxiliary operation. The intrigues of the Germanophile
aristocratic clique in favour of a separate peace with Germany drove the
nationalist bourgeoisie to carry out their preventive plan -- the
abdication of the Tsar and the installation of a regency.

But catastrophe was to overtake "His Majesty's Opposition in their
interminable preparations. At the beginning of 1917, cold and hunger
brought popular discontent to a climax and forced events. Bread was
scarce in St. Petersburg in February. The workers struck again and
again, women provoked street demonstrations, the army hesitated to obey
orders against the demonstrators, and then joined resolutely in the
movement of protest, as the French Guard did in 1789; insurrection was
in being. In "a hundred hours" absolutism, which found practically no
defenders, was irresistibly swept away. The servile Duma, overwhelmed,
was compelled to form a provisional government. On the same day the
Workers' Soviet, soon extended by the admission of the soldiers, was
improvised in the capital. Two rival authorities marshalled themselves
simultaneously on the ruins of the old regime, which had tumbled to
pieces almost without a struggle under the pressure of practically the
whole population. The insurrection cost less than fifteen hundred
victims, including wounded. The provinces unanimously followed the
capital.

Of the Commune in 1871 Benoît Malon has observed: "Never had revolution
surprised the revolutionaries more." Once more the revolution had begun
without the help of professional revolutionaries. No socialist party had
urged or guided the masses in revolt. The principal deputies, from
Rodzianko to Chkheidze, with Guchkov, Miliukov and Kerensky between the
two extremes, submitted in their various fashions to the accomplished
fact. The Petrograd proletariat, left to its own devices, instinctively
realised the first elements of success by fraternising with the peasant
soldiery. Of their own accord they took by assault the police offices
and forced open the doors of the prisons. Their elite, veterans of the
1905 struggle, though they were matured by continuous activity, had
small training in socialism, and needed outside direction in the chaos.
Deprived of their recognised leaders, either deported or in exile, they
abandoned the nominal power to the privileged classes, to the partisans
of constitutional monarchy preoccupied with the maintenance of the
dynasty to safeguard their own privileges. Kerensky, a recent convert to
the Social Revolutionary Party, a typical representative of the confused
ideas of a transitional period, was the "hostage of democracy" in the
Provisional Government of which Miliukov was the governing spirit. The
Petrograd Soviet did not dare to assert its pre-eminence or even demand
a republic. But this voluntary effacement did not deprive it of the
effective hegemony which was assured to it by the confidence of the
armed workmen and above all of the soldiers, its sworn defenders.
_Prikaz_ No. 1 had put the army at its disposal. The dyarchy, a singular
combination of two powers, immediately developed into a sullen
antagonism of irreconcilable forces.

The transformation of the imperialist War into civil war, was brought
about, as Lenin said, by the logic of circumstances, not by propaganda.
Neither Bolshevik appeals nor any other reached the Russian people.
"Defeatism," widely spread during the Crimean War and still more in the
course of the Manchurian campaign, found less direct echo this time in
the people and in the army where it was vaguely latent. Seconded by his
wife, Krupskaya, and by his adjutant, Zinoviev, Lenin inspired in
Switzerland an intransigent isolated group, without offshoots. At the
international conferences of Zimmerwald (1915) and Kienthal (1916)
summoned by the Swiss and Italian Socialist parties, he formed a little
group of intellectuals known as "the Left," opponents of all pacifism,
and of any conciliation with the official International. No workers'
group supported his effort, unknown outside a very narrow circle of
international revolutionaries. Alone, he repudiated the appellation of
Social-Democrat to substitute that of Communist. Alone, he wished to
create without delay a Third International. Alone, in accordance with
Clausewitz's maxim on war, "the continuation of politics by other
means," and in agreement with the Marxian formula of force as the
"accoucheur of society in labour," he regarded civil war as the
inevitable prolongation of the policy of the class struggle. But his
hopes dwindled and a month before the February Revolution he ended a
speech at Zurich on this sad note: "We, the older ones, will not perhaps
live to see the decisive battles of the coming revolution...."

He was in correspondence with the docile group of Duma Bolsheviks, all
five imprisoned or exiled. The Central Committee of the Party had only
one representative, himself, at liberty, unless Zinoviev is included. Of
seven members of the Bolshevik Committee at Petrograd, three were
discovered to be police agents, who sabotaged all its work.

The _agent provocateur_, Malinovsky, was then in Germany in a prisoners'
camp, where he was lecturing on the Erfurt socialist programme. A few
copies of the works of Lenin and Zinoviev, afterwards published under
the title _Against the Current_, were brought in through Scandinavia.
Cut off from their master, his disciples were lost. They were hardly
distinguishable from other revolutionaries in the first enthusiasms of
the revolution. The Petrograd _Pravda_, edited by modest militants,
Molotov and Shliapnikov, had difficulty in striking out a line of its
own, though it tried to show how Left it was by printing old sayings of
Lenin's dating from 1905. The _Social-Democrat_, at Irkutsk, published
articles by Ordjonikidze, Yaroslavsky and Petrovsky, whose Bolshevism
closely resembled Menshevism. In the provinces many Social-Democratic
groups incorporated the two sections.

The revolution took the revolutionaries unawares, though they had long
foreseen its imminence, just as war had surprised the socialists, though
they had announced and denounced it long before. Lenin rapidly recovered
his wits. At the beginning he telegraphed to his friends from Zurich to
put forward the modest demand for immediate elections to the Petrograd
municipality. His programme contained three fundamental demands: _a
democratic republic, the eight-hour day, confiscation of the large
landed estates_ -- identical with the Menshevik demands. He confirmed
his 1914 utterance: "_We desire at all costs a Great Russia proud,
republican, democratic, independent and free, which, in her relations
with her neighbours, will apply the human principle of equality, not the
feudal principle of privilege_." But he was soon adjuring his followers
to refuse confidence to the Provisional Government, to oppose the policy
of the leaders of the Petrograd Soviet in that matter. His _Letters from
Afar_, sent from Switzerland, dealing with the "first stage of the first
revolution" to issue from the War, speak of the Soviet as the "embryo of
a Workers' Government" and conclude by urging the necessity of
conquering the Democratic Republic, "as a step towards socialism."

Trotsky looked at the situation as it developed in much the same
fashion. He was opposed to "defeatism," which he regarded as nationalism
turned inside out, to the call for civil war, preferring a call for
peace, and to the extreme policy of schism practised by the Bolsheviks,
but he nevertheless foresaw the course of events dimly discerned by
Lenin. He had broken with Martov, who was too hesitating for him. He had
published in Paris, under various titles, an internationalist paper
which came up against the censorship, and led to his expulsion from
France. This was after he had been convicted in Germany for a
revolutionary pamphlet and before he was forced to leave Spain, where
the secret police pursued him vindictively. Many Bolsheviks saw no
difference between his attitude and Lenin's: "_The Social-Democrat_
published by Lenin and Zinoviev in Switzerland, the Paris _Goloss_
suppressed by the French police and changed into _Nashe Slovo_, directed
by Trotsky, will be for the future historian of the Third International
the essential elements from which was forged the revolutionary ideology
of the international proletariat," wrote Manuilsky, a Bolshevik of the
Left, six years afterwards. After emigrating to America, Trotsky
collaborated in the _Novy Mir_ of New York, with a young Bolshevik then
unknown, N. Bukharin, and a brilliant convert from Menshevism, Alexandra
Kollontai, who had recently joined Lenin. For him, too, events in Russia
were a stage towards the socialist revolution, a prelude to social
revolution in Europe.

Bolsheviks in Russia had no such bold ideas. Absorbed in action, they
shared the collective illusion of a mob drunk with easy victory. From
Perm, Lenin received this telegram: "Fraternal greeting. Start to-day
for Petrograd. Kamenev, Muranov, Stalin." The liberated exiles were on
their way. Lenin was unaware that Kamenev had shortly before signed
another telegram, in the name of a popular meeting held in Siberia,
congratulating the Grand-Duke Michael on having renounced the throne,
pending the decision of the future Constituent Assembly. On their
arrival in the capital, Muranov, Kamenev and Stalin, the first three
leaders restored to the Bolshevik section, took over the direction of
_Pravda_ on their own authority. Stalin, delegated by the Central
Committee of his party, that is by himself and a few close comrades,
entered the executive committee of the Soviet without erection either by
the workers or the soldiers. History drew him from his subterranean
activity and gave him the opportunity of working in the light of day.

### 5.2

>War incontestably played a great part in the development of our
>revolution. It materially disorganised absolutism; it disintegrated the
>army; it emboldened the mass of the inhabitants. _But, happily, it did
>not create the revolution, and that is fortunate, because a revolution
>born of war is impotent_; it is the product of extraordinary
>circumstances, rests upon exterior forces and shows itself incapable of
>maintaining the positions conquered.

THESE words of Trotsky's, in _Our Revolution_, referred to the
Revolution of 1905 and to the Russo-Japanese War.

Lenin did not attribute to his Party any imaginary merit; he recognised
in the War the determining factor of the revolt of 1917, but without
deducing from that connection the impotence of the revolution: "The fire
of revolution was fed by the ignorance and terrible sufferings of
Russia, by all the conditions created by the War," he said, adding on
another occasion: "Our revolution was engendered by the War; without it
we should have all the capitalists in the struggle arrayed against us."
Later he laid emphasis on the indifference of the mass of the population
with regard to frontiers and on the absence of national sentiment: "_It
was easy to begin the revolution in such a country. It was easier than
lifting a pen. But it would be vain to hope to undertake a revolution in
a country where capitalism is flourishing without hard work and
preparation_."

The War made possible the co-operation between workers and peasants
which was lacking in 1905. Moreover, it had developed certain industries
and accentuated the concentration of the proletariat in Petrograd and
Moscow. The gaps created by mobilisation and the immense slaughter were
met by a flow of peasants into the large towns. This new uneducated
working class, without settled or conservative traditions, but also
without technical knowledge or political education, was a blank Sheet of
revolutionary temperament for any party capable of interpreting its
aspirations, aspirations fundamentally clear but confused in their
outward manifestations.

The workers had been claiming for a long time a better Standard of
living and democratic privileges; the peasants coveted land in the
possession of parasites; the soldiers wanted peace. But these same
soldiers were for the most part peasants greedy for land; the workmen
were no less interested in peace, the peasants in liberty. Moreover, the
oppressed nationalities of the Empire hungered for autonomy and national
independence. The mass of the people, unanimous for certain imperious
necessities, waited impatiently for the Constituent Assembly to satisfy
these vital requirements.

The Provisional Government, representing the interests and ideas of an
infinitesimal minority, without contact with the people or experience of
power, proved incapable of comprehending the urgency of the popular
demands, and still more of beginning to resolve the problems laid down.
They neither assured bread for the workers, nor peace for the soldiers,
nor the liberty of self-determination to the nationalities. The
convocation of the Assembly was fixed for a vague and distant date under
the pretext of first passing a model electoral law. The economic crisis
grew more and more acute.

The Petrograd Soviet, regarded by the workers as the authentic organ of
democracy in spite of its amorphous constitution, and invested by tacit
gratitude with prestige over "all the Russias," sought a compromise
between "demagogy" and "reaction." Mensheviks were in a majority in the
executive. There were only a handful of Bolsheviks. Georgian Social
Democracy, with Chkheidze as President from the beginning, and soon with
Tseretelli, back from Siberia, and the most influential of the leaders,
took the first place once more. On the Executive Committee, unanimous in
declaring themselves as Zimmerwaldians, the internationalists Sukhanov
and Steklov formed the Left Wing together with little known Bolsheviks,
before the advent of Kamenev and Stalin.

In his _Notes on the Revolution_, prolix but sincere and vivacious, and
used by all historians who have dealt with this period, Sukhanov gives
in these terms the impression made by Stalin:

>Of the Bolsheviks, with the exception of Kamenev, only Stalin figured
>in the Executive Committee. He was one of the central figures of the
>Bolshevik Party, and consequently one of the few individuals holding
>(and still holding) in his hands the fate of the revolution and the
>State. Why this was so I do not undertake to say: strange are the
>influences among the higher circles, far removed from the people,
>irresponsible, and little known! But in any case, as far as Stalin was
>concerned, there was reason for perplexity. The Bolshevik Party, in
>spite of the low level of its "officers' corps," its ignorant and
>casual rank and file, possesses a number of notable personalities
>suitable for leadership in its general staff. Stalin, during his meagre
>activity on the Executive Committee, impressed me, and not me alone, as
>a colourless personage acting sometimes in a dull and evasive way. In
>fact there is little more to say about him.

Stalin's role in the Executive Committee left in fact no trace in its
minutes or in its archives. But the part he played at the head of the
Party is known from articles in _Pravda_ and from the works of
Shliapnikov, a Bolshevik militant turned memoir-writer.

After brusquely evicting the management of the paper without taking any
notice of the organisation or of the cadres, solely on the strength of
his membership in the Central Committee by simple co-optation, Stalin
imposed on the Party organ the policy known as "conditional defensism."
According to this point of view, the Provisional Government might count
on Bolshevik support in so far as its policy conformed to the views of
the Menshevik-Social Revolutionary Soviet. Kamenev served as theorist in
this volte-face, Muranov defended it as a deputy, and Stalin held the
_de facto_ command. This minor _coup d'état_, very illustrative of
"professional revolutionary" methods with regard to the Party, subject
to the will of a clandestine clique of management, unknown to all and
elected by nobody, roused great indignation among subordinates who had
not yet acquired the habit of blind obedience. Shliapnikov describes its
first repercussions as follows:

>March 15th, the day of the appearance of the first number of the
>"reformed" _Pravda_, was a day of rejoicing for the "defensists." The
>whole of the Tauride Palace, from the members of the Committee of the
>Duma to the Executive Committee, the heart of revolutionary democracy,
>was full of the news -- the victory of the moderate, reasonable
>Bolsheviks over the extremists. Even in the Executive Committee we were
>met with venomous smiles. It was the first and the only time that
>_Pravda_ won the praise of "defensists" of the worst type.
>
>In the factories, this number of _Pravda_ produced stupefaction among
>the adherents of our Party and its sympathisers, and the sarcastic
>satisfaction of our enemies. In the Petrograd Committee, at the Bureau
>of the Central Committee and on the staff of _Pravda_, many questions
>were received. What was happening? Why had our paper left the Bolshevik
>policy to follow that of the "defensists"? But the Petrograd Committee
>was taken unawares, as was the whole organisation, by this _coup
>d'état_, and was profoundly displeased, accusing the Bureau of the
>Central Committee. Indignation in the workers' suburbs was very strong,
>and when the proletarians learnt that three former directors of
>_Pravda_, just come from Siberia, had taken possession of the paper,
>they demanded their expulsion from the Party.

Especially in the Vyborg quarter, the "reddest" in the capital, the
expulsion of Stalin and his two associates was demanded. After violent
debates, all three were disavowed and reproved by the superior Party
tribunal, and the former staff were reinstated with the addition of some
newcomers. The Bolshevik Party was not yet organised on the military
model, and the opinion of the rank and file could make itself felt.
Warned by his unfortunate first effort in high politics, Stalin thought
it prudent to abandon Kamenev, author of the condemned article, and to
take a position a little more to the Left, but still not far removed
from Menshevism. The formation of a small group more frankly Right Wing
made it possible to class him with the "centrists." The truth is that he
was for conciliation, as against Bolshevism, before the arrival of
Lenin.

According to his _On the Road to October_ Stalin had written so far only
three articles. The first, on the Soviets, "upheld the necessity of a
democratic republic for all the inhabitants of Russia" (without
distinction of class). The second, on the War, proposes "pressure on the
Provisional Government" for the opening of peace negotiations (a
Menshevik idea). The third, on the conditions of revolutionary victory,
enumerates three: the formation of an All-Russian Soviet as the future
organ of power, the arming of the workers, and the early convocation of
the Constituent Assembly. A fourth article, against Federalism, which
appeared immediately after Lenin's arrival, reflects on the subject of
nationalities the hesitations and contradictions of Bolshevism, which
was definitely hostile to federalism a very short time before imposing
it as an indispensable solution.

In fact Stalin was in complete agreement with every statement which
committed the Party, as much with the programme article of _Pravda_
repudiating "defeatism," as with the action of the Bolshevik fraction in
the Soviet, which joined in the unanimous voting on fundamental
questions where their principles demanded that they should keep their
distance. The Bolshevik representatives had even approved, at a Soviet
Conference at the beginning of April, a resolution supported by Dan, the
Menshevik theorist who had returned from Siberia, "not to hamper the
Provisional Government" -- such was their line of conduct. In the
provinces, unified Social-Democratic Committees reconciled the "enemy
brothers" in the general confusion.

In Switzerland, Lenin raged at the confusion of his fraction under this
bad leadership. After his _Letters from Afar_ he wrote in a threatening
tone: "Our Party would completely disgrace itself, would commit
political suicide if it were lured by such deception ... unqualifiedly
condemn ... any connection with those inclining towards
Social-Patriotism...." He recalls to a sense of duty Kamenev, his
closest comrade and the strongest representative of the state of mind
which he condemns, and warns him to be on his guard against all the
conciliators, including Stalin. At last, just as his patience was
exhausted, he succeeded in returning to Russia, crossing Germany with a
group of émigrés, whence the legend of the "sealed car."

The idea was not Lenin's but Martov's. In face of the refusal of the
Governments of London and Paris to allow the political exiles to be
repatriated after the revolution, the only possible route was through
Germany or Scandinavia. The Swiss Socialists negotiated the journey as
an exchange of civil prisoners, and all the proscribed Russian
revolutionaries were able to profit by it, including the patriots.
Lenin's example was followed by many of his adversaries. Miliukov's
journal at the time said politely: "A socialist leader as universally
known as Lenin ought to enter the arena, and we can only hail his
arrival in Russia, whatever may be our opinion of his political
doctrine."

Lenin arrived in the middle of a Bolshevik conference and found his
Party completely off the rails. He was "more Left than our Left" wrote
Shliapnikov. Alone in his conception of the coming deepening of the
Russian Revolution by the dictatorship of the proletariat, in
correlation with European revolution, he had to win over to his ideas
his own pupils before attempting to convince the masses (even Zinoviev
was inclined to join Kamenev and Stalin in the group of "old Bolsheviks"
opposed to the intransigent policy of their master). He immediately
attacked the position of the provisional directors of the Party, and,
published, under his single signature, the April Theses, which became
famous in Russia, and formed the point of departure for a new
development of Bolshevism.

These theses declared the impossibility of a democratic peace without
first overthrowing capitalism; proposed fostering fraternisation among
the soldiers at the front; fixed the present moment as the transition
towards the seizure of power by the proletariat and the poorer peasants;
and advocated the future republic of soviets, the suppression of the
police, of the standing army, of a professional civil service, the
nationalisation of the land, control of production by the workers, and
the fusion of the banks into one undertaking controlled by the State;
within the Party itself they proposed a revision of the programme, a
change of name and the foundation of a new International. Lenin
expounded them at the Bolshevik Conference in session at the time of his
arrival.

In this same assembly, Stalin had already defended an absolutely
contrary point of view. He imagined a sort of division of functions
between the Provisional Government and the proletariat:

>Power is divided between two organisations, neither of which has
>complete power.... The Soviet of Workers' and Peasants' Deputies
>mobilises the forces, and exercises control; the Provisional
>Government, though reluctantly and with many deviations, consolidates
>the conquests already realised in fact by the people. Such a situation
>has its negative as well as its positive side; it is not now to our
>advantage to force events, or to accelerate the process of detachment
>from the bourgeois classes, which must inevitably separate themselves
>from us in the end....

Like the Mensheviks he proposed support of the Provisional Government,
"in so far as it consolidates the advance of the revolution." Krestinsky
was able to state: "There is no practical difference between Stalin and
Voytinsky." The latter was about to join the Mensheviks.

The Conference had before it a resolution of Tseretelli's in favour of
Social-Democratic unity. Stalin approved. "We ought to accept. It is
indispensable to settle the line of agreement. Unity is possible on the
Zimmerwald-Kienthal principles." To the faint objections raised by
Molotov, he replied: "We have neither to anticipate nor to prevent
differences. _Without differences there is no life in the Party_. Within
the Party we shall overcome our minor disagreements." Lenin appeared in
time to upset these proposals by the uncompromising declaration:

>Even our own Bolsheviks show confidence in the Government. This can be
>explained only by the dazing effect of the revolution. It is the death
>of socialism. You, comrades, have faith in the Government. In that case
>our ways must part. I would rather be in the minority. One Liebknecht
>is worth more than a hundred and ten "defensists" of the Steklov and
>Chkheidze type. If you sympathise with Liebknecht, and extend even one
>finger (to the "defensists") you are betraying international socialism.

Not only did Lenin refuse any understanding with the Mensheviks, but he
resolutely took the offensive by proposing the adoption of the name of
Communist Party. "But," he said, "in order to change one's linen one
must take off the soiled and put on clean." He imagined socialism to be
already in a state of schism in all countries; and thought that the
Zimmerwald Left existed in every country. And he cut short the ceremony,
congratulations and speeches: "We have done with compliments and
resolutions; it is time to get down to work, to proceed to serious
business."

He again explained his views to an audience composed of both Bolsheviks
and Mensheviks. There was more laughter than hooting, more scorn than
indignation, and the general opinion was that Lenin was ridiculous
rather than dangerous. Some thought he was raving; others were glad to
see Bolshevism discredited by its chief. Goldenberg, a former Bolshevik,
exclaimed: "Bakunin's place has long been vacant in the Russian
Revolution. Now it is occupied by Lenin. We have just listened to the
negation of Social-Democratic doctrine and of scientific Marxism. Lenin,
leader of our Party, is dead. A new Lenin, an anarchist Lenin, is born."

Stalin stood aloof, but Kamenev, on behalf of the Old Bolsheviks, tried
to refute the _April Theses_, unacceptable because they sought to rush
the transformation of the bourgeois revolution into the socialist
revolution, and were contrary to the classic formulas of Bolshevism.
Lenin replied by indicating the unforeseen circumstances of the
situation, especially the duality of power in Russia and the
international situation, and by advising revision of the old catchwords.
"We are not Blanquists, partisans of the seizure of power by a
minority." They had to fight for preponderance in the soviets, to strive
to win over the toiling masses.

In vain Kalinin, another supporter of the Kamenev-Stalin group, said
shortly afterwards: "I belong to the old school of Leninist Bolsheviks,
and I think that the Old Leninism has by no means shown itself
inapplicable to the actual situation. I am astounded that Lenin should
denounce the Old Bolsheviks as a hindrance to-day." Lenin did not
hesitate to attack "_these 'Old Bolsheviks,' who more than once have
played a sorry part in the history of our Party, stupidly repeating a
formula learned by heart, instead of studying the peculiarities of new
living reality_."

This formula was "the dictatorship of the workers and peasants," long
opposed by Bolsheviks to the "permanent revolution" and the "workers'
government" of Trotsky, Parvus and Rosa Luxemburg. Without abjuring it
after the event, Lenin thought the hour had come for a further advance:
"Bolshevik ideas and slogans have been generally confirmed by history;
but, as to the concrete situation, things have turned out to be
different, more original, more unique, more multi-coloured than could
have been anticipated by anyone."

The occasion seemed to him a suitable one to give the rigid "Old
Bolsheviks" a lesson in applied Marxism:

>The Marxist must take cognisance of living reality, of the actual facts
>of the time, and he must not continue clinging to the theory of
>yesterday, which, like every theory, at the best only outlines the main
>and general, only approximately embracing the complexity of life. He
>added: A Marxist must proceed not from the possible, but from the real.

Since the soviets were the organisation of the majority of the people,
Lenin declared himself "against any adventurism in the seizure of power
by a workers' government, against any Blanquist coup," and in favour of
a "_conscious_ intervention of the majority," in the sense of the coming
dictatorship of the proletariat, the power of the soviets.

A fortnight later, a radical change of front had taken place, for
Lenin's general plan corresponded closely to the rapid development of
the situation. Resolutions passed at public meetings everywhere,
demanding peace and land, and hostile to the Provisional Government,
showed the strength of the popular current opposed to the half-measures,
tergiversations, and theoretical subtleties of a temporising socialism.
The surrounding atmosphere put an effective pressure on the Party from
all sides. Moreover, the Old Bolsheviks were overwhelmed by new young
adherents; the organisation had 80,000 members by the time of its
conference in the early days of May. Lenin had got his men in hand,
imposed his theses, and forced the Right to retreat. Kamenev, Kalinin,
Rykov, and Tomsky were wasting their time in defending Old Bolshevism.
Kalinin in vain demanded union with the Mensheviks. But Lenin was still
absolutely alone in recommending rupture with any indecisive socialist
tendency whatever, even with the internationalism of the Zimmerwald
majority.

Stalin made haste to submit. At the May conference, he put in a report
on the question of nationalities, his special subject, in agreement with
Lenin's ideas, in which the main point formulated the recognition of the
right of nationalities to separate from the dominating State; he had to
meet opposition from the Left, inspired by Rosa Luxemburg, and
represented by Dzerzhinsky, Pyatakov and Bukharin, who feared to see the
Party declare in favour of regional chauvinism and encourage separatist
reactionary tendencies. He confined himself to repeating what Lenin had
said. There is nothing in the report to indicate his future.

Seven years later, in a preface to the collection, _On the Road to
October_, Stalin thought it necessary to give retrospective explanations
of his political relations with Kamenev, the most un-Bolshevik of the
Bolsheviks, who, before the telegram to the Grand-Duke Michael, had
already repudiated Leninism at the trial of the Bolshevik deputies to
the Imperial Duma. "The first three articles," he wrote cautiously:

>... reflect certain hesitations felt by the majority of our Party on
>the questions of peace and of the power of the soviets; they belong to
>the period March-April 1917. It was a time of rapid break with old
>traditions. The earlier platform of the direct overthrow of the
>Government no longer corresponded with reality.... A new orientation of
>the Party was required. It is not surprising if the Bolsheviks,
>dispersed by Tsarism in prisons and in exile and only just permitted to
>assemble from all parts of Russia to prepare a new programme, were not
>able immediately to determine their course. It is not at all surprising
>that, in seeking a new orientation, the Party was brought up against
>the questions of peace and the power of the soviets. It required
>Lenin's celebrated _April Theses_ to enable the Party to move forward
>energetically on a new path.... This mistaken position I held with the
>majority of the Party, but I left them at the end of April to adopt the
>Lenin Theses....

Fresh confirmation of an observation essential for the comprehension of
the course of the revolution: Bolshevism was non-existent without Lenin.

### 5.3

THE Provisional Government, in a state of permanent crisis, impotent to
disentangle the contradictory elements in the March Revolution, or even
to diminish the tension, exhausted one by one the various expedients for
prolonging its factitious life. Neither the Premiership of Kerensky
after that of Prince Lvov, nor the successive resignations of Ministers
after Miliukov's sensational departure, nor the pseudo-dictatorial
Directory after the Liberal-Socialist Coalition, resolved the question
of power. They were so many stages of attrition and discredit before the
final catastrophe.

All the visible phenomena of economic decadence under the old regime
persisted and developed in catastrophic fashion: scarcity of
commodities, debasement of the currency, rising prices, paralysis of
transport, closing of factories, with their social consequences --
growing destitution, insecurity, strikes and unrest. The number of
deserters from the disintegrated army was to be doubled before October.
Reference of the agrarian question to an indefinitely postponed
Constituent Assembly meant that vast areas were unsewn -- a certain
menace of famine. The soldiers at the Front, fearing a division of land
in their absence, returned en masse to the villages without permission.
The peasants began to pillage the great estates, and to seize cattle.
Everywhere alarming symptoms increased.

Nevertheless, the bourgeoisie persisted in its hopeless policy. In a
country whose army, in process of dissolution, could hardly maintain the
defensive and whose people were devoid, not only of desire of conquest,
but of any patriotic sentiment, Miliukov's avowed intention was to annex
Constantinople and Armenia, and dismember Austria-Hungary and Turkey --
showing thereby the political immaturity of his class, so weak in Russia
owing to the preponderance of foreign capital.

Tied to this bourgeoisie, the Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks
did everything to lose the confidence of the proletariat and the army,
the moving forces of the revolution, and to disappoint the rural
districts. Their participation in a government which perpetuated a state
of affairs universally execrated, and their repeated compromises with
those immediately responsible for the existing chaos, gave the Bolshevik
Party the monopoly of expressing the aspirations of the impatient
masses.

The Party of Social Revolutionaries, less and less socialist and
revolutionary, more and more rhetorical and sterile, became a "grandiose
nullity," as it was currently called in allusion to its temporarily
large numbers. An energetic Left detached itself from the main body to
act on parallel lines with the Bolsheviks with a view to "deepening" the
revolution. Traditional Social-Democracy, steeped in western ideas,
sought an impossible equilibrium by parliamentary methods unsuited to
the time and place; on its Left, Martov and the group of
internationalist Mensheviks criticised severely the majority and its
tacticians, Dan and Tseretelli. The Bolsheviks, more homogeneous and
better disciplined, trained to collective action led by a chief who was
a realist, at once pliable and firm, prompt in manoeuvre and unwavering
in principles, lost no time in taking advantage of an exceptionally
favourable situation and of the repeated errors of their rivals.

Fighting under the simple and attractive slogan of "All power to the
Soviets," a phrase which went home everywhere, they won day by day more
support among the poor, the poor whom Kerensky in despair called the
"populace" and the "soldiery," factory workers, Kronstadt sailors, Lett
fusiliers and Finnish machine-gunners. In May, states Sukhanov, a third
of the Petrograd proletariat were on their side. Their advance was
continuous. At the first Congress of the Soviets, in June, they had only
105 delegates as against 285 Social-Revolutionaries and 248 Mensheviks;
the provinces moved more slowly than the capital. But in the Petrograd
Soviet, their fraction was strengthened at every by-election. The
district soviets, beginning with that of Vyborg, passed into their
hands. Entire military units, the principal factories, among them the
Putilov works, with 50,000 workmen, answered their call.

By the return of Trotsky, and with the assistance of the
Social-Democratic organisation known as "Inter-District," grouping
dissident Mensheviks and Bolsheviks, they had received new strength.
Trotsky, who found it more difficult than Lenin to get back to Russia,
had been arrested at sea by the English, was interned near Halifax and
was only liberated on the demand of the Petrograd Soviet. He did not
arrive until May. He still hoped for the unity of the Social-Democratic
fractions, but changed his mind when he was on the spot. The gulf
between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks was thenceforward impassable, in spite
of a common theoretical programme. On the other hand his conception of
the "permanent revolution" and Lenin's new strategy were convergent.
Although he had feared the sectarian spirit of a fraction subject to the
"Ilyich regime," he thought he could discern a "debolshevisation of
Bolshevism." The old differences seemed to be smoothed down and identity
of view on immediate aims complete. The "Inter-District" group was one
with the Bolsheviks in action before merging with the Party in
July 1917. Beside Trotsky, there were ex-Mensheviks such as Joffe,
Uritsky, Volodarsky and Karakhan, with Old Bolsheviks of the Left such
as Lunacharsky and Manuilsky. Other former Mensheviks, Alexandra
Kollontai, Larin and Antonov, rallied to Bolshevism, an example followed
later by Chicherin, Steklov and others. Riazanov, "outside of
fractions," did the same.

The name of Trotsky was coupled with that of Lenin in the press and the
minds of the public, both in and out of Russia. The two personified to
the world the growing plebeian movement on the march. Lenin, rarely
seen, handled the Party tiller surely and well, and made full use of the
band of "professional revolutionaries," at the same time elaborating the
theoretical justification of his tactics. Trotsky always present at
meetings within doors or in the streets, untiring speaker and writer,
galvanised the crowd and recruited the legions for the final Struggle.
The phrase "Lenin and Trotsky," as the embodiment of social purpose,
engraved itself in memory and history. Ultimately people even wrote
"Lenin-Trotsky."

The two former adversaries understood one another better in the great
day of civil war than in the _chiaro-oscuro_ of the emigration and were
mutually complementary.

>In the way Trotsky spoke of Lenin the attachment of the disciple is
>visible. At that time Lenin had behind him thirty years of militant
>work in the service of the proletariat, and Trotsky twenty. All trace
>of the differences of the pre-war period had disappeared. There was no
>difference between the tactics of Lenin and Trotsky. This
>rapprochement, signs of which had appeared during the war, had become
>clearly defined from the moment of Leon Davidovich's arrival in Russia.
>Immediately after his first speeches we, old Bolsheviks, Leninists,
>felt that he was one of us.

These are the words of Raskolnikov, a Bolshevik of the old guard.

Lenin fully appreciated his rival: "No one would think of disputing a
candidature such as that of L. D. Trotsky," he wrote with regard to the
Bolshevik list of candidates to the Constituent. And on another
occasion, in connection with the reconciliation of the various socialist
parties: "Trotsky has been saying for a long time that unity is
impossible. Trotsky grasped the fact, and, since then, there has been no
better Bolshevik." This disinterested sentiment was probably not shared
in Lenin's immediate circle by those, Stalin among others, who felt they
were eclipsed by the newcomer. The ruling nucleus in the Party formed a
close brotherhood, and the rise of Trotsky to the top was unprecedented.
Possibly the germ of certain personal rivalries dates from this moment.
But it could not mature in the atmosphere of the collective struggle for
power. Lenin justified his adoption of the political and tactical
formula of the speedy advent of the dictatorship of the proletariat by
the imminence of the social revolution in the advanced countries of
Europe. In his view the Russian Revolution was inseparable from the
coming of European socialism. "The victory of Social-Democracy," he
wrote as early as 1905, "will make it possible for us to rouse Europe to
revolt, and the socialist proletariat of the West will throw off the
yoke of the bourgeoisie, and in its turn will help us to achieve the
socialist revolution." The World War, then recently stoked up by the
intervention of the United States, confirmed him in his belief in the
near approach of universal civil war, in which the Russian episode would
only be the first stage.

Kautsky, in a study on _Slavs and the Revolution_, published in _Iskra_
in 1902, pointed out the displacement of the revolutionary centre from
the West to the East, and predicted the role of the Slavs as its
vanguard: "Russia, which has in great measure received her revolutionary
impetus from the West, is now perhaps ready to serve the West in her
turn as a source of revolutionary energy." The Russian Revolution would
cleanse the vitiated atmosphere in which the European workers' movement,
handicapped by parliamentarism, stagnated. After 1905 the same writer
predicted as a result of the Russo-Japanese War a revolutionary era in
Asia and in the Moslem world; his prediction was verified two years
later in Turkey, next year in Persia, and two years later still in
China. Signs of revolt were evident in India and in Northern Africa.
Lenin on the other hand expected the war to result in European
revolution, without which socialism would be impracticable in Russia.

With the optimism characteristic of all pioneers, he had always
over-estimated the revolutionary capacity of the Occidental proletariat
at any given time, and miscalculated the resources and the capacity of
capitalism to resist. In 1914 his illusions about German socialism were
so strong that he refused to believe that the Social-Democrats in the
Reichstag had voted war credits, and thought the number of _Vorwärts_
containing the news was faked, until he was compelled to accept the
evidence. He reacted the more violently in the opposite sense, alone
even in the International, against the old socialist parties moulded by
bourgeois legality; the conclusions he drew were the inevitability and
the necessity of new workers' parties, of a new Communist International,
whose role would be to end the War by the overthrow of capitalism. There
can be no doubt that his tactics in Russia would have been less radical
if he had not reckoned with such certainty on the aid of European
revolution.

His war-cry, "All power to the Soviets," is not to be understood as
indicating a hasty ambition to seize the State organisation which he
intended to destroy and replace, for reformist socialism was then
dominant in the soviets. But he looked further ahead, foreseeing the
rise of his Party assisted by the bankruptcy of the "Louis Blancs" of
the moment. Moreover, he never lost sight of the danger latent in the
enormous mass of the peasantry, capable of submitting to the most
extreme reaction: "Let us be on our guard against the possibility of the
alliance of the peasantry with the bourgeoisie," he said, facing the
worst. Her peasants "make Russia the most petit-bourgeois country in
Europe." Therefore he advocated, in vain, separate soviets of poor
peasants, formed to counterbalance the holders of small and medium
holdings. Far from desiring to force historical events, he advised the
soviets not to "decree any reform for which the time was not entirely
ripe both in the concrete economic circumstances and in the minds of the
overwhelming majority of the people."

He did not over-estimate the degree of development of the Russian
proletariat, numerically small, "less conscious, less mature than that
of any other country." On many occasions he repeated in varying words:
"Socialism cannot be victorious immediately or directly in Russia." He
ceaselessly exhorted his Party patiently to explain their interests to
the ignorant masses. But, attentive to the changing temper of opinion,
he was careful to keep pace with the main current: "The country is a
thousand times more Left than Chernov or Tseretelli and a hundred times
more Left than we are." He was convinced of the necessity of a
dictatorship, of a power resting not on law but on force, and he had
already amazed the Congress of Soviets by declaring that he and his
Party were ready to assume the whole power without sharing it with
anyone, at a time when other socialists were shrinking from
responsibility. To his mind the soviets represented in a confused
fashion the interests of the workers and peasants, but his own Party was
alone capable of giving them conscious and logical expression.

After the "July days," when the proletariat and the garrison of
Petrograd demonstrated of their own accord in the streets, by way of
answer to the disastrous Galician offensive needed by the Allies but
decided on by Kerensky with the approval of a majority in the Soviet, he
suddenly reversed his tactics, and changed his slogans. The Bolsheviks
had not provoked the demonstration, but, seeing it was inevitable, they
had decided to make use of it. Severe repression, in which they were the
sufferers, followed. Decisive action was premature, and its objective,
"All power to the Soviets," was still impracticable. The reactionary
parties feared revolt. The headquarters of the Party of the permanent
revolution were sacked. Trotsky, Kamenev, Kollontai and others were
imprisoned, and Lenin and Zinoviev were obliged to go into hiding.
Pretended revelations, fabricated to represent the Bolshevik leaders as
in the pay of Germany, though obviously false, made them suspect. The
dark days had come.

A whole literature, superficially imposing, is devoted to presenting the
spectacle of a nation of over a hundred million souls at the mercy of
the venality of a few individuals and a handful of German marks. Quite
apart from the incontestable incorruptibility of the principal person
concerned, proved by the whole course of his life, the "proofs" in
question refute themselves. No distribution of funds has required to be
substantiated by such a mass of superfluous documentation, inconceivable
except as a demonstration of the non-existent. Moreover Kerensky did not
dare to make use of "incriminating documents" of which there is no trace
in the archives of the German Reich, made public by the German
revolution. Further, Masaryk has disposed of them in his _Memoirs:_ "I
do not know what the Americans, the English and the French paid for
these documents, but to anyone accustomed to dealing with matters of
this kind, their contents alone are sufficient to reveal that our
friends had purchased forgeries. There was one proof _ad oculos:_ these
documents, alleged to come from different countries, had been typed on
the same machine." Thus the machine betrayed the machination.

In his retreat Lenin meditated on the lessons of the failure, and
deduced from, it the fact that the cry "All power to the Soviets" had
ceased to be correct. Henceforward, they must demand the dictatorship of
the proletariat executed through the medium of the Bolshevik Party.
Peaceful development of the revolution was made impossible by the fault
of the "Louis Blancs" and the "Cavaignacs"; what was required was a
war-cry announcing the fight without quarter. He announced with his
customary directness: "Not to understand that, is to understand nothing
about the essential problems of the moment."

But this was just what the Party did not understand, and the future
justified the retention of the old popular formula. In this instance
conservative inertia carried the day over the quick mind of the Party
chief, who had not time to win over more than the directing circles of
the Party to his thesis. Events moved with increasing rapidity,
upsetting all reasoned conclusions. In August, Kornilov's abortive coup
gave an unhoped-for turn to affairs; the scorned and persecuted
Bolsheviks were summoned to help in the struggle against the factious
general, the hope of the counter-revolution. They had the tactical sense
to accept a socialist coalition in defence of the threatened revolution,
and were thus able to take up arms once more and to show themselves in
the open. The danger was overcome, but Kerensky's prestige was still
more diminished by the suspicious part he had played in the affair and
his manifest powerlessness. His socialist allies, who had been in favour
of conciliation, lost ground visibly, and the suburbs, the garrison and
the crews of the fleet, stimulated by the alarm, went over to the
Bolsheviks who had given warning of the event. One by one those
imprisoned in July were set at liberty. A new wave of revolution arose
in the sea of the masses. Trotsky especially emerged from the affair
with increased personal prestige. The moving tale of how he had
intervened with the raging mob to save Chernov from lynching was in all
mouths. In contrast to the equivocal attitude of Lunacharsky, a Left
Bolshevik, whose opportunist behaviour was commented on in the press, he
had openly taken part with the vanquished: "I share the principles
adopted by Lenin, Zinoviev and Kamenev. I have maintained them in
_Vperyod_ and generally in all my public speeches." According to the
testimony of his fellows he bore himself heroically before the examining
judge. In Lenin's absence the Bolsheviks regarded him as their most
eminent exponent, even before his formal enrolment in the Party.

Lenin, who was inclined to attribute to the enemy a decision equal to
his own, a similar sense for effective action, had said in July: "Now
they will shoot us all. It is their moment." In the same way he had
expected to be arrested when he arrived in Russia. He was soon reassured
by the turn of events. After the Kornilov affair, he said: "We are
extraordinarily near power, but at a tangent." And, by way of
compromise, he resumed the old slogan which he had too hastily
repudiated: "All Power to the Soviets," the last chance, he said, of
securing the peaceful progress of the revolution. What this really meant
was "the formation of a government of Social Revolutionaries and of
Mensheviks, responsible to the Soviets."

As for Stalin, it is still difficult to assign to him any considerable
role without ignoring proportion. Whether calculated or not, this
reticence is perhaps characteristic. He assumed administrative work at
the headquarters of the Party and of its journals, and was careful to
say and do nothing which would commit him irrevocably. Demian Biedny
relates with admiration the following example of his method. On the eve
of the July demonstration, the Kronstadt sailors telephoned to _Pravda_
to know if they should march with their rifles. Stalin replied: "Rifles?
It is for you to decide, comrades. We scribblers always carry our arm,
the pencil. As for you, with your arms, it is for you to decide."
According to Trotsky, he kept prudently aloof, waiting for an
opportunity to display his wisdom. At any rate he was looked upon as one
of the principal militants but behind the stage and, lacking
originality, he made himself useful by perseverance.

Without Lenin and without the accredited theorists of the Party, the
semi-clandestine Social-Democratic Congress of the Bolsheviks was held
in July-August under the firm and discreet direction of Sverdlov. It was
an assembly which had to confirm past action and to dispatch current
business. The work was done by the members of the Central Committee,
policy was determined strictly by Lenin's letters and articles.
Delegates felt they were executants rather than directing agents. In
this restricted task, Stalin played a leading part as mouthpiece of the
directing central organisation. Repeating Lenin's instructions he
recommended the abandonment of the watchword "All Power to the Soviets."
He secured the introduction into the resolution carried of a phrase
which is indicative of the temporary hesitation of Bolshevik
headquarters: "_The Soviets are reaching the end of an agonising
struggle to the death, and are perishing through not having seized all
power into their hands in time_." A serious error, the blame for which
rests in the first instance with Lenin; it excludes the possibility of
the bolshevisation of the Soviets. Later on, Stalin took undue credit to
himself for having resisted the amendment he himself had formulated in
the text of the resolution, vague enough in any case to allow of various
interpretations: "Full liquidation of the counter-revolutionary
bourgeoisie." This did not supply any practical policy and showed no
clear way of attaining power.

At the end of the Sixth Congress, there was a brief, unimpassioned
exchange of observations between Stalin and Preobrazhensky on the last
words of the resolution. The revolutionary classes, it said, should
seize power to advance "in unison with the revolutionary proletariat of
advanced countries towards peace and the socialist reconstruction of
Society." Preobrazhensky suggested an alternative wording: "Towards
peace and, on the advent of proletarian revolution in the west, towards
socialism." Stalin opposed, declaring: "It is not excluded that Russia
may be _the pioneer country in the advance to socialism_." An apparently
insignificant difference, but one big with future consequences.

For the first time Stalin was confirmed in his functions as a member of
the Central Committee by a Congress (his position had been confirmed at
the May conference). He was helped by the position he had acquired by
co-optation during the mysterious phase of his activity. No one thought
of contesting the accomplished fact or questioning the validity of the
earlier choice made by Lenin. At that time the Party had more than
175,000 members, but its framework and central organisation were
sufficiently hierarchical to assure continuity of direction and
organisation. Nevertheless, Trotsky was elected in his absence to the
Central Committee by more votes than Stalin, a fact which illustrates
the exceptional character of his election.

The official biography does not attribute any remarkable role to Stalin
between February and October of this memorable year, but merely praises
him for his "complete agreement" with Lenin. As the documents show, the
"complete agreement" began in profound divergence, and continued as
passive submission. Trotsky in his _My Life_ gives the following
estimate of Stalin's personal part in Party politics during the
revolution:

>Not one of his articles written about that period shows that Stalin
>made any attempt to estimate his previous policy and win his way to
>Lenin's stand. He simply kept silent because he had been too much
>compromised by his unfortunate leadership during the first month of the
>revolution. He preferred to withdraw into the background. He never made
>any public appearance to defend Lenin's views; he merely stood back and
>waited. During the most responsible months of the theoretical and
>political preparation for the uprising, Stalin simply did not exist in
>the political sense.

This statement is accurate if by policy is understood general ideas,
wide conclusions arising out of theory and programme, plans for the
future. But in the narrower sense and on the lower level of daily
political action, Stalin was one of the foremost agents in the execution
of Lenin's designs. In this respect and within his limitations, he
rendered incontestable service to the Party and Lenin appears to have
made full use of Stalin's special aptitudes.

### 5.4

"IN SPITE Of great errors and frequent absurdities, the soviets have
been the primitive moulds, political and social, in which the torrent of
revolutionary lava has been cooled down." These were the words of
Kerensky, who assured the British Ambassador that the soviets "would die
a natural death." This was practically Stalin's point of view in the
"death struggle" of the soviets. The _Izvestia_ of the first Executive
Committee also stated that "The soviets are nearing their end." Facts
were to give the lie to all these prophets; instead of disappearing the
soviets went Bolshevik.

In September the Petrograd Soviet by a majority passed over to the
vanquished of July, and elected Trotsky as its President. Those of
Moscow, Kiev and the principal towns took the same course. At the
municipal elections there was a parallel movement towards Bolshevism and
a still stronger one in the army and navy. The Leninists won over the
trade unions and the workshop committees. Their party had organised the
earliest detachments of Red Guards. In this country in process of
dissolution, the only real, active force, determined and disciplined,
was at Lenin's disposal.

He was not the man to neglect or to miss the psychological moment. His
whole life had been a laborious and detailed preparation for the
decisive struggle. He saw that the long-expected hour was approaching
and from his hiding-place he studied the news, examined possibilities,
and calculated chances and risks. The Bolshevik organisation, his
creation, the product of twenty years of work and struggle, had absorbed
the most virile and the best elements of the workers' revolutionary
movement. Around him were grouped all those who seriously regarded
socialism as an immediate necessity, all those who were burning to pass
from theory to practice. The Social Revolutionaries of the Left
supported him with their increasingly numerous fighting elements. The
Menshevik Internationalists, through Martov, appreciated him and were
not without hope of future union. His adversaries committed folly on
folly, and helped his game. The denouement was undoubtedly at hand.

Provided that the Party, the instrument of his plans, was ready at the
supreme moment, the revolution would achieve the last lap.
"Counter-revolution or Jacobinism?" So Lenin laid down the historic
alternative. The conquest of power became an urgent question. To what
end? To realise a "completely democratic republic." Complete democracy
was the essential point in the programme.

The soviets, said Lenin, were "_a superior type of democracy_." There
was nothing abstract about the matter: "Power to the Soviets -- this is
the only thing that can secure further progress, _gradual, peaceful and
smooth_, keeping perfect pace with the consciousness and the resolve of
the majority of the masses of the people, with their own experience."

He insists especially on the pacific character of this conception:

>The pacific character of the revolution would be possible and probable
>provided that all power rested with the soviets. The struggle of
>Parties for power may develop peacefully within the soviets on
>condition that the latter do not give a twist to democratic principles,
>as for example, by giving one vote to five hundred soldiers as against
>one for a thousand workers. In a democratic republic these distortions
>of principle must not be permitted.

This idea recurs repeatedly in his writings at this time, with varying
emphasis:

>If the soviets assumed power, they could still now -- and probably it
>is the last chance -- assure the peaceful development of the
>revolution, peaceful election by the people of its deputies, peaceful
>rivalry of the Parties within the soviets, the trying out of the
>programme of the different Parties, and the transfer of power from one
>Party to another.

As for the measures to be taken by the sovereign soviets to realise real
democracy, they are comprised in the suppression of the police, of the
permanent army, of bureaucracy. Invariably, and not once but a hundred
times, Lenin reiterated the definite and categorical promise for the
suppression of the police, the army and professional civil servants. The
militia, a general army of the people, with officers elected in all
ranks, would replace the police and the old army. The functions of the
State would be assumed by citizens elected for the purpose, liable to
dismissal at all times, whose pay would not exceed that of the workers.
"These democratic measures, simple and automatic, by the solidarisation
of the interests of the workers and of the majority of the peasants,
will serve at the same time as the bridge between capitalism and
socialism." The example to be followed was that of the Paris Commune of
1871.

Such are the propositions advocated by him in the Bolshevik press and
more strongly justified in his work, _The State and Revolution_, written
in various retreats, where he worked with extraordinary ardour and
courage. Simultaneously he examined the economic and political situation
in a pamphlet, _The Threatening Catastrophe and How to Fight It_, in
which he advocated workers' control of production, the nationalisation
of banks and trusts, the obligation to work. This contains the warning:

>War is implacable, it puts the question with merciless sharpness;
>either overtake the advanced countries and surpass them _also
>economically_ or perish. It is possible to do this, for we have before
>us the experiences of a great number of advanced countries; we have
>available the results of their technique and culture.... Either full
>steam ahead, or perish. This is how history has put the question.

On the day on which he finished this essay, he addressed to the Central
Committee of the Party a letter beginning with these words: "Having
obtained a majority in the Soviets of Workers and Soldiers' Deputies of
both capitals, the Bolsheviks can and must take power into their hands."

He foresaw that "the Bolsheviks will form a government which nobody will
overthrow." It must be done quickly for it was rumoured that Petrograd
would shortly be abandoned to the Germans, and a separate peace between
England and the Central Powers was also mooted. (There were many panicky
rumours at the time.) They must not wait for the Constituent Assembly
because, "by surrendering Petrograd, Kerensky and Co. can always destroy
the Constituent Assembly. Only our Party, having assumed power, can
secure the convocation of the Constituent Assembly." Finally, they must
take to heart Marx's words "Insurrection is an art."

This letter was followed by yet another in which Lenin explains why and
how insurrection is an art, supporting his argument by the teaching of
Marx and Engels, and applies his method to the particular situation. He
says notably: "Our victorious insurrection alone will secure the failure
of the intrigues for a separate peace," and, if the worst comes, "If our
peace offer (general peace) were refused, and we did not even obtain an
armistice, we should become ardent partisans of national defence." Then
follows practical advice on the creation of a general staff for
insurrection, on the distribution of forces, the occupation of strategic
points, and the indispensable preliminary operations. Now or never, was
the time to use, for the purposes of civil war, the military science
learned from the study of the "masters of war," of Clausewitz, and of
the experience of 1905.

How did the Party respond to Lenin's hopes and appeals? The minutes of
the Central Committee show that those leaders who were at liberty were
far from thinking for themselves of the eventualities so clearly
indicated. On receiving pressing messages of this kind, some were
convinced by Lenin's arguments, some obeyed out of fidelity, others
awaited events, and some took an opposite view. Stalin was one of those
who held their hand, though following with the stream. Trotsky, in close
agreement with Lenin on the course to be followed, was busy with
providing legal cover for insurrection, a condition realisable because
of the coincidence of the rising with the Second Congress of Soviets,
already won over to the Bolsheviks. Zinoviev and Kamenev, with the tacit
approval of some others, thought the seizure of power dangerous and
premature, fearing isolation for the Party and the consequences of an
adventurous policy.

But Lenin certainly reflected the sentiments of the masses in revolt,
especially of the soldiers eager to escape from the nightmare of war.
Delegations from the Front were demanding daily the saving intervention
of the Soviet; they called on the Bolsheviks to work hard for peace and
for the solution of the agrarian question. Rumours of movements in rural
Russia caused universal alarm; confiscation of harvests, seizure of
land, and armed resistance to Kerensky's measures of repression showed
that the patience of the peasants was nearing its end.

The Bolshevik Party had now 240,000 members. Its Right, vague in outline
and of varying strength, was inclined to the role of a parliamentary
opposition in the representative institutions of the Republic, finally
proclaimed in September. The Right secured a decision in favour of
participation in the Democratic Conference, arbitrary in composition,
summoned by the Government in the interim before the Constituent as a
sort of provisional assembly from which the Pre-Parliament would emerge.
Trotsky, supported by Stalin, proposed to boycott the latter, but was
outvoted. Once more pressure from Lenin was required to drive the Party
back to the path of insurrection.

"We should have boycotted the Democratic Conference," cried Lenin in his
article "The Errors of our Party": "We all erred by not doing so"; and
now they "must boycott the Pre-Parliament." He congratulated Trotsky and
encouraged him, he demanded an extraordinary Congress of the Party if
need be to reverse the "shameful" decision of the "directing circles."
The Central Committee submitted, and the Bolsheviks left the
Pre-Parliament after Trotsky had read a threatening declaration. Violent
conflict was only a question of hours.

"The crisis is ripe," said Lenin in another article, asserting that
"there is no doubt that the beginning of October has brought us to the
greatest turning-point in the history of the Russian and, according to
all appearances, of the world revolution." He thought he saw "the
unimpeachable signs of the great change, indications preluding world
revolution" in Italy and Germany. "There is no room for doubts," he
wrote, "we are on the threshold of a world proletarian revolution." It
is for us, he continued, to begin, because of the advantages, the
liberty and the means at our disposal in Russia. The break-up of the
reformist socialists and the dizzy progress of the Bolsheviks, indicated
at all the elections, precluded hesitation: "With the Left Social
Revolutionaries, we have to-day a majority in the Soviets, in the army
and in the country."

But there was in the Central Committee of the Party a tendency in favour
of "awaiting the Congress of Soviets, against the immediate seizure of
power"; it should be overcome; "_otherwise the Bolsheviks would cover
the themselves with shame for ever, they would be reduced to nothing as
a Party_." The allusion to Trotsky is clear. To wait for the Congress
would be "idiocy" or "treason." We must strike unexpectedly at
Petrograd, Moscow, and in the Baltic Fleet. To delay is to lose all....
And in order to rouse his too passive principal supporters, Lenin
resigned from the Central Committee. For he knew himself to be
indispensable.

He did not merely urge them to action; he used the full force of
argument in discussion and persuasion. His pamphlet, _Will the
Bolsheviks Retain State Power?_ brought over many waverers. In this he
refutes one by one current prejudices that if the Bolsheviks seized
power they would be unable to retain it. Under cover of replying to the
enemy he was really seeking to convert irresolute partisans. In that
pamphlet he borrows from the comminatory words of the gospel: "He that
doth not work neither shall he eat," and he opposed with assurance the
sophisms of his timid followers. If 130,000 landowners were able to
govern Russia in the interests of the rich, 240,000 Bolsheviks could
administer it in the interests of the poor. There were obviously immense
difficulties to be met, but "you cannot make an omelette without
breaking eggs." The Bolsheviks will win, for they incarnate "the
workers' idea of justice" and "ideas become forces when the masses
embrace them."

The Central Committee gave way to these arguments, but with a delay and
a slowness exasperating to Lenin, haunted by the idea of losing all by
missing the right moment. "_Delay becomes positively a crime_," said
another letter to the directors of the Party. "Temporising is a crime,
to wait for the Congress of the Soviets is a childish formality, absurd
and disgraceful, it is the _betrayal_ of the revolution.... There must
be immediate Insurrection.... Victory is certain at Moscow, where no one
can fight us. Petrograd can wait. The Government is powerless, its
situation is hopeless; it will yield.... Victory is certain, there are
nine chances in ten that it will be won without bloodshed.... To wait is
a crime against the revolution."

Next day Lenin sent his _Advice from an Outsider_ to repeat once more
that the seizure of power meant armed insurrection and to recall the
Marxist conception of insurrection as an art. Conclusion: "The triumph
of the Russian Revolution and of world revolution both depend on two or
three days' fighting."

Another letter on the same day to the Bolsheviks in the Regional
Congress of the Northern Soviets, urges the offensive: "_The hour is so
grave that to temporise is really like death_." For mutiny in the German
Fleet, after many other symptoms, was heralding the world revolution.
Three times he repeated: "_To temporise means death_."

On October 23rd, he returned secretly to Petrograd, and took part in the
session of the Central Committee which finally decided on insurrection.
The reasons given in support of the revolution were in the first place
the "growth of world revolution," the "threat of peace between the
imperialist powers," the undoubted "intention of the Russian bourgeoisie
and of Kerensky and Co. to surrender Petrograd to the Germans." It is
important to make it clear that the historic act was based on three
mistaken suppositions. But a just appreciation of the internal situation
in Russia was sufficient to ensure its success.

Kamenev and Zinoviev alone had openly resisted Lenin's lead, although
their anxiety was shared by many others. They did not think the world
proletarian revolution was either so near or so ripe, and refused to
stake the whole future on the insurrection card. In fear of "certain
defeat," they committed a breach of discipline by disavowing the Party
instructions in Gorky's paper, hostile to Bolshevism. Kamenev emphasised
the gravity of his disapproval by resigning from the Central Committee.
The defection of two of the principal Old Bolsheviks at the very moment
of preparation for attack was an ill omen.

But Lenin did not think the loss irreparable. To disciples of this kind
he applied Marx's bitter words: "I have sown dragons and reaped fleas."
After patiently refuting their thesis, he denounced them constantly as
"traitors" when he learnt of their open opposition, invited the Party to
exclude the "deserters," these "yellow" men whom he accused of
"unbounded infamy" in plain terms. Stalin was foolish enough to try to
break the force of the blow by an editorial note in the central organ of
the Party: "The sharp tone of Lenin's article does not alter the fact
that we remain in agreement on the essential point...." General
reprobation compelled his resignation from the staff of the paper, but
he knew that the endless difficulties of the moment would prevent its
acceptance.

This was not Lenin's gravest cause of alarm. The Congress of Soviets,
several times deferred before it was fixed for November 7th, was
approaching, and the Central Committee seemed to be awaiting this date
before giving the signal of insurrection. Trotsky wanted to associate
the two events, but Lenin was anxious to secure the accomplished fact,
to execute the technical operation, content to have it politically
confirmed later on. Might not Kerensky forestall them, and with the help
of a few dependable regiments, upset all his plan? But nothing of the
kind happened; an accumulation of unprecedentedly favourable
circumstances facilitated the victory of the new revolution.

Everything concurred, as John Reed said, to pour "oil on the Bolshevik
fire." Confronted by the most urgent collective tasks, the authorities
oscillated endlessly between half-way solutions and ineffective
repression; they accumulated miscalculations and errors. The only hope
of the disappointed masses found expression in the clear notes of
Lenin's programme.

The Government, incapable of taking any step towards peace, responsible
for the useless massacre of Galicia, had become an object of hatred to
the soldiers. The Bolsheviks, while promoting fraternisation in the
trenches, proposed to offer immediately to all belligerents "a
democratic peace," without annexations or indemnities. "In case of
refusal, we will wage a war of revolution," said Lenin, and Trotsky
spoke in the same tone.

The Government persisted in putting off to the Greek Kalends the
appeasement of the land hunger; in their absorption in statistics,
studies, commissions, and plans, they had lost all authority in the
rural districts. The Bolsheviks proposed the immediate reversion of the
land to the peasants' soviets, charged with its distribution according
to local circumstances -- a gigantic expropriation in which every tiller
of the soil was interested.

The Government refused to accede to the more and more insistent demands
of the nationalities oppressed by Tsarism, and were in open conflict
with Finland and the Ukraine. The Bolsheviks proposed to give complete
self-determination.

The Government seemed to be accessory to Kornilov's
counter-revolutionary coup, and their suspicious conduct in this affair
set the military chiefs against them without conciliating anyone else.
They lost at one and the same time the support of the forces of the
Right and the confidence of the Left. The Bolsheviks had foreseen the
renewal of the offensive by the reaction and were foremost in the fight
against it. The Government put off the Constituent as if they feared it.
The Bolsheviks demanded its immediate convocation. The Government were
evidently trying to wreck the meeting of the Congress of Soviets. The
Bolsheviks went ahead with it.

As if to complete their unpopularity the Government reinstated the death
penalty in the army, they allowed it to be thought that the capital
would shortly be transferred to Moscow, and revealed their intention of
sending to the front two-thirds of the Petrograd garrison. The
Bolsheviks, making clever use of the triple opportunity of overwhelming
their adversary, promised to abolish the death penalty, to keep the
capital at Petrograd, and to retain the revolutionary garrison there.
The Government plans were reduced to vague threats; they merely
encouraged and strengthened the opposition. At the end of October the
Bolshevik Party numbered about 400,000 members.

The logic of facts worked in the same direction. Economic disintegration
imposed on the local soviets intervention in everyday life; they had to
transform themselves into directing organisations especially in the
provisioning of their districts by means of taxation and requisitions.
The Menshevik Soviet of Tiflis, for example, presided over by Jordania,
acted as a regional government, and the smallest revolutionary
municipalities did the same within their own jurisdiction. The
socialisation of certain enterprises seemed the only solution possible
to the partial stoppages of production brought about by bellicose
employers, to strikes caused by engineers which brought about industrial
paralysis. The Soviets of Kaluga, of Tashkent, of Kazan, of Kronstadt
and other places did not wait for the Congress of Soviets to decide the
question of power.

The conflict with regard to the Petrograd garrison served as a pretext
and a bait for the first _coup d'état_. The Soviet nominated on October
26th a Military Revolutionary Committee, and placed the movements of
troops under its control. Trotsky, president of both committees,
therefore held in his hands all the levers. On its side the Bolshevik
Central Committee had formed a Political Bureau of seven members charged
with the direction of the Party without formalities; Lenin and Trotsky
were its brains, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Stalin, Sokolnikov and Bubnov its
arms. There was also a "military centre" of five members -- Sverdlov,
Stalin, Bubnov, Uritzky and Dzerzhinsky -- introduced into the Military
Revolutionary Committee presided over by Trotsky. Thus he had a regular
revolutionary general staff.

The final result depended on the army, about whose state of mind there
was no doubt. At the beginning of October the officer Dubassov had
declared to the Soviet: "The soldiers do not at this moment demand
either liberty or land. All they ask is the end of the War. And whatever
you may say here they will do no more fighting." At the end of the
month, a series of delegates from the Front warned the Soviet Executive
Committee: "It is impossible to continue the War in the circumstances of
to-day.... The Front lives in feverish expectation of peace"; "Many
units demand peace of any kind, even a separate peace"; one of them
added: "If it is a disgraceful peace, give us that." At the beginning of
November, General Verkhovsky, Minister of War, said in a secret session
of the commissions of the Pre-Parliament: "No persuasion has any effect
on people who don't see why they should face death and privation....
General disintegration.... Hopeless situation ... there are at least
2,000,000 deserters; the army cannot be fed.... It cannot be
sufficiently clothed or shed.... The Staff no longer exist....
Bolshevism continues to dissolve our armed forces.... These actual facts
compel us to recognise frankly and openly that we can no longer wage
war." The insurrection could count on the support of millions of
soldiers.

The Military Revolutionary Committee made its dispositions openly. "The
centre of the work of mobilisation was the Petrograd Soviet, which had
acclaimed as President Trotsky, the most brilliant tribune of the
proletarian insurrection," writes Bukharin.

At the Regional Conference of the Soviets of the North, Trotsky got the
following resolution voted:

>The country means to survive; the Government must disappear. The
>soviets have not only the right; they have the necessary force. The
>time for words is past. The hour has come when only decisive and
>unanimous action by all the soviets can save the country and the
>revolution and solve the question of the central power.

At the Petrograd Soviet, Trotsky, who was ubiquitous, declared: "They
say we are preparing a general staff for the seizure of power. We make
no secret of it." But at the same time he neglected no precaution to
deceive and to lull the vigilance of the enemy. To inquiries in the
Soviet as to Bolshevik activities, he replied promptly and skilfully:
"We are hiding nothing. I declare in the name of the Soviet that we have
given no instruction for armed action. But if the course of events
should force the Soviet to order action, the workers and soldiers would
march like one man." Meanwhile, representatives of the Party were
negotiating a compromise with other socialists to gain time.

Kerensky let things slide, or acted without vigour. "The whole of Russia
is on our side. There is nothing to fear," he said three days before the
_coup d'état_. Yet for months attrition had been going on in the Centre
parties, to the advantage of the extremes of Right and Left. In the
south the reactionaries were beginning to use the Cossacks and to
dissolve the soviets. The Kadets were rallying the active forces of
social conservatism. Some of them were using wrecking tactics, hoping to
dispose of the Bolsheviks easily, after the fall of Kerensky; others
preferred German "order" to Russian "disorder." The Social
Revolutionaries were no longer a party, but a noisy mob in perpetual
confusion. Their Left, definitely detached, served as a prop to
Bolshevism. The Mensheviks lost prestige by declaring for peace in
principle, but for war in fact. "This policy," says their theorist
Voytinsky, "was understood neither by the Allies, nor by Russia."
Martov's proposal, supported by the Georgian Mensheviks, was to
constitute a "homogenous Socialist Government," including all shades
from the Populists to the Bolsheviks, but it came too late and was no
longer compatible with the tendencies of the groups to be associated.

"We were certainly weak," writes Trotsky, "in technique and in
organisation." But the Bolsheviks were confronted with an even weaker
force and they were borne along on the current. According to the same
competent authority "the issue of the Revolution of November 7th was
already three quarters predetermined when we opposed the removal of the
Petrograd garrison." Lenin, in hiding, was less well-informed; that is
why he advised beginning with Moscow and was so impatient of delay.
Trotsky's explanation is not decisive; in fact, Lenin desired to
forestall any defensive measure by the authorities, to confront the
Congress of Soviet with the accomplished fact, not with a plan for
discussion. "Ever since the battalions, by the order of the Military
Revolutionary Committee, refused to leave the city, we have had a
scarcely veiled victorious insurrection.... The insurrection of November
7th had a complementary character." This is Trotsky's view.

This was never Lenin's opinion, as is proved by a last letter to the
Central Committee, a unique document in which the intelligence and the
will of the chief is concentrated on shouting the order to attack, on
the eve of the Congress of Soviets:

>It is as clear as can be that _delaying the uprising now really means
>death_.... With all my power I wish to persuade comrades that now
>_everything hangs on a hair_, that on the order of the day are
>questions that are not solved by conferences, by congresses (even by
>congresses of soviets!).... _We must at any price, this evening,
>to-night, arrest the Ministers_, having disarmed (defeated, if they
>offer resistance) the military cadets. We must not wait! We may lose
>everything.... Who should seize power? At present this is not
>important. Let the Military Revolutionary Committee seize it, or "some
>other institution".... The matter must absolutely be decided _this
>evening, or to-night_. History will not forgive delay by
>revolutionaries who could be victorious to-day (and will surely be
>victorious to-day), while they risk losing much to-morrow, they risk
>losing all.... _Seizure of power is the point of the uprising_; its
>political task will be clarified after the seizure. It would be
>disaster or formalism to wait for the uncertain voting of November 7th.
>_The people have the right and the duty to decide such questions not by
>voting but by force_.... The crime of the revolutionaries would be
>limitless if they let go the proper moment. The Government is
>tottering. We must _deal it the death blow_ at any costs. To delay
>action is the same as death.

Now or never, said Lenin. At last the Military Revolutionary Committee
acted without further delay, and passed from preparation to action.

"The most important points in the city were occupied by us during that
night almost without fighting, without resistance, without casualties,"
writes Trotsky.

Lenin's foresight was justified; no blood was shed in Petrograd, but,
contrary to his expectation, there was a sanguinary struggle in Moscow.
On the whole the revolution met with no serious obstacles. It took
place, as Trotsky says, on the date fixed. On the disputed question of
putting off the moment until the Congress of the Soviets, Lenin said
afterwards to his comrades of the Central Committee: "Yes, you were
right" -- this is related by Stalin himself three years afterwards in a
commemoration address.

The regime of yesterday, represented by the transient figure of
Kerensky, fell almost as easily as its predecessor, incarnate in the
hereditary Tsar, and for reasons analogous, if not identical. "War gave
the power to the proletariat," observed Gorky, following Lenin, "_gave_
it, because none can say that the proletariat itself, with its own
hands, seized power."

But even in an extraordinarily favourable situation, the Party had to
have capable leaders if full use was to be made of it. Stalin, with a
thousand others, said: "All the practical work of organising the
insurrection was done under the immediate direction of Trotsky, the
president of the Petrograd Soviet. It can be safely asserted that for
the rapid desertion of the garrison to the side of the Soviet and for
the clever organisation of the Military Revolutionary Committee, the
Party is above all and primarily indebted to Comrade Trotsky." As for
Lenin, he shines by his own light.

On November 7th, writes Bukharin enthusiastically, "Trotsky, splendid
and courageous tribune of the rising, indefatigable and ardent apostle
of the revolution, declared in the name of the Military Revolutionary
Committee at the Petrograd Soviet, with thunders of applause from those
present, that the Provisional Government no longer existed. And as
living proof of this fact there appeared in the tribune Lenin, whom the
new revolution had liberated from the mystery which had surrounded him."
In about six months, the Russian Revolution had brought forth the
republic, and in less than nine months the dictatorship of the
Bolsheviks. The French Revolution had taken more than three years to
install the republic and the dictatorship of the Jacobins.

### 5.5

THE "professional revolutionaries" this time had their part in the
victory; without them Lenin would not have brought off the enterprise,
nor even have conceived it. If the advent of Bolshevism required for its
achievement a concourse of propitious circumstances, a policy of suicide
on the part of the possessing classes and the tenacious aberrations of
the socialists advocating social conciliation -- the intervention of a
consciously revolutionary party, relatively conscious of the aims to be
reached, was not less necessary. And among these "professional
revolutionaries" Stalin was incontestably a prototype. Before he did
anything that distinguished him as a political personage he found
himself in command of positions in the new State, by sole reason of his
fidelity to the victorious group and of his qualities as a soldier --
sufficient for the immediate task.

In the historical "literature" of documents and memoirs which has
accumulated on the October revolution, it is rare to find the name of
Stalin. Most of these works never mention him. Only in the minutes of
the Party is he listed as member of the committees on which he sat for
the daily political administrative work. In these committees, wrote John
Reed, "only Lenin and Trotsky were for insurrection" -- an assertion not
to be taken literally but nevertheless containing an element of profound
truth. Lenin would never have praised so ardently and unreservedly the
now classic work of the American Communist writer, as "an exact and
extraordinarily living picture" if he had seen in it any depreciation of
the Party to which the "professional revolutionaries" such as Stalin
belonged.

"Men make their own history, but not on their own initiative or in
circumstances freely chosen." Thus Marx, claimed exclusively by
Bolshevism, interprets the objective and subjective data of historical
events. Looked at from this point of view, Lenin and Trotsky emerge
above the growing mass of their Party to the point of dominating it.
Between them and the Party, the "professional revolutionaries" were
agents of transmission communicating the impulse and the orientation
desired by "the clandestine group of directing minds." In October,
Stalin was not yet somebody, but he was something; if his name was
unknown, his weight was felt, though merged in the collective authority
of the Party. In the unprecedented experience now beginning, the
"professional revolutionaries" were to be submitted to the real test,
that of the building of the socialist State, the transition to a
classless society.

Among them neither Stalin nor any other could foresee the events even of
the near future. For some socialists it goes without saying that the
conquest of power is not an aim in itself but the indispensable means of
realising a programme. In this matter the Party had no clear idea at
all; they had to leave it entirely to the directing minds whose views
were very uncertain.

Having placed his faith on the world revolution, and that in the
immediate future, Lenin had to modify his conception, as a scrupulous
theorist, by collaborating in the revision of the Social-Democratic
programme, a few days before the _coup d'état_. Putting aside as too
boastful Bukharin's proposal to suppress the "minimum programme," he
wrote: "_We do not know how soon after our victory the revolution in the
west will come. It is not impossible that we may be at the beginning of
a period of reaction.... We don't know and we cannot know_." On this
point Zinoviev and Kamenev were not wrong in their warnings against the
imminence of international revolution. And Riazanov was right in saying,
if his words are correctly reported by John Reed: "The European workers
will not move."

But even in this event Lenin did not refuse power; what was necessary
was to maintain it, while taking the transitional measures leading to
socialism. "The definitive victory of socialism is impossible in one
country alone," he said three months after the October Revolution, but
he still hoped for external reinforcement. Recalling the words of Marx
and Engels: "The French will begin it, and the Germans will complete
it," he expressed his conviction with a variant: "Russia has begun, the
German, the Frenchman and the Englishman will complete the work, and
socialism will conquer." A month later, while affirming that "Our
safety, in all difficulties, lies in the pan-European revolution," he
went on to say: "The revolution will not come so soon as we expect it.
History has proved that. We must admit the fact."

At least he was not under any illusion as to why "Russia had begun." In
a speech to the Moscow Soviet, he was to say in April 1918: "It was the
fact of our being a backward country that enabled us to be in advance,
and we may perish if we do not hold on until the moment when our
revolution receives effective help from the revolutions of other
countries." This is not an isolated remark on his part. "We are," he
said, "a revolutionary detachment of the working class, thrown into the
attack not because we are better than other workers, not because the
Russian proletariat is superior to the working class in other countries,
but only because we were one of the most backward countries in the
world." He insisted some months afterwards, in a letter to American
workers: "Circumstances have put our detachment in the van, the Russian
detachment of the socialist proletariat, not by reason of our merits,
but because of the especial backwardness of Russia."

Very similar was the view held by Plekhanov, whose political career was
over before the revolution but who was still in full intellectual
vigour. In reply to his friends who were inclined to look on the Soviet
regime as a short episode he said: "The strength of the Bolsheviks lies
in the weariness and ignorance of our people and also in our backward
economic conditions. Bolshevism will last many years, and our people
will only attain consciousness after this hard lesson. Then there will
be an end of Bolshevism. But that day is far off."

Trotsky remained convinced of his theory of the "permanent revolution."
He declared to the Congress of Soviets on the morrow of the revolution:
"Either the Russian Revolution will bring about a revolutionary movement
in Europe, or the European powers will crush the Russian Revolution."
The whole of the Central Committee shared this view. "Unless there is a
socialist revolution in the west," said one of its members at the
beginning of 1918, summing up the general opinion, "our revolution is
threatened with disaster." To which Stalin replied: "We also bank on the
revolution, but you count in weeks, and we in months." No one reckoned
in years.

But the vain expectation of socialist revolution in the west involved
tactical errors more and more dangerous for Bolshevism. Lenin, in the
absence of any valid forecast of the date, was the first to attempt to
explain the delay of other countries. "To pass from one victory to
another with such facility," he said, "was easy only because the actual
international situation protected us for the moment from imperialism."
Elsewhere and under other conditions, things would go differently. "It
is much more difficult to begin in Europe," he said: "with us it was
infinitely easier to begin, but it will be less easy to continue. In
Europe the contrary is the case; once revolution has begun, it will be
much easier to go on with it...."

And, recalling the obstinately optimist Bolsheviks of the Left to a
sense of realities, he added: "Yes, we shall see the world revolution,
but in the meantime it is only a fairy-tale, very attractive, very
pretty. I quite understand that children like pretty fairy-tales, but I
ask a serious revolutionary -- Can he believe in them?"

## Chapter 06: The Civil War

### 6.1

BOLSHEVISM inherited a truly catastrophic situation, in which the
outstanding factors were famine, reduction of the grainfields, ruined
industry and transport, a fall in the value of paper money with a
corresponding rise in the cost of living, boundless speculation in
shares and in exchange, and spontaneous demobilisation. These were not
favourable conditions for what Trotsky, in the enthusiasm caused by the
victory of the revolution in October, called an "unprecedented
experiment."

There was no magic solution for the problem. The era of violence and
suffering inaugurated by the War of 1914 was merely entering on a new
phase. Once more history demonstrated the impossibility of social
transformation by peaceful means. The resistance of the propertied
classes at home and the hostility of the capitalist world abroad
dissipated any hope of escaping regular civil war. And the harsh
regulations of a state of war were to take the place of the promises of
the Lenin programme. Victory must come before conversion, blows before
persuasion.

The Bolsheviks had promised the immediate convocation of a Constituent
Assembly; they had to defer it, then to dissolve it. They protested
against the death penalty in the army; they reinstated it after having
suppressed it, and then instituted it for civilians as well as soldiers.
They offered violent opposition to the transfer of the capital to
Moscow; they themselves afterwards carried it out. They recognised the
right of independence for nationalities; they encouraged separation only
to reintegrate them by force of arms. They vehemently denounced a
separate peace; they were constrained to sign one. They were on the
other hand committed to a war of revolution; they could not keep their
word. They demanded a "democratic" peace; they had to submit to a
"shameful" peace. They promised the land to the peasants; they were to
confiscate the products. As for the abolition of the police, of the
standing army and of bureaucracy, it was indefinitely postponed; the
institutions condemned by Lenin were to survive under other names: the
Extraordinary Commission _(Cheka)_, the Red Army, the Soviet
bureaucracy.

In other words the Bolshevik programme, admittedly, could not be
translated at the moment from theory into practice, however sincere its
promoters might be. The only realisable and actually accomplished step,
the seizure of power, was related to a unique combination of
circumstances. "If we had not seized power in October, we should never
have obtained it," admitted Trotsky. In Lenin's words the whole thing
hung by a hair.

Diverted by the Civil War from the line of action they had laid down
beforehand, the Bolsheviks could do no more than execute their plan of
socialisation by stages, beginning with the control of production by the
workers. The immediate vital necessities which drove them to the
momentary sacrifice of principle, without committing themselves as to
the future, also drove them to desperate improvisation in the economic
field. The inevitability of this radical action had been foreseen by
Jaurès:

>Whenever unexpected events, similar to the historic disturbance of
>1871, carry the socialist proletarians to power, they would be
>compelled to accomplish or at least to attempt a social revolution by
>the transformation of the system of private property. It would be
>useless to say that perhaps not the whole peasant class was prepared,
>that perhaps even in the working class there were too many inert and
>non-conscious elements; they would be compelled by the very logic of
>socialism to use the power which historical events had put into their
>hands for the complete transformation of property.

The February (March) Revolution failed in the eyes of the people because
it had failed to realise the truth formulated in Kropotkin's _Memoirs:_
"A Revolution must from its inception be an act of justice towards the
ill-treated and the oppressed, and not a promise to perform this act of
reparation later on. If not, it is sure to fail." The October (November)
Revolution thus failed to fulfil its engagements, though only after
having at least demonstrated the intention and desire to keep them. And
when growing popular discontent put it in peril, it succeeded in
maintaining itself, not by words, but by combining, in opportunist
fashion, vigorous repression with cleverly conceived concessions. The
Jacobins among the proletariat had profited by some of the lessons of
history.

In fact, with their decrees on the subjects of peace and land, approved
at the Second Congress of Soviets, the Bolsheviks displayed their
anxiety to carry out when in power the promises they had made in
opposition. The decree on a democratic peace could not provide such a
peace, which must be determined by international conditions and the
relative strength of the belligerents. The decree on the land could not
provide a socialist solution of the agrarian question by consolidating
the capitalism which the new regime aimed at limiting and eventually
abolishing. But illusions shared alike by the Bolsheviks and the masses
were at first satisfied by symbolic gestures. As these illusions
vanished, the young Soviet Government found new means of strength in
breaking all opposition by force, without pursuing any particular course
of action to the bitter end, and, before as after the _coup d'état_, by
taking advantage of the colossal mistakes of their predecessors. But
they had gradually to abandon their initial programme.

Five days after the October insurrection, Kerensky, with his customary
foresight, had proclaimed that "Bolshevism is breaking up, it is
isolated, and, as an organised force, it no longer exists, even at
Petrograd." The whole of the "cultured classes," the socialist and other
political parties, upper, middle and lower classes of the bourgeoisie,
the Allied embassies and missions, all shared this opinion, which was
voiced abroad by press correspondents and official and non-official news
services.

The avowed reactionaries had refrained from active assistance to the
Provisional Government; General Headquarters waited to see what would
happen, and the Cossacks in the capital had declared neutrality,
reserving the right to act on their own account. Troops, the strength of
which was unknown, under General Krasnov, were marching on Petrograd,
raising alarm in some quarters, hope in others. A general strike of
State officials and employees paralysed public administration. The
railwaymen's and the postal servants' unions demanded a Coalition
Socialist Government, under the threat of depriving the new Government,
the Council of People's Commissars, of transport and communications.

At this critical moment, Lenin saw arrayed against him in his own Party
the Old Bolsheviks, who were also supporters of a "Socialist Government
of all the Soviet parties," and of agreement between Bolsheviks,
Mensheviks, Left and Right Wing Social Revolutionaries. Ten days after
the _coup d'état_, while negotiations for the sharing of power were in
full swing, eleven out of fifteen People's Commissars handed in their
portfolios, saying: "There is only one other course, the maintenance of
a purely Bolshevik Government by means of political terrorism." Rykov,
Nogin, Miliutin, Shliapnikov and their colleagues added: "This policy
diverts the organisations of the masses of the proletariat from the
direction of political affairs, and leads to the establishment of an
irresponsible Government, to the ruin of the revolution and of the
country."

Kamenev, Zinoviev, Rykov, Nogin and Miliutin resigned from the Central
Committee of the Party, accusing its directing group, that is, Lenin and
Trotsky supported by Sverdlov, Dzerzhinsky, Stalin and Bukharin, of
"_desiring at all costs a purely Bolshevik Government without counting
the number of worker and soldier victims it may cost_." By their
resignation they hoped to put a stop at the earliest moment to the
"_bloodshed between the various democratic parties_." The "Left"
Bolshevik, Lunacharsky, had preceded them by resigning from the Council
of Commissars on hearing the false news of the bombardment of a church
in Moscow. Shliapnikov signed the protest without resigning. Riazanov
also protested, but he was not an inveterate Bolshevik and protested
because he felt obligations to the railwaymen's union, which he had
helped to found. At Gachina the People's Commissar, Dybenko, concluded a
compromise with Krasnov's Cossacks, admitting the temporary removal of
Lenin and Trotsky from the Government and even from the assemblies of
the people.

In fact Bolshevik principles no longer committed anybody to anything.
Strategy superseded political loyalty. Lenin and Trotsky especially were
playing for time, which spelled victory.

With this end in view they agreed to send delegates to the congresses of
conciliation convoked by the railwaymen, and they did not refuse to
constitute a Coalition Government, though they continued to insist on
irreductible fundamental conditions as against the personal political
conditions formulated by the socialists, so as to prolong negotiations
until the moment came to take another tone and saddle their rivals with
the responsibility of the inevitable breach. The blindness of their
opponents made the Bolshevik tactics easier. There was equal
intransigence on both sides. The victors desired confirmation of their
fundamental decrees on the questions of peace and land; the vanquished
proposed to decapitate the revolution by removing only Lenin and
Trotsky. But these two had long ago taken the measure of their talkative
adversaries and were the cleverer tacticians.

They were still too optimistic over the prospects of international
revolution, but they were not under any illusion about Russia, and, at
this decisive moment, they surveyed the situation dispassionately. They
saw the profound apathy in the urban population, proved by the recent
municipal elections, in which in some places more than two-thirds of the
electorate did not vote; a wave of anarchy in the country districts,
taking shape in sanguinary riots, pillage, lynchings and pogroms; a
peasant mass suspicious but kept quiet in the provinces by the sharing
out of the land and at the Front by promises of peace; nationalism in
Finland, Ukraine, the Baltic provinces and the Caucasus satisfied by the
right to secede; town soviets bolshevised but elected less and less by
the working-class majority; trade unions, weak and too recently formed
to assume an independent role; and they saw their enemies, whether
socialists, liberals or reactionaries, divided and disorganised, and
incapable of quick action. The struggle was between small forces on
either side. The soldiers and sailors were masters of the situation.

Trotsky did not hesitate to speak frankly of the soldier as the man "in
whose hands power rests." The _coup d'état_ had been an essentially
military proceeding, carried out under the orders of a military
committee against a government with no military protection. "The
inhabitants slept peaceably," said Trotsky, "without realising that
power had passed from one body to another." The former police force was
dissolved, and no new force existed to thwart the conspiracy. The
attackers were hardly more warlike than the attacked; they spent a whole
day in capturing the Winter Palace which might have been taken in a few
minutes. Two or three point-blank shots from a cruiser would have sown
terror in the Democratic camp. In Moscow the struggle was uselessly
prolonged by the indecisive character of the Bolshevik action.
Elsewhere, in the provinces, a telegram was sufficient to secure a
change of government. The "battle" in Petrograd between Reds and Whites,
and the capture of Tsarskoye Selo, admirable themes for grandiloquent
communique, were really only feeble skirmishes followed by the
occupation of a village already evacuated.

Lenin was not wrong in saying: "_It was easy to begin revolutions in
such a country, easier than lifting a feather_." For its continuation a
respite was necessary to create the machinery of coercion lacking under
the preceding Government; the Red Guard and the sailors served as such
pending the organisation of the Cheka, the revolutionary police. Lastly,
"the primitive sheep instinct of the Russians," as Engels said, was a
destined source of strength for the strongest. There was no longer any
question of the "peaceful competition" of parties in the soviets (Lenin
had already said so). The Bolsheviks were determined to keep power at
all costs, if necessary by the means employed to seize it. The parallel
drawn by Lenin between the 130,000 rural landlords of yesterday and the
240,000 Bolsheviks of today, now raised to 400,000, was verified beyond
all expectation; in both cases, despite class differences, the political
domination of an exiguous minority implies certain analogous
consequences.

The negotiations for conciliation gave time to meet the most pressing
difficulties and to forge an embryo mechanism of government. Among the
negotiators on the Bolshevik side, Kamenev and Riazanov sincerely
believed in the necessity of compromise. On the contrary Lenin and
Trotsky foresaw the failure of any collaboration of this kind, without
disdaining at least a temporary alliance with the Left Social
Revolutionaries. Stalin took part in these diplomatic manoeuvres as
confidential agent of the "clandestine directing circle," with
instructions to make concessions in form while conceding nothing in
principle. His principal characteristics, astuteness and firmness, made
him an efficient agent for such a task. Lenin understood how to make the
best use of the qualities and the defects of his followers.

The Bolshevik Central Committee declared themselves ready, under certain
conditions, to form "a coalition within the limits of the soviets," not
only with the various socialists of the Left but with those of the
Right. Before constituting the Council of Commissars it had, indeed,
invited in vain three Social Revolutionaries of the Left to join it. The
demands of the Moderates made agreement impossible, and left the leading
role to the Bolsheviks, who thus gained appreciable support for their
Government from the Left Social Revolutionaries.

Lenin, a past master in the art of "negotiating and fighting
simultaneously," strengthened his position in all quarters under cover
of the truce. He had directed the first military operations with Trotsky
and Stalin as his lieutenants, Trotsky at the front, Stalin in the rear,
each where his best qualities were most useful; Trotsky as leader
because of his personal magnetism as a leader of men, his masculine
power of initiative and his inspiring courage, and Stalin in the rear
because of his worth as a punctual, diligent, rigorous organiser, and as
an energetic and reliable executive. At the same time he himself faced
the deserters from his old group of "professional revolutionaries," the
Zinovievs, Kamenevs and Rykovs; in violent philippics he roused opinion
in the Party against them, reducing them first to silence and at last to
submission. In his anxiety to bring about preliminaries of peace with
Germany he overthrew the obstacle of the Army Headquarters by wireless
as it were, by appealing to the troops over the heads of their officers;
here again he had assistance from Stalin in the manoeuvre executed by
Krylenko. Finally, heedless of democratic hesitations and scruples in
the Bolshevik ranks, he tackled resolutely the primary conditions of
every dictatorship, restriction of the freedom of the press. No one at
that time dared to envisage total suppression.

Immediately after the _coup d'état_ there arose the question of
abolishing the "bourgeois monopoly of the press," an expression
paradoxical enough in Bolshevik journals with large circulations.
"_Every group of citizens should possess its own printing press and
materials_," declared Trotsky. Lenin himself asserted that "now that the
insurrection is over, _we have no intention whatever of suppressing the
journals of the other Socialist parties_ except in case of incitement to
armed rebellion or sedition." A press decree, drawn up by Lenin, gave
the express assurance that "_immediately the new order is consolidated,
all administrative pressure on the press will be at an end; complete
liberty of the press will be established on the principle of legal
responsibility, on the widest and most advanced principles_." Meanwhile
the attack against democratic principles on which Lenin and Trotsky
prided themselves, met with protests even in the camp of Bolshevism,
which still bore the name of Social-Democracy. But he had an
incontrovertible argument for his insistence -- the Red Guard and the
sailors.

The whole of the non-Bolshevik press abused and vilified the usurpers."
Only the journals of the Right had been suspended, but the others felt
their interests assailed by the attack on the freedom of the press.
Articles of Gorky, a former Left Bolshevik, give an idea of the general
point of view, and sum up the average opinion held by the socialist
revolutionary intelligentsia: "Lenin, Trotsky and their disciples are
already intoxicated with the poison of power as is proved by their
shameful attitude towards liberty of speech, personal freedom, and all
the rights for which Democracy has fought." In the same _Novaya Zhizn_,
in the pages of which he had defended the fugitive Lenin after the days
of July, Gorky described the Bolsheviks as "_blind fanatics,
conscienceless adventurers_," and Bolshevism as a "_national disaster_."

He denounced the "vanity of Lenin's promises ... the extent of his
madness ... his anarchism on the Nechayev and Bakunin model," and his
government as an "_autocracy of savages_." He expressed passionate
indignation over their first steps in dictatorship. "Lenin and his
acolytes," he said, "think they have licence to commit every crime."
"How," he asked, "does Lenin's conduct with regard to freedom of speech
differ from that of Stolypin, Plehve and other caricatures of humanity?
Does not Lenin send to jail all those who do not think as he does, just
as the Romanovs did?"

Friend of Lenin as he was, he wrote of him in these terms: "_Lenin is
not an all-powerful healer, but a cynical conjurer caring nothing for
the honour or the life of the proletariat_." Lenin, he adds, has all the
dualities of a leader, "especially the amorality essential to the part,
and the _country gentleman's_ scorn for the life of the masses." The
Leninists are no better, for the "_working classes are for them what
minerals are for the mineralogist_." He clings to the comparison with
Nechayev. "Vladimir Lenin," he says, "is introducing the socialist
regime into Russia by Nechayev's methods -- _at full steam through mud_.
Lenin, Trotsky and all the others who accompany them to destruction in
the slough of realism are evidently, like Nechayev, convinced that
_dishonour is the best way of persuading a Russian_...." He takes
pleasure in likening Bolshevism to Tsarism: "by threats of starvation
and massacre for all those who do not approve of the Lenin-Trotsky
despotism, these leaders justify the despotic power against which the
best elements is the country have so long been struggling."

In reply to the reproaches of certain partisans of the new regime Gorky
said: "_Novaya Zhizn_ has asserted and will continue to assert that the
requisite conditions for the introduction of socialism are non-existent
in our country, and that the _Government at the Smolny Institute treats
the Russian workman as if he were a log; it sets light to the logs to
see if the flame of European revolution can be kindled on the Russian
hearth_." He fearlessly warns the workers on repeated occasions and in
varying terms: "_The Russian proletariat is being subjected to an
experiment which it must pay for in blood, life, and, what is worse, in
lasting disillusion with regard to the socialist ideal_."

Another Bolshevik of the Left, Bazarov, a colleague of Gorky's, wrote of
Lenin in the same paper: "He is an incurable madman, signing decrees as
head of the Russian Government instead of undergoing hydrotherapeutic
treatment under the care of an experienced alienist." Such is the tone
of all representatives of traditional socialism in Russia and elsewhere,
among them many of Lenin's former comrades-in-arms.

Lenin did indeed sign many decrees which remained a dead letter. He
himself said later on: "For a considerable period our decrees were a
form of propaganda." According to Trotsky, he attempted by these decrees
to cover the whole field of economic, political, administrative and
cultural life. "He was not animated," says Trotsky, "by a passion for
bureaucratic regimentation but by a desire to develop the Party
programme in terms of law." Nevertheless the programme day by day was
losing its initial content and tending exclusively to a single aim, the
maintenance in power of the Bolshevik Party.

### 6.2

THE Council of People's Commissars was, in the idea of its creators and
in the letter of the Constitutional Law adopted by the Congress of
Soviets, a _Provisional Government_ pending the convening of the
Constituent Assembly -- a solemn undertaking forgotten, as so many
others, before and after, were forgotten. Lenin considered it as
necessarily subordinate ipso facto to the sovereign Party, that is to
the Bolshevik Central Committee. Therefore he thought it unnecessary
himself to become a member of it. This was not modesty on his part but
in keeping with the division of labour. He proposed to nominate as
President of the Council Trotsky, as the person best fitted to vitalise
the fundamental decisions of the Party, and did not himself finally
accept the post except under the unanimous pressure of the Central
Committee.

None of the leaders had any conception of the various organs of the
revolutionary dictatorship. It was a period of extreme confusion, of
groping, of improvisation in the domain of government. There was no
historical precedent, no scientific recipe for reference, and the
example of the Commune of 1871, so often mentioned, only offered vague
and general indications. Neither Lenin nor Trotsky believed a
commissariat of Foreign Affairs to be necessary. The departments of
State were entrusted to administrators, not to representative men or to
political heads. This partly explains why the majority of the Commissars
found themselves in opposition to Lenin and Trotsky from the very
beginning on the essential question of the division of power. But the
fact that this opposition had no influence on the march of events and
that Lenin was easily able to ignore it suffices to show where the real
power lay. By formulating the idea of a homogeneous Bolshevik
Government, after having for tactical reasons allowed a week's
discussion, Lenin intimidated the advocates of an entente with the Right
Wing Socialists by the significant remark: "If there is a breach, so
much the worse: _we shall go to the sailors_."

Gradually the Central Committee of the Party and the Council of
Commissars ended by carrying out the same functions, and the latter
became the instrument of the former. Only the presence of the Left
Social Revolutionaries on the Council secured an appearance of respect
for existing constitutional forms. But for some months the Council of
Commissars, with Lenin and Trotsky as its principal members, had the
semblance of power. During the Civil War, the same group of men,
overwhelmed by the chaotic state of affairs and by their tasks, were to
assume all responsibility, to direct everything, and juridical
distinctions lost all meaning. Effective power was concentrated in fact
in the small directing group of which Lenin was the centre, in the
Central Committee. For the settlement of urgent questions a Political
Bureau of four members was nominated, but under the obligation to
consult all the members of the Central Committee present at any given
moment in the Smolny Institute. It was a quarter consisting of Lenin,
Trotsky, Sverdlov and Stalin, and underwent modification from time to
time in accordance with the course of internecine struggles in Russia.
In the distribution of government work Stalin was entrusted with the
Nationalities question. For this reason he took charge of the journal,
_The Life of the Nationalities_, which was the organ of this
commissariat. His colleague Pestkovsky has related how, in putting his
services at the disposal of the Soviet power at the outset, he made
Stalin's acquaintance:

>"Comrade Stalin," I said, "you are People's Commissar for
>Nationalities'" "Yes." "And have you a Commissariat?" "No." "Then I
>will make you one." "Good, what do you need for that purpose?" "For the
>moment only a chit indicating concurrence." "Good!"

This dialogue reflects with exactitude the state of the governmental
services at the time and one of Stalin's master qualities-his economy of
words, so remarkable in a nation of talkers and above all during a
general fever of oratory. Pestkovsky goes on to describe the
installation of the Commissariat in a room in the Smolny Institute
already occupied -- a small table, two chairs and a sheet of paper fixed
on the wall with the inscription: "People's Commissariat for the
business of Nationalities." "Stalin agreed, glanced at the Commissariat,
uttered a sound indicative either of approbation or the reverse, and
went back to Lenin's room." The remark indicates Stalin's skill in
concealing his views.

The sketchy character of the Commissariat of Nationalities corresponded
with the general aspect of new institutions; in fact it was almost
sufficient for the functions of the Commissariat. Indeed Stalin's
activity was absorbed by the invisible labours of the Central Committee.
In the ministerial scheme his job was to represent the Government either
personally or by deputy at the Congresses, assemblies and people's
committees of the different nationalities. The Commissariat exchanged
messages with them, received delegations of Letts and Ukrainians, Jews
and Tartars, Lapps and Bashkirs, classified claims and grievances which
were soon lost in the torrent of such documents at this period.

At the Finnish Social-Democratic Congress in November, Stalin, as
mouthpiece of the Council of Commissars, launched an appeal for decisive
action in the seizure of power by the Helsingfors workers, promising
them the fraternal assistance of the Russian proletariat; two months
later the advice was followed, but, for want of the promised aid, the
Finnish Revolution was literally drowned in blood and the workers'
movement crushed by the White Terror. Stalin's signature accompanied
Lenin's on the Declaration of Rights of the Russian People, asserting
"willing and honourable union" and "complete and reciprocal confidence,"
and then, at the foot of the manifesto "To the Mussulman Workers of
Russia and the Orient," repudiating Imperialist Russian aims in Persia
and Turkey -- documents which were then useful for purposes of agitation
and propaganda and now have retrospective interest for the evolution of
Bolshevism from theory to practice.

In this matter Lenin's doctrine, which Stalin had to carry out, was
hesitant, confused and contradictory. In opposition to the Austrian
Social-Democrats, defenders of "cultural national autonomy" within the
frame of existing States, and in opposition to the Left Social-Democrats
of his own Party in Russia and Poland who had no interest in
particularist nationalisms, Lenin had maintained the old democratic
formula of the right of peoples to self-determination, as if, for a
Marxist that did not signify the right of the ruling classes to dispose
of the ruled and, in some cases, the right of one country to involve the
fate of its neighbour.

In 1913, in a letter to S. Shaumian, he repudiated federalism in these
terms: "We stand for unconditional democratic centralisation. _We are
opposed to federation. We are for the Jacobins against he Girondins_. We
oppose federation on principle; it weakens economic bonds, and is not a
desirable type of State.... Generally speaking, _we are against
separation, but for the right of separation_, because of Great Russian
reactionary nationalism...." But in 1917, in The State and the
Revolution, he admits, in conformity with the teaching of Marx and
Engels, the necessity of federation by way of exception or as a
transitional stage towards the "Republic one and indivisible." He
preaches simultaneously separation as a right and federation as a duty.
Next year he did not hesitate to declare, contrary to his former
declaration, that "_the interests of socialism are indeed superior to
the right of self-determination_," Stalin was content to follow these
variations obediently.

After having, as opponents of federation, created a federal republic,
the Bolsheviks saw the impossibility of maintaining it without trampling
on the reactionary nationalisms they had themselves stimulated. The
bourgeoisie of Finland and the Ukraine and later of other neighbouring
countries, appealed to German imperialism against the revolutionary
movement, and Soviet Russia had to reply by armed intervention. The same
thing happened with regard to the rights of nationalities as to other
parts of Lenin's programmes: in a very short time practice bore no
relation to theory. And Stalin, the theoretical advocate of the right of
peoples to independence, became the executant of the right of the Soviet
State to impose itself by arms on reactionary nations.

Rosa Luxemburg had indicated the impasse into which Bolshevik policy had
strayed. Lenin's motto, she said, was in gross contradiction with the
democratic centralisation proclaimed elsewhere and with the glacial
scorn showered on other democratic liberties. This "hollow phraseology"
tended in reality towards the breaking up of Russia into fragments
without any advantage to socialism; on the contrary it provided water
for the counter-revolutionary mill. By suppressing the right of public
meeting, the liberty of the press, and universal suffrage, the
Bolsheviks refused the Russian people the right of self-determination
advocated for other nations. At the same time they delivered over the
masses to reactionary demagogy, and thus provided their own enemies
"with the dagger which these were to plunge in the heart of the Russian
Revolution." Their nationalist formula, whether utopian or mere
mystification, helped forward bourgeois domination, for, under
capitalism, each class seeks "self-determination" after its own fashion,
and the bourgeoisie has a thousand means of influencing a popular vote,
for the same reasons which make it for ever impossible to establish
socialism by a plebiscite. Rosa Luxemburg concluded: "The tragic
consequences of this phraseology introduced into the Russian Revolution,
from the thorns of which the Bolsheviks were to receive bloody wounds,
should serve as a warning to the international proletariat."

Neither Lenin nor Trotsky attempted to refute this argument of a
revolutionary of their own school, who was, they admitted, one of the
most eminent Marxists of the day. Still less did Stalin attempt any
reply, though the national question was the principal theme of his
writings at that time and had played an essential part in his life as a
militant. The collection of his writings on the subject would be worth
studying in detail if there were to be found in them anything but
paraphrases of the opportunist views expressed by Lenin, in which theory
is adapted to the tactical pre-occupation of the dislocation of the
Empire and the discovery of temporary allies among the revolutionary
classes -- and if facts had not eventually annulled words.

There are certain indications, nevertheless, that Stalin, if left to
himself, would have inclined to the "Left" position of Bukharin and
Pyatakov, who were sometimes charged by the Leninists with Muscovite
Imperialism for denying to the subject nations the right of secession.
This was especially evident at the time of the drafting of the
constitution of the Republic of Soviets and in the debates of Congress.
But these matters are hardly worth detailed examination, because the
final decision always lay with Lenin, and Stalin made no original
contribution to the subject; his political action will provide occasion
for judging him by his achievement.

Another section of Pestkovsky's recollections, eight years after the
first, presents Stalin as Commissar for Nationalities. This differs from
the earlier one in its tendencious nature, characteristic of many
writings of the time intended to be useful in internecine struggles. In
it Stalin appears as a friendly and tolerant advocate against his
colleagues in the Commissariat afflicted with the "Leftness" which Lenin
called an infantile disease of communism. When his patience was
exhausted by interminable discussions, Stalin disappeared, saying he was
"going out for a minute," and did not return; his colleagues had no
alternative but to close the meeting. It was a typical Oriental method
of avoiding a definite decision. Stalin spent the greater part of his
time with Lenin first at the Smolny Institution, then at the Kremlin,
but the Nationalities question was not the most absorbing topic of
discussion. Lenin had innumerable problems to solve, and needed diligent
men to execute his orders; Stalin was one of the most valuable of his
immediate collaborators in this matter.

In the _Memoirs_ of Koté Tsintsadze, Kamo's redoubtable comrade in the
Caucasus, there is an illuminating passage on Lenin's actual practice on
the national question, more valuable than the compact theses and the
voluminous reports in which Stalin specialised. He said:

>After the October _coup d'état_, I left Georgia for Petrograd with a
>letter from Shaumian in order to see Stalin and Lenin. I found Stalin
>alone in the office, but after a while Lenin came in, and Stalin
>introduced me with the words: "This is Koté, the former Georgian
>terrorist expropriator." "Ah! tell us about Georgia," said Lenin. When
>I got to the incident of the capture of the Tiflis arsenal by the
>Mensheviks, Lenin cut me short. "What, you surrendered the arsenal to
>the Mensheviks?" However much I tried to explain the causes of the
>capture of the arsenal, he kept on saying: "But you surrendered the
>arsenal to the Mensheviks???" Then Kamo came in. Lenin was in a hurry,
>took his leave, saying to Stalin: "Don't keep them waiting; take all
>the necessary measures without delay." We decided not to stay more than
>two days. We were provided with some millions of Tsarist roubles and
>they gave us Colonel Sheremetyev as military director of Transcaucasia,
>with special reference to Georgia. We left.

This needs no comment. The right of self-determination, a two-edged
weapon, was turned in Transcaucasia against its advocates, and that
classic ground of national antagonisms justified Rosa Luxemburg against
Lenin only too well. Class struggles complicated by racial struggles in
a historic situation in which the rivalries of world powers intervened
in the smaller conflicts was no matter for democratic solution. All the
various parties in the Caucasus appealed for outside aid, and violent
intervention was to provide the denouement of the tragedy. The first
secret Bolshevik manoeuvres to sovietise his native land were taken by
Stalin in person, and, by a fateful irony, against the Georgian
Social-Democracy of which he was the offspring.

Georgia had not followed Russia in her evolution towards Bolshevism and
revolution. Fear of Turkish invasion created circumstances unfavourable
to defeatism by giving definite local meaning to the idea of national
defence. For a long time the only influence the Bolsheviks had was among
the soldiers, mostly Russian, who were war-weary and naturally anxious
to get home. But the unwarlike garrison of Tiflis allowed the arsenal to
be captured and disarmed by a few hundred determined socialist workmen
who formed a "People's Guard," as Bolshevik workmen had formed a Red
Guard in Russia. Both Guards filled their respective missions -- the
maintenance of order for the benefit of the ruling party, with different
aims but by identical means.

The Georgian Mensheviks, uncontested masters of the country, regarded
their Party as merely a regional section of the Pan-Russian
Social-Democracy. At Petrograd, where Chkheidze and Tseretelli were
their best known representatives in the first Soviet and in the
Provisional Government, they stood firm for a Russian Republic "one and
indivisible," even against the very legitimate claims of Finland. After
the October Revolution, although they had no "centrifugal" tendencies
and were hostile to Lenin's views on the national question, they
retreated across the Caucasus to join an ephemeral grouping of Georgia,
Armenia and Azerbaijan. When the Russian advocates of separation became
country snatchers by revolutionary necessity, the Georgian advocates of
Greater Russia became separatists in order to defend their democracy.
Like Lenin, but in the opposite direction, Tseretelli felt himself
driven, by the inexorable necessity of the political and the social
struggle in time of revolution, to take action contrary to his
programme.

"_Hatred of Bolshevism was the reason why Transcaucasia made itself
independent of Russia_," said the socialist, Albert Thomas. But the
immediate cause of the Balkanisation of the Caucasus, and of the
incessant disturbances and wars, which were to end in the negation of
the pseudo-principle of nationalities, was less important than the
distant causes. Elisée Reclus had already indicated them in his
impartial, monumental work: "_The geographical situation of Georgia
hardly permitted its peoples to maintain their independence and form a
single nation with satisfactory boundaries_." Since these words were
written, the Baku oil-wells have reinforced the geographical reasons by
economic considerations founded on the geological formation of the
country. Neither neutrality nor independence was possible in the era of
imperialism.

The bridge between Europe and Asia, as Jordania called her,
Transcaucasia could not fix her own future without the help of one of
the Great Powers whose interests were concerned. The national question,
always a burning and acute one in these regions, merely multiplied
pretexts for external intervention. The Armenians, in fear of the Turks,
called in the Russians; the Mussulman Tartars, in fear of Russia, called
in the Turks; the Georgians, in fear of the Turks and the Russians,
called in first the Germans and then the English. Moreover, Armenians,
Tartars and Georgians, in local competition, fought among themselves.
The Russians on their frontiers were of two kinds, Reds and Whites. In
the interior, Bolshevism was making headway and undermining fragile
States. In spite of implacable repression, peasant insurrections
followed one another. Foreign military and civil missions poured oil on
the flames by mutually thwarting their intrigues. The theoretical
Bolshevik solution of the national question then could settle nothing
and itself propounded an insoluble question: whose right was it to
determine what? "_Does the right of self-determination mean the right to
injure one's neighbours with impunity_?" This question addressed by
Trotsky to the Georgian Mensheviks was also an unconscious answer to
Lenin.

### 6.3

THE squaring of the national circle was insoluble without belying theory
in practice. The agrarian question also was settled by a tactical
expedient postponing difficulties instead of overcoming them. The Land
Decree abolished the big estates in principle without laying the
foundation of collective management. Cultivation by individuals gave the
peasant a right to use the soil, a perpetual usufruct equivalent to
possession.

Rosa Luxemburg had said of the Leninist solution of the national
question: "It is analogous to the Bolshevik policy with regard to the
peasants, whose appetite for land it is proposed to settle by permission
to take direct possession of the great estates, thus securing their
adhesion to the revolution.... Unfortunately the calculation has been
absolutely wrong in both cases." Like the territorial dismemberment of
the State, the parcelling out of the land was diametrically divergent
from the natural tendency towards economic centralisation. Neither
Stalin, nor any Bolshevik of the second rank, in their blind following
of Lenin and Trotsky, foresaw the future perils from these large
strategic plans.

The immediate seizure of land by the peasants has nothing in common with
socialism, wrote Rosa Luxemburg in substance: "_Not only is it not a
socialist measure; it cuts away the path leading to socialism_." There
was thus established not socialised property, but a new property of
individuals, which was technically backward compared with the relatively
advanced great estates. The apportionment of the land accentuated
inequality instead of tending towards its suppression. The rich
peasants, the _kulaks_, in virtue of their effective supremacy in the
village, were assuredly the principal gainers by the agrarian
revolution. Socialism would thus have a new and powerful category of
enemies in the countryside. The future socialisation of the land, and
therefore of production in general, would involve in the future a sharp
conflict between the town proletariat and the peasant masses. The course
of events was to confirm this reasoning; its final endorsement came ten
years later.

Lenin did not deny the opportunist tendency, if not the opportunism, of
his agrarian policy. He had changed his tactics many times on the
question. Before 1905 his programme was the most modest among all the
Russian socialist programmes. The first revolution convinced him of his
error. "Having exactly foreseen the direction of the movement," he said,
"we were in error as to the degree of its development." At that time he
advocated the confiscation of the great estates for the benefit of the
smaller peasants. In his pamphlet, _To the Poor Peasants_, he wrote:
"The Social-Democrats desire to expropriate only the large
estate-owners, only those who live on the labour of others. _They will
never dispossess the small and the 'middle peasant_.'" Later on he
adopted nationalisation of the land, that is to say general
expropriation, even of small properties. Finally, in 1917 he took over
the programme of the Social Revolutionaries, his traditional enemies,
translating it into action by his famous Decree. This Decree confiscated
large landed property, to be placed at the disposal of local agrarian
committees and regional peasants' soviets; the final solution was left
to the Constituent Assembly; the "peasant memorial" of the Social
Revolutionaries, a resume of agrarian claims, served meanwhile as a
guide.

In reply to those who reproached him with his change of front, Lenin
said of this "memorial": "What does it matter who drew it up? As a
democratic government we cannot evade the decision of the masses, even
if it is not in accordance with our views." He was frankly to admit a
few days later: "_We shall not realise the Bolshevik programme: our
agrarian policy is drawn from the peasants' memorials_." Three years
later he explained this change of programme.

>At the time of the October Revolution [he said], we had concluded with
>the petty-bourgeois peasant class a political alliance which, if not
>formal, was at least quite serious and effective, by accepting en bloc
>with one modification only, the agrarian programme of the Social
>Revolutionaries, _that is to say by concluding a compromise to prove to
>the peasants that we in no way desire to impose a regime on them, but
>on the contrary to come to an understanding with them_,

and indeed he was only recognising an accomplished fact, for the
peasants were dividing the land without consulting anyone.

In spite of his intention to "prepare the ground in such fashion that no
bourgeoisie can ever raise its head again," he had created the
conditions for a capitalist renaissance in Russia, in the expectation of
a European revolution which would solve the paradoxes of this backward
country. He afterwards made the admission: "_The peasants have
incontestably gained more from the revolution than the working
classes... That proves certainly that, up to a point, our revolution was
a bourgeois revolution_." But in 1917 he subordinated all considerations
of principle to the seizure of power, which required the purchase of the
sympathy or at least the neutrality of rural Russia. In Trotsky's
arresting phrase, "the young Russian proletariat was only able to
accomplish its task at that time by dragging with it the heavy mass of
the peasantry, just as one drags out a lump of earth with the roots of a
tree."

Lenin was evidently preoccupied with other considerations in decreeing
his earliest governmental measures. Without any illusions as to
achieving socialism along the path into which circumstances had led him,
he expected to be able to diverge from that path when the progress of
the socialist revolution was assured in the west. He said repeatedly
that the extension of the international revolution would put Russia in
the position of a backward Soviet country. And he set himself to hold on
as best he could until the fall of capitalism in Europe, which seemed to
him to be assured in the immediate future. This conviction accounts for
all the actions contradictory to his programme; where others saw hasty
change of front in cynical repudiation, he conceived himself as faithful
to his aim while temporarily changing his methods. To his mind tactics
were infinitely variable, and this "doctrinaire," often accused of
dogmatism, liked to quote a phrase from Goethe's _Faust:_ "Theory, my
friend, is grey, but the tree of life is eternally green."

The most violent surprise reserved for his opponents and for many of his
followers was his domestic policy. For him dictatorship was no empty
phrase; he was determined to exercise it through his Party as the
mandatory of the poorer classes who had followed his teaching, and to
prolong it even when he no longer had their confidence. "The
dictatorship of the proletariat presupposes violence against the
exploiting classes," he said, but, refusing to be bound by any law, he
soon came to use violence against any opposition, even peaceful or legal
opposition, against any non-Bolshevik party, whether of workmen or
peasants, even against the Social-Democrats whose programme was still
accepted by the opposing sections. After having demanded liberty from
the socialists when they were in power, on the ground of their
principles, he now refused it to them for tactical reasons. The
dissolution of the Constituent "may be said to have been the
turning-point of this policy," said Rosa Luxemburg, disturbed as to the
fate of a revolution which she praised without losing her critical
sense.

Under Kerensky, the Constituent Assembly, constantly deferred, became a
myth, and the Bolsheviks angrily demanded that it should be summoned. At
first sight their demand appeared to be in flagrant contradiction with
the demand for power for the soviets. Lenin never made the point clear,
but he appears to have envisaged a "composite State" harmonising the
Constituent and the soviets, the national and the municipal power;
Zinoviev and Kamenev have reported some remarks in this sense. On the
morrow of the October Revolution, fidelity to the Constituent was
immovable. The principal Soviet Decrees were provisional pending
ratification by the Assembly. Lenin declared: "We shall submit all the
peace proposals to the decision of the Constituent." Trotsky wrote: "The
country can only be saved by a Constituent Assembly representing the
exploited working classes." Statements of this kind abound.

The elections yielded unexpected results at Petrograd; more than half
the votes went to the supposed "usurpers." The Bolsheviks cherished for
the moment the chimerical hope of similar success in the provinces; the
support of the Social Revolutionaries of the Left, represented on the
Council of Commissars, and the stern action against the Kadets were
expected to secure a majority for the Soviet regime. But the results as
they came in dispelled the illusion; the peasantry followed tradition in
voting for the Social Revolutionaries without making any distinction
between Left and Right. Lenin saw the danger, and desired to parry it by
the preventive measure of another postponement and a modification of the
electoral law. The Central Committee thought otherwise. Bukharin spoke
of excluding the Right from the future Assembly and convening the Rump
as a Convention. Stalin urged the necessity of getting rid of the
Kadets, already outlawed by Decree. Amid the anxiety and hesitancy of
the ruling organizations, the idea of dissolving the Constituent made
headway.

The Bolsheviks obtained in all a quarter of the votes, but in the two
capitals, in the industrial towns, in the army on the principal Fronts
and in the fleet they had a majority. As Lenin had foreseen, the
distribution of forces assured their preponderance in the decisive
quarters. The Social Revolutionaries, with more than half the votes, but
scattered over the countryside, remained impotent before the real
governing body. The Kadets were numerically the second urban party. The
Mensheviks paid disastrously for their errors and compromises, except in
the Caucasus, where Georgian Social-Democracy remained invulnerable.

The Constituent Assembly, the dream of many generations of
revolutionaries, was adjourned on the day it met, on the demand of a
sailor, without having ventured to oppose the Soviet Government's policy
on peace and land. The decree of dissolution, signed by Lenin, was
received next day. The objections raised by the Bolshevik Right met with
no response, and the Third Congress of Soviets automatically sanctioned
the operation. Russia remained indifferent, though there were a few mild
protests in socialist and liberal circles. Parliamentarism on the
western model could not be acclimatised in this enormous and backward
country, where the active minority imposed itself without a parliament
on a passive majority incapable of insisting on its parliament, under
historical conditions in which democracy no longer existed anywhere. The
bourgeoisie had postponed the Constituent when the Bolsheviks demanded
it, and began to demand it when the Bolsheviks suppressed it -- a
reversal of roles which emphasises the anachronism of an institution
inherited from bourgeois revolutionary tradition in other lands and
defenceless against the accomplished fact of a new "specifically
Russian" system at home.

The supporters of the Constituent expected salvation from a spontaneous
break-down of Bolshevism, from an outburst of popular feeling, from some
unknown remedy arising from the seriousness of the disease, or, most of
them, from help from outside. Gorky justly remarked: "Even now that the
people are masters of their fate, they continue to expect a _barin_; for
some of them this _barin_ is the European proletariat; for others, the
Germans, the creators of an iron discipline; others think that Japan
will save them; no one trusts to his own right arm." The Bolsheviks had
the advantage of relying upon themselves, pending the world revolution.

After the event, Trotsky condemned the Constituent as a "belated echo of
an epoch outdated by the revolution." The elections had followed too
close on the insurrection, the rural districts were ill-informed of the
events in the towns, the lumbering machine of democracy did not
correctly represent the rapid development of the political situation in
a country so vast and so ill-organised. To which Rosa Luxemburg replied,
in the name of the principles of Bolshevism, that it _was necessary to
break the antiquated Constituent and to convoke instead an Assembly
derived from a renovated Russia_. According to Trotsky, she said, "the
body elected by the democracy would always reflect the image of the
masses at the date of the elections, just as, according to Herschel, the
starry heavens represent the celestial bodies, not as they are when we
look at them, but as they were at the moment when they sent their rays
from an immeasurable distance, to our earth." This negation of any
living bond between the elected and the electors is contradicted by
historical experience, showing that the "living wave of the people's
opinion constantly bathes, inspires and directs their representatives."
The friendly criticism received no response; the disagreement implied
insuperable opposition, not only on the particular issue, but between
two conceptions of the revolutionary dictatorship.

In reality, Lenin and Trotsky, equally sincere in summoning and in
denouncing the Constituent, had not foreseen the realities corresponding
to their abstract formulas, and, by revising the formulas on the basis
of actual circumstances, they found justification in the complexity of
the facts for the most unpremeditated solutions. Doubtless they did not
recollect Plekhanov's forecast at the Social-Democratic Congress of
1903, justifying a future blow at universal suffrage, until they found
themselves faced with inevitable civil war. But, again, the conclusion
of peace came about quite differently from the way in which they had
intended. Another proof of the truth of a pre-Marxist prophetic remark
by J. de Maistre: "Men do not so much lead revolutions; revolution leads
them."

### 6.4

LENIN had often propounded the dilemma: an honourable, democratic peace
or revolutionary war. The Bolsheviks, unanimously convinced that they
had to defend their country under a socialist regime, understood such a
peace as the end of hostilities without annexations or indemnities and
with the right of self-determination for the peoples. German
imperialism, in virtue of this right, proposed to support the
counter-revolution in Finland, Poland and Ukraine. The theses of Lenin
and his disciple Stalin on the national question might be interpreted in
an opposite sense. The refusal of the Allies to agree to an armistice
preliminary to a peace in which there should be neither victors nor
vanquished, drove Russia to choose between a hopeless revolutionary war
and the separate peace scorned by intransigent Bolshevism.

The impossibility of reconciling revolution and imperialism was evident
at the first meeting at Brest-Litovsk. Clinging to the hope of an
imminent social revolution in the west, especially in Germany, the
Bolsheviks desired to gain time; they multiplied their appeals to the
international proletariat, manifestoes sent out by wireless, which were
intercepted and everywhere censored. The German ultimatum cut short
these manoeuvres; they had to capitulate to obtain a respite, or to
expose themselves to invasion with the certainty of disastrous defeat.

Lenin was the first to grasp the alternative of life and death. On the
morrow of the _coup d'état_ he had sounded a warning against unreasoning
optimism. "Our party," he said, "never promised to secure an immediate
peace. We said we would immediately make peace proposals and would
publish the secret treaties. That has been done; the struggle for peace
is beginning." On the approach of danger he had no hesitation in making
a frontal attack on the bellicose romanticism of the Party, and
resolutely proposed acceptance of a "shameful peace"; for, he said, the
socialist Republic required a truce, and revolution in Germany might be
delayed.

But his own words on a war of revolution were remembered by the Party,
which was disposed to translate them into action. Once more, Lenin was
in a minority. Against him were ranged the Left Communists, advocates of
breaking off negotiations and of perishing in a life and death struggle
rather than compromise with the enemy; among these were the most
energetic and able of the militants: Bukharin, Pyatakov, Preobrazhensky,
Radek, Joffe, Krestinsky, Dzerzhinsky, Pokrovsky, Ossinsky, Sapronov,
Kollontai, and many others, supported in the Soviets by the active
section of the Left Social Revolutionaries. Unconsciously the
neo-Jacobins were falling into the same political error as the
Girondins, denounced first by Marat, and then by Robespierre. In the
Central Committee of the Party, Lenin could only rely with certainty on
Sverdlov, Stalin, Sokolnikov and Smilga, not counting Zinoviev and
Kamenev, who, as "October-deserters," were rather compromising
associates. Trotsky, without identifying himself with the Left, took a
"centrist" standpoint, which consisted in renouncing battle but without
signing peace, and, for the moment, in a prolongation of the Brest
negotiations with the idea of publicly demonstrating the incompatibility
of the policies of the parties and of encouraging revolutionary activity
in the Central Empires.

Stalin prudently followed Lenin. But how? According to Trotsky, he had
no settled convictions, but temporised, manoeuvred, and intrigued; he
supported both Lenin and Trotsky, trying to keep in with both of them
while the result was uncertain. "Stalin," he says, "took no active part.
No one took much notice of his hesitation. Certainly my main
preoccupation, to make our conduct on the peace question as
comprehensible as possible to the world proletariat, was a secondary
consideration for Stalin. He was interested in _peace for one country
only_, just as later on he was interested in _socialism for one country
only_. In the decisive vote he was with Lenin."

Though Stalin took no public part in the discussion, he shared in the
secret deliberations of the Central Committee of the Party, which was
already the real Government of the Republic. The minutes of this "secret
group of leaders" show that he was more decided than Trotsky admits,
though he did not necessarily rise to the level of Lenin's motives. His
first speech on the question is thus summarised by the Secretary, Helen
Stassova:

>Comrade Stalin thinks that in adopting the slogan of a war of
>revolution we are playing the imperialists' game. Comrade Trotsky's
>position is no position at all. There is no revolutionary movement in
>the west, there is no action, only potential action, and on that we
>cannot rely. If the Germans begin the offensive, our counter-revolution
>will be strengthened. Germany can attack, for she has Kornilov's troops
>and the Guards. In October we spoke of a holy war, because we were told
>that the mere word peace would be the signal for revolution in the
>west. But that was a mistake. The introduction by us of socialist
>reforms will rouse revolution in the west, but we need time for that.
>By adopting Comrade Trotsky's policy, we should create the worst
>conditions for the movement in the west, and therefore he [Stalin]
>proposes the adoption of Comrade Lenin's motion.

Thus Stalin came round to Lenin's conclusions, but for national reasons,
while Lenin had arrived at them just because of "potential"
international revolutions. Revolution has not begun in the west, said
Lenin in reply to Stalin, but "_nevertheless, if we altered our tactics
for that reason, we should be traitors to international socialism_." He
only proposed to sign peace in the belief that it would be annulled by
the "general socialist revolution." Stalin, on the contrary, only
conceived of a revolutionary movement in the west under the influence of
socialist reforms in Russia.

Trotsky's compromise of "_cessation of the war, non-signature of the
peace, and demobilisation of the army_," was adopted by the Central
Committee by 9 votes to 7, a provisional solution which had at least the
advantage of preserving the Party from a mortal breach. Stalin
recognized this at the next meeting, when he said: "_The intermediate
position of Trotsky's has provided us with a way out from a difficult
situation_." It was the same position which Stalin had recently
described as no position at all.

Lenin wore down his opponents with obstinacy and skill. Internal
dissension was unusually sharp. More than two hundred soviets which were
consulted on the subject pronounced for rupture of the Brest
negotiations, and only two important soviets were for peace. The Left
disclosed several shades of opinion. By 7 votes to 6 the Central
Committee once more supported Trotsky's proposal to refuse the
resumption of negotiations. But on that very day another meeting was
hastily summoned, on the news of the German offensive. The Kiev Rada
came to terms with the Central Empires, in the name of
self-determination, and Ukrainian nationalism became the handmaid of the
invaders. In the north Dvinsk was captured and Petrograd threatened; the
old Russian army declared itself incapable of fighting, and the new one
did not yet exist. Lenin's thesis was hourly strengthened.

Every possible error had been made, and Trotsky wavered, beginning to
come over to Lenin's view. Stalin cut the matter short: "We must speak
plainly. The Germans are attacking, we are defenceless. It is time to
say bluntly that negotiations must be renewed." Lenin, with more
assurance than ever, reiterated his argument in short, cutting phrases.
"It is no use jesting with war. We are losing rolling-stock and making
our transport worse. We cannot wait, for the situation is plain. The
people will not understand that if there were to be a war we ought not
to have demobilised. Now the Germans will take everything. The game has
come to such a pass that the downfall of the revolution is inevitable if
we persist in a middle policy." Trotsky wavered, but insisted on first
asking the Central Powers for their terms. Stalin replied: "After five
minutes' hurricane firing we shan't have a single soldier in the line.
This confusion must be ended. I don't agree with Trotsky. A question
like that is merely paper talk. We must now consider the whole situation
and say that we are for resumption of negotiations." On the vote, Lenin
won by 7 to 5, with one abstention. Trotsky, unconvinced, nevertheless
voted with Lenin, fearing an irremediable split.

The internal crisis in the Party was at its worst; discord amounted to
paroxysm. Trotsky resigned from the Council of Commissars, and Lenin
threatened resignation from the Central Committee. "We are turning the
Party into a dung-heap," cried Bukharin, sobbing in Trotsky's arms. The
Left began to publish papers in opposition to the official press. They
treated Lenin as "phrase-maker and opportunist," capable of "the same
faults as Kautsky" and they denounced the "profound mistake which will
ruin the Russian and the international revolutions." At the next sitting
of the Central Committee, Stalin sought to conciliate the extremists.
"It is possible," he said, "not to sign, but to begin negotiations."
Lenin would yield nothing. He said: "Stalin is wrong in saying it is
possible not to sign. We must sign the terms laid down. If you do not
sign, you sign the death sentence of the Soviet power in three weeks.
These conditions do not affect the Soviet power. I have not a shadow of
hesitation. I do not lay down an ultimatum and then run away. I want no
more revolutionary phrase-making. The German revolution is not ripe. It
will take months. The conditions must be accepted." By 7 votes to 4 and
with four abstentions, including Trotsky's, Lenin obtained a relative
majority for submission to the imperialist conditions of peace. The
Central Committee pronounced unanimously for a future war of revolution.

Four members of the Left, including Bukharin and Bubnov, immediately
resigned their "responsible positions." With Lenin's assent they
reserved the right to agitate in the Party against the resolution
adopted by the Central Committee. A breach seemed inevitable. Six
People's Commissars, including Pyatakov and Uritsky, followed Trotsky in
resigning. Stalin, who was evidently uneasy over the lack of leaders,
made deserving efforts to conciliate them in terms unusually friendly
for him. Trotsky, once more in disagreement with Lenin, nevertheless did
his best to safeguard unity.

The Seventh Bolshevik Congress was summoned to vote on the ratification
of the "shameful peace"; the various soviet bodies had in the end to
conform to the decision of the sovereign Party.

This special Congress was held in March in the dramatic atmosphere of
the first rumblings of civil war, with only 29 duly elected delegates.
Stalin was not there. He was no orator, and he rarely appeared on great
occasions in the assemblies. Without even appearing in the forefront or
inscribing his name in the revolutionary annals, a self-effacing but
capable executor of Lenin's instructions, he was useful as an
administrator in a small group which was in fact, if not formally,
gathering into its hands all the political prerogatives of the State. At
that time Sverdlov calculated the Party membership at 300,000;
one-fourth must have been lost in less than six months, under the fear
of the coming fall of the new regime.

The majority of the Congress rallied to Lenin, repudiating
retrospectively the formula "neither peace nor war," and exhibiting
little anxiety to do justice to the imposing part played by Trotsky at
Brest, or to his disinterested mediation between the rival sections in
the Central Committee. Trotsky, bitterly offended, resigned all his
offices and functions in the Party and in the Soviets. Lenin had
severely criticised his "revolutionary phrase-making" which, by
concealing the enormous danger in which the revolution stood, aggravated
it. Riazanov, although a Right Communist, left the Party, and was soon
followed by Kollontai. The Left section continued its violent
opposition. But civil war was soon to rally all revolutionaries to the
defence of the "socialist fatherland in danger." Before separating, the
Congress decided to modify the old Social-Democratic programme, at last
obeying Lenin's wishes and adopting the name Communist.

Lenin had resumed the ascendancy which was henceforward to be
unquestioned. The incarnation of the political and tactical intelligence
of Bolshevism, strengthened by inflexible determination turned
unceasingly on a single aim, he imposed his authority by plain common
sense, of which most of his comrades and followers showed themselves
destitute in great emergencies. Because he had outlined a policy whose
logic was elementary, "_not to fight when you were assured of defeat_,"
he was to pass for a genius in a party which owed him everything -- its
origin, organisation, doctrine and programme, its strategy, and its
tactics, its theory and practice, and the conquest and maintenance of
power, a party which nearly lost everything by losing confidence in its
leader and inspirer. His distinctive supremacy really lay, apart from
his personal qualities, in the essential faculty of discerning "the
grain of reality in the straw of words." In this he showed himself
genuinely deserving of the only praise he desired, that of being a
Marxist. In this respect Trotsky's political weakness was evident, in
spite of his brilliant outward gifts. The Brest episode shows up the
idealism of the one and the realism of the other.

Under the circumstances, Lenin thought it wrong to risk the fate of the
revolution begun in Russia on the single card of a coming revolution in
Germany, and wished, as Radek puts it, "to gain time." When his own
words on a war of revolution were recalled he replied: "We were speaking
of the need of preparation and of carrying on revolutionary war.... But
we never promised to embark on such a war without considering the
possibilities and chances of success." The socialist revolution is
ripening in all countries, but it will come "_at the end of the end, and
not at the beginning of the beginning_." We must learn to retreat. The
man who can't adapt himself to the worst situation "is only a talker,
not a revolutionary." The Left Communists "take the nobleman's, not the
peasant's point of view." The Treaty of Brest will have the same fate as
the Peace of Tilsit. Peace is only a means of reconstituting one's
forces.... Peace is a truce between wars; war the means of securing a
better peace. It must not be possible to say with truth that
"revolutionary phrase-making about the revolutionary war ruined the
revolution."

Hardly had the Communist Government obtained respite on the new western
frontier when they had to face manifold and constantly increasing
dangers at home. A new "Time of Troubles" opened for Russia. During the
year 1919 the situation took a sinister turn in the country given up to
fire and blood.

### 6.5

WHILE the Germans occupied, in addition to Finland and Poland, first
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in Russian territory, and then the Ukraine
and the Crimea, and, lastly, Georgia, where they were summoned by the
Menshevik Government in aid against a Turkish invasion -- civil war
broke out under many forms. Plots, treason and mutiny followed. There
was sabotage in the public services and a strike of officials and
technicians. After the repressions of the risings of Kaledin on the Don,
and of Dutov in the Urals, the mobile "Cossack Vendée" was constantly in
revolt. In the north the Finnish counter-revolution, supported by German
troops, threatened Petrograd. Presently, English and French forces were
to occupy Archangel and the Murmansk coast. On the middle Volga
detachments of Czechoslovak prisoners of war on their way home raised
armed revolt. On the lower Volga, Krasnov's Cossacks were approaching
Tsaritsyn. In the Kuban the first volunteers of Denikin's future army
were assembling to the south of the Caspian; Whites with some English
officers from Persia threatened the Baku Commune, then in the hands of
the Reds. On the Romanian frontier Bessarabia was invaded. In the Far
East the Japanese were landing at Vladivostok, and, but for the
opposition of the United States, would have advanced along the
Trans-Siberian railway, and re-established "order" in Asiatic Russia,
which was ravaged by bandits, by "great companies," and "infernal
columns," so called. Finally, after the blockade, military intervention
on the part of the Allies was to be expected, and their agents,
missions, embassies, fictitious consulates, fomented and supported
sedition and political crime.

In rural Russia groups of "partisans" of all colours were operating. The
peasants hid their grain, refused worthless coinage, and returned to a
system of barter. Inflation reached astronomical figures. The local
soviets, at the end of their resources, levied extraordinary
contributions, decreed requisitions, and carried out arbitrary
confiscations. In the starving towns industrial production fell almost
to zero, commerce was dying, and scarcity compelled increasingly drastic
rationing. Instead of "workers' control" of industrial undertakings, the
Communists decided on their gradual nationalisation by force, in order
to keep them going, at the request sometimes of the workers, sometimes
of the owners. The Mensheviks incited strikes, the Social
Revolutionaries revived terrorism, the Anarchists formed their Black
Guard filled with Whites, the counter-revolution organised itself in
"Liberating" and "Patriotic" leagues. In this indescribable chaos the
"building-up of socialism" hoped for by the Bolsheviks was pushed into
the background by the necessities of the defence of the revolution.

In vain Lenin had sketched out in April 1918 a constructive programme of
the "successive tasks of the Soviet power," emphasising the following
essential measures: economic reconstruction by rigid calculation and
control of production and distribution, the organisation of positive and
creative work by one-man direction in industry, the employment of
highly-paid specialists, the adoption of the Taylor system, piece work,
the incentives of emulation and of force -- while he denounced the
hysteria of the Left, "Communists of disaster." Repression was a more
urgent task than administration. Trotsky, now Commissar for War, had
summarised the same programme in his formula, "_Work, discipline and
order will save the Republic of Soviets_." But first of all, the
implacable enemy had to be crushed, as the event proved, if they
themselves were not to be exterminated. Jaurès was not a false prophet
when he wrote at the end of the last century: "In the present condition
of Europe, and in so far as the course of events can be foreseen, it is
no longer possible to hope, unless one is blind, or to assert, unless
one is a traitor, that socialism will be achieved in the advanced
nations by peaceful means. The nation which first achieves socialism
will see all the frenzied powers of reaction hurled against it at the
same time. It will be lost if it is not itself prepared to seize a
sword, to answer bullet with bullet, so that the working class of other
countries may have time to organise and rise in its turn."

In May, the hostile newspapers, which demanded armed foreign
intervention, were suppressed; the brief period of a free press was at
an end. In June, "anti-soviet" parties were excluded from the soviets;
the soviet monopoly of politics had begun. Volodarsky was assassinated
in Petrograd by Right Social Revolutionaries. The Cheka seized hostages;
its repressive measures were still moderate, while the Whites, by their
mass shootings and hangings, were sowing the seeds of inexpiable hatred
and ensuring severe reprisals for themselves. The Red Terror was hardly
yet equal to the White Terror. But a merciless struggle was beginning in
the villages; expeditions of workmen went there ostensibly to seize
bread from the kulaks, but really to take it from all peasant farmers,
and they provoked sanguinary rural warfare. The industrial centres had
to be fed at all costs. Committees of "Poor Peasants" were formed, on
Lenin's initiative, to break the resistance of those who refused to
supply cereals, to requisition cattle, and to confiscate surpluses.
Necessity knows no law. The essential was not "a socialist experiment,"
but the mitigation of famine.

Stalin set out for Tsaritsyn, where Voroshilov was then in command, in
charge of a detachment of Red soldiers, provided with two armoured cars,
to direct operations for the collection of food in the south. The
national question might wait, and for that matter, would wait for a long
time. Most of the energetic militants were mobilised on the "Food
Front," if they were not commissars with the armies. In any case all
fronts tended to become one, and, instead of differentiation of
functions, a mass of work and responsibilities of all kinds had to be
undertaken. Dzerzhinsky, Pyatakov, Smilga, Sokolnikov, Ivan and Vladimir
Smirnov, former workmen such as Serebriakov, Shliapnikov and Voroshilov
went into the army, some as commissars, some as improvised generals.
Stalin also began his military career haphazard; he found Tsaritsyn in
inextricable disorder which made his task impossible without exerting
pressure on the command, the headquarters of the Tenth Army.

There is nothing about Stalin in the military works, or the historical
memoirs and studies on the Russian Civil War. For ten years no communist
author thought it worth while to give him any notice. Trotsky's name is
associated throughout the world, by friends or enemies, with the
victories of the revolution; Stalin's share was not discovered
until 1929. There were violent domestic rivalries before Voroshilov
suddenly thought of filling up the gap, and before Trotsky made the
necessary documentary corrections to his belated tribute. Stalin's
reputation as a soldier does not emerge enhanced, but there is further
evidence of his organising capacity, his dictatorial method, and his
faculty for intrigue; here also are the beginnings of a personal
antagonism which was soon to weigh heavily on the destiny of the
Republic.

The history of the Red Army is bound up with the life of Trotsky, as the
history of the Bolshevik Party is bound up with Lenin's. To these two
men, who complemented one another, the revolution owed its salvation in
its critical hours. This may be said without injustice to the
achievements and the heroism of the Party and of the picked few among
the workers and peasants. Marx and Engels, who did not exaggerate the
historical role of individuals, said, "_For the realisation of ideas you
must have men with practical ability_."

Trotsky recognised the pre-eminence of Lenin, and the latter in turn
appreciated Trotsky's value. Gorky has reported some remarks made by
Lenin about Trotsky in private conversation. "Show me any other man," he
said, "capable of organising an almost model army in one year and
moreover of winning the sympathy of professional soldiers. We have that
man. We have everything. You will see miracles." That did not prevent
differences of opinion, for the very simple reasons which led Bonaparte
to say somewhat paradoxically, "_rather one bad general than two good
ones_." But in those terrible years the profound agreement and
reciprocal esteem between the two principal leaders, reinforced by a
Sverdlov in administrative affairs, a Dzerzhinsky at the police, a
Rakovsky for war and diplomacy in the Ukraine, and many other able and
distinguished militants, gave the revolutionary Government an authority
unparalleled except, _mutatis mutandis_, in the case of Robespierre and
Saint-Just. Other times, other men, other circumstances, other
historical stages, and other social conditions -- but the analogies are
sufficient to justify the parallel.

Stalin was not yet an outstanding personage, and was still unknown in
the country and in the Party, but nevertheless he must be counted among
those hardened revolutionaries who were always available for the most
unexpected tasks. Theoretically under the orders of Trotsky, who was
Commissar for War and President of the Revolutionary Council of War, he
nevertheless had direct access to Lenin as a member of the Central
Committee of the Party, an extra-constitutional body which was already
the supreme authority. Moreover the Council of Commissars was to cease
to exist as the nominal Government when the Left Social Revolutionaries
broke with the Bolsheviks, whose peasant policy and peace tactics they
violently opposed.

At the beginning of July 1918, these "hysterical maniacs of the Left"
attacked the Communist Party during the Fifth Congress of Soviets, tried
to revive war with Germany by assassinating the ambassador, Mirbach, and
attempted to overthrow the Council of Commissars by bombarding the
Kremlin. The revolt was stifled in twenty-four hours, and was the
beginning of the end for the Left Social Revolutionaries; some were
shot, others imprisoned, and their party was shattered. (The anarchists,
already roughly handled in April, soon suffered a like fate.)
Thenceforward the communists monopolised the Council of Commissars, and
almost had a monopoly of the Executive of the Soviets. The Bolshevik
Central Committee did not need to take any formal steps to be able to
exercise the dictatorship through their Political Bureau. At the same
period, and at the instigation of French diplomatic agents, the extreme
Right of the Social Revolutionaries and the Whites, led by Savinkov,
provoked, by the Yaroslavl revolt, the first great massacre of the civil
population and the destruction of one of the finest cities of old
Russia. The episode recalls the Lyons incident of 1793. Terror breeds
terror. Under the shadow of this tragedy, the Congress of Soviets,
interrupted by bombing and cannonade, passed, on Sverdlov's motion, the
Constitution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Soviets, an idealised
codification of the existing order, preceded by the Declaration of
Rights of the Toiling Masses. In this solemn charter nothing was said of
the dictatorship of a single Party or of the communist monopoly of
power. But force of circumstances in fact concentrated the public power
in the hands of the victorious Party for the time being.

Meanwhile news from the Front was not reassuring. On the Volga the
commander-in-chief, Muraviev, committed treason and then killed himself.
Below Tsaritsyn, where Voroshilov was unequal to his task, the Cossacks
pierced the Red Line. The Soviet army, occupying an immense Front, was
ill-nourished, ill-equipped and badly officered, and was everywhere in
retreat. The Communist Party mobilised all their fit men and their last
resources. Stalin hastened to the Front.

A few minutes before starting, he wrote to Lenin: "I harry and abuse all
those who deserve it, and hope for early improvement. Be sure we shall
spare no one, neither ourselves nor others, and we shall send grain. If
our military specialists (the fools!) did not sleep and dawdle, the line
would not have been broken; if it is repaired, it will be in spite of
them."

In reply to Lenin's expressed anxiety about the Left Social
Revolutionaries at Tsaritsyn, where the anarchists had attempted a
rising in May, Stalin replied: "As for the hysterical maniacs, be sure
that our hand will not falter; with enemies we shall act as enemies."
Indeed it was abundantly clear at this time that Stalin was a man whose
hand did not falter.

There is a significant phrase in his short note about "military
specialists," that is, professional soldiers. Stalin had no use for
them. His aversion is expressed in a telegram in which he says: "Our
specialists are psychologically unfit for decisive war against the
counter-revolution." A whole section of the Party shared this prejudice.
The "military opposition," recruited especially among communists of the
Left, advocated guerilla war, independent guerilla bands, the election
of officers by their men, federalism and improvisation in military
affairs. Just as the remnants of the Left opposition accused Lenin of
blindness, of opportunism and of compromise with capitalism because of
his practice of using specialists in industry, so the military
opposition reproached Trotsky with his centralised methods, strict
discipline and employment of specialists in the army. The nucleus of
this opposition was at Voroshilov's headquarters at Tsaritsyn. Stalin
secretly encouraged it.

Now, if Trotsky was able to put the Red Army on a conscripted instead of
voluntary basis, raise its effectives from 100,000 to one, and then to
two or three millions, to form sixteen armies in a Front of 8,000
kilometres, it was by incorporating, as Dubois-Crancé did, the sound
elements of the old army in the new, by using professional soldiers
under the surveillance of revolutionary commissars, by abolishing the
election of officers and the soldiers' council and by instituting rigid
discipline under a single command. The resistance of Tsaritsyn to the
orders of the Revolutionary Council of War only made defeat certain. As
Trotsky explains in _My Life_, the opposition could not do without
specialists, but they chose mediocre ones.

Though he was not a Left Communist, Stalin supported this opposition in
a new way. Trotsky says that this intrigue was directed against him.
Why? Trotsky does not say. Probably, even before the October Revolution,
Stalin had been jealous of the popularity of an opponent outside the
secret circle of professional revolutionaries who thought the direction
of the revolution a preserve of their own. For Stalin and his like,
Trotsky was, if not an intruder, at least a convert, and if no one now
ventured to contest the preeminence of Lenin, the stronger men
necessarily competed for preponderance of influence with the master.
Stalin and Trotsky, so different in their birth, education, intellect
and culture, both had a passion for domination.

Voroshilov, an unconscious witness against himself, says that the centre
of the Tenth Army presented a lamentable picture of confusion and
impotence when Stalin arrived. His presence rapidly made itself felt in
the rear and at the Front. Stalin showed "colossal energy," and purged
the commissariat, the administration, and the staff. The tone of his
letters to Lenin shows the spirit by which he was animated. "I shall
make good," he said, "the local deficiencies and many others. I am
taking and shall take measures to deprive unsuccessful officers and
generals of their command in spite of rules, which I shall break if
necessary. For this I naturally assume full responsibility before the
superior courts."

Stalin was especially successful in the town. He organised a local
Cheka, and instituted inexorable repression. On this matter, Voroshilov
quoted with satisfaction a White witness, the turncoat Nossovich, who
wrote of Stalin: "It is only just to say that his energy may be envied
by every former administrator and that his capacity for adapting himself
to his task and its circumstances might be an example to many others."
The atmosphere of Tsaritsyn changed. "The Cheka is working at full
speed"; every day new plots were discovered, and all the prisons were
overflowing. An engineer and his two sons, who had come from Moscow,
were arrested for conspiracy. "Stalin's decision was brief: 'Shoot!' The
engineer Alexeyev, his two sons, and several officers with them, some
belonging to the organisation, others only suspected, were seized by the
Cheka and immediately shot without trial." Stalin's hand did not falter.

There are no statistics of the victims under his proconsulship. The same
initiative and the same firmness were shown everywhere on all occasions.
In this memorable month of July, when the days of the Soviets appeared
to be numbered, the Ural communists under Byeloborodov executed the
fallen Emperor and his family on the approach of the victorious
Czechoslovaks. A Left Communist, the workman Myasnikov, killed the
Grand-Duke Michael. In August, after the loss of Simbirsk and Kazan,
Trotsky started in person to the middle Volga where the fate of the
revolution was in the balance, and formed the legendary armoured train
in which for more than two years he hastened from the most dangerous
point of one Front to another.

At the end of the same month, the Civil War entered on its acutest
phase. Simultaneously an attempt was made to kill Lenin, and Uritsky was
assassinated at Petrograd; the secret organisation of the Right Social
Revolutionaries was at work. Trotsky, on the way to Moscow, had the luck
to escape the bombs and bullets of the terrorists. This time the Cheka
replied with lightning swiftness. The Red Terror was openly endorsed and
martial law imposed. Five hundred counter-revolutionaries were executed
at Petrograd, as many at Kronstadt, perhaps a hundred at Moscow, and an
unknown number in the provinces. The Russian Revolution had its
September massacres. Atrocities on one side were made good on the other.
The press published lists of hostages, and announced mass arrests. There
are no exact statistics of the number of victims. All trace of democracy
vanished in the fury of suppression. At the Front panic-stricken
communists were shot. Some days later the Fifth Army of Ivan Smirnov
took Kazan, Tukhachevsky re-entered Simbirsk with the First Army, the
Red guerillas of the Urals under the workman Blücher effected a junction
at Perm with the Third Army after marching 1,500 kilometres and after
fifty days of murderous fighting.

Trotsky had other cares besides the struggle for Kazan. Tsaritsyn
headquarters caused him anxiety because of its obstinate opposition, its
flagrant lack of discipline, and the obstruction of Army Headquarters'
plans. Voroshilov, still quoting Nossovich, admits the pernicious role
played by Stalin:

>A characteristic peculiarity of this drive was the attitude of Stalin
>to instructions wired from the centre. When Trotsky, worried because of
>the destruction of the command administrations formed by him with such
>difficulty, sent a telegram concerning the necessity of leaving the
>staff and the war commissariat on the previous footing and giving them
>a chance to work, Stalin wrote a categorical, most significant
>inscription on the telegram -- "To be ignored!" ... The entire
>artillery and a section of the staff personnel continued to wait on
>barges at Tsaritsyn.

Lenin could not have been aware of this very significant incident, but
he interested himself in this conflict. Knowing something about Stalin
he suspected him of improper conduct, but sought to reduce friction so
as to get the full value from all his personnel. At the beginning of
October, Trotsky telegraphed to him:

>I insist categorically on Stalin's recall. Things are going badly on
>the Tsaritsyn Front in spite of super-abundant forces. Voroshilov can
>command a regiment, but not an army of 50,000 men. Nevertheless I will
>leave him in command of the Tenth Tsaritsyn Army on condition that he
>reports to the Commander of the Army of the South, Sytin. Up till now
>Tsaritsyn has not even sent reports of operations to Kozlov. I have
>demanded that reports of reconnaissances and operations should be sent
>twice daily. If that is not done to-morrow I shall send Voroshilov and
>Minin for trial and shall publish the fact in an Army Order. So long as
>Stalin and Minin remain at Tsaritsyn, their rights, in conformity with
>the Statutes of the Revolutionary Council of War, are limited to those
>of members of the Revolutionary Council of War of the Tenth Army. We
>have only a brief interval to take the offensive before the autumn mud,
>when roads here are not practicable either for horse or foot. Without
>coordination with Tsaritsyn no serious action is possible. There is no
>time to lose in diplomatic pourparlers. Tsaritsyn must either submit or
>get under. We have a colossal superiority of forces, but complete
>anarchy at the top. I can put a stop to it in twenty-four hours
>provided I have your firm and definite support. At all events that is
>the only course I can see.

Next day Trotsky communicated with Lenin by direct wire: "I have
received the following telegram: 'The execution of Stalin's fighting
instruction No. 10 must be suspended. I have given full instructions to
the Commander on the Southern Front, Sytin. Stalin's activities destroy
all my plans. VATZETIS, Commander-in-Chief. DANISHEVSKY, member of the
Revolutionary Council of War.'"

Stalin was immediately recalled to Moscow. By way of special
consideration, Lenin sent Sverdlov to fetch him in a special train, and
Trotsky, on his way to Tsaritsyn, met them en route. A conversation took
place between Trotsky and Stalin. "Is it true that you want to turn out
the lot" asked the latter resignedly, speaking of the "opposition" at
Tsaritsyn. Submission was only apparent. Stalin harboured resentment and
bided his time.

At Tsaritsyn, when Trotsky sought an explanation with Voroshilov, this
peculiar soldier admitted frankly that he did not mean to carry out
instructions unless he thought them right. Whereupon Trotsky indicated
unconditional obedience to superior orders on pain of immediate dispatch
to Moscow under escort for trial. Voroshilov had to give way, but
Trotsky had one personal enemy the more. And when the Commissar for War
turned his back on Tsaritsyn opposition continued, secretly supported by
Stalin. This at any rate is Trotsky's version, in the preceding as in
the following pages; but he bases it on irrefutable documents and no one
has ever been able to query them.

Voroshilov also had to be recalled after another telegram from Trotsky
to Lenin: "It is impossible to leave Voroshilov at his post after he has
nullified all attempts at compromise. There must be a new Revolutionary
Military Council with a new Commander at Tsaritsyn, and Voroshilov must
be transferred to the Ukraine." This was another indirect hit at Stalin.
After this the defensive and offensive capacity of the Tenth Army was
stimulated under Trotsky's influence. The workman Shliapnikov entered
the new Revolutionary Council of War on the Tsaritsyn Front.

In the Ukraine Voroshilov played the same game, still with secret
support from Stalin. Trotsky was obliged to telegraph to Sverdlov: "I
must categorically state that the Tsaritsyn policy, which led to the
complete disintegration of the Tsaritsyn army, cannot be tolerated in
the Ukraine.... The line pursued by Voroshilov and Rukhimovich means the
ruin of the entire enterprise." Stalin intrigued in the shadow, but
Trotsky saw through his game.

In reply to Lenin and Sverdlov, who sought to smooth things over,
Trotsky replied: "A compromise is of course necessary, but not one that
is rotten.... I consider Stalin's patronage of the Tsaritsyn policy a
most dangerous ulcer, worse than any treason or betrayal by military
specialists.... Read carefully once more Okulov's report on the
demoralisation of the Tsaritsyn army by Voroshilov with the help of
Stalin." The prospect of Anglo-French military intervention in the
Ukraine did not permit tergiversation on Trotsky's part; nevertheless he
did not insist on extreme measures.

After temporising for some months, Lenin finally telegraphed to
Voroshilov: "It is absolutely imperative that all agitation be stopped
immediately, and that all work be placed on a military basis; that no
more time be wasted on all the fine projects about separate groups and
similar attempts at restoring the Ukrainian Front. Discipline must be
military...." He asks him to put an end to "chaos, palaver, and disputes
about precedence." On the same day, he summoned the Political Bureau of
the Central Committee which took Trotsky's side and called on Voroshilov
to carry out his duty, "otherwise Trotsky will summon you to Izium the
day after tomorrow and will make detailed arrangements." Next day the
Central Committee empowered Rakovsky and Trotsky to take energetic
measures to recover from Voroshilov the munitions which he had secured
illegally. Lenin wrote by direct wire to Trotsky: "Dybenko and
Voroshilov making free with military property. Complete chaos, no
serious help given the Donetz base." By dint of tenacity, Trotsky had
defeated Stalin's influence and had liquidated "Tsaritsynism."

But at what price? In his _My Life_, a source even more essential for
Stalin's biography than his own, Trotsky admits that he hustled and
offended many people during the disturbed period of his supreme command.
"But in the great struggle that we were carrying on," he said, "the
stakes were too big to permit me to consider side-issues." There is no
doubt whatever that he was inspired by the interest of the common cause.
But in the difficult period of internal dissensions he came into contact
with all those who were discontented or annoyed. When Lenin had offended
comrades by his fierce polemic, he always sought once he had won his
victory, to bind up the wounds and to conciliate the vanquished. Trotsky
did not take the trouble, and scornfully accumulated enemies. It was a
weakness in a politician.

Stalin, he says, "carefully picked up people with grievances. He had
leisure for it and it was to his personal interest" -- an allusion to
his reputation for idleness, which Bukharin confirmed. The latter says:
"Stalin's first quality is laziness and his second is implacable
jealousy of anyone who knows more or does things better than himself. He
even tried to dig under Ilyich." In speaking of the recriminations
heaped on Lenin with every failure at the Front, Trotsky says that
Stalin secretly directed the machinations. The Assistant Commissar for
War, Skliansky, who was highly valued by Lenin, and compared by Trotsky
to Carnot as a distinguished organiser, suffered from Stalin's underhand
attacks. Stalin gathered round him a group of disappointed and ambitious
careerists. Trotsky reports a characteristic story revealed by
Menzhinsky. The latter learned that Stalin had suggested to Lenin that
Trotsky was forming a cabal against him. An invention of this kind
recalls the old accusations made at Tiflis, the suspicions felt at Baku,
and many other incidents. Trotsky ends this passage in _My Life_ by
saying: "But Stalin was obviously sowing trouble. Not until much later
did I realise how systematically he had been doing that -- almost
nothing but that. For Stalin never did any serious work."

With due allowance for controversy, Trotsky no doubt had in mind
intellectual work and high politics. For Stalin was not only lazy and
intriguing as Bukharin and many others thought; his faults were allied
with compensating qualities, but on a limited scale. His brutal energy
in police repression, and his calculating intrigue in personal
relationships, together with a certain flair for day to day politics,
gave him in the narrow Party circle an important place in the shadow of
men who were indispensable. These minor qualities, given a favourable
time and place, were to assist his elevation.

A letter from Lenin to Trotsky shows well how Stalin succeeded in
circumventing others without exposing himself to attack. After his
recall from Tsaritsyn, Stalin pretended to seek an understanding, to
advise Voroshilov to submit, and he asked to be allowed to show what he
could do on another sector of the Front. Lenin wrote:

>Stalin is anxious to work on the Southern Front.... He hopes that in
>actual work he will be able to demonstrate the correctness of his
>view.... In informing you, Leon Davidovich, of all these statements of
>Stalin's, I request that you consider them and reply first as to your
>willingness to talk the matter over with Stalin personally-for this he
>agrees to visit you-and second, if you think it possible to remove the
>friction by certain concrete terms and to arrange for the joint work
>which Stalin so much desires. As for me, I consider it indispensable to
>make every effort for such an arrangement with Stalin.

Trotsky, less intransigent in his actions than in the bitterness of his
memoirs, replied favourably, and Stalin was appointed to the
Revolutionary War Council of the Southern Front. There, he
unsuccessfully continued his machinations, but with greater prudence and
caution.

### 6.6

STALIN'S new appointment coincided with great historic events. On the
first anniversary of the October Revolution, the military and political
map of Europe had greatly changed. The Central Empires had suffered
disastrous defeats on the Western Front and in the Balkans; there was
mutiny in the German fleet, revolution in Bulgaria, in Austria-Hungary
and in Germany, and there were preparations for a general peace. The
economic and military intervention of the United States had enabled the
Allies to keep going in the last lap. Moreover, the end was hastened by
the so-called Bolshevik poison in the Austro-German armies, assisted in
the rear by Joffe, the ambassador of the Soviets in Berlin.

These disturbances were not yet the world socialist revolution counted
on by Lenin, but he thought he saw in them the first steps towards an
"October" with two continents for its stage. The delay in the
realisation of his expectations had made him wary without quite
depriving him of the hope of a universal social conflagration. "The
world proletariat is with us, and marches at our heels," he said, at the
least sign of revolt in the belligerent countries. "There is no issue
from this war except in revolution," he repeated on another occasion,
and later on he said more emphatically, "Only the workers and peasants
of all countries will make peace." The first rumblings of the German
Revolution led him to declare that "the crisis in Germany is beginning;
it will inevitably end in the seizure of power by the proletariat." He
was so obsessed by the course of the Russian Revolution that it seemed
to his mind the only immediate prospect open to the whole world. "World
history in these days is hastening more and more towards a world
workers' revolution."

Nevertheless he was disquieted by the victory of the Allies, a vague
menace of armed intervention in favour of the Whites in the Russian
Civil War. "We have never been nearer a worldwide proletarian
revolution, but neither have we ever been in such danger ourselves." But
there were stronger grounds for hope than for fear. In November, at the
Sixth Congress of Soviets he declared: "A whole series of countries are
invaded by the flames of the workers' revolution. Our expectations are
being accomplished, all our sacrifices are justified."

Trotsky expressed himself in similar terms: "History is developing,
perhaps against our will, but on the lines we have marked out.... The
end will be as we have foreseen ... the fall of the gods of capitalism
and imperialism.... Soviet Russia is only the vanguard of the German and
the European revolution...." Stalin did not at that time venture public
expression on these matters. The Left Communists were retracting or were
silent in face of the tangible results of Lenin's tactics.

The leaders of revolutionary Russia thought the German Revolution more
important than their own for the future of humanity. In the name of the
interests of socialism, they declared themselves ready to sacrifice the
revolution of the most backward country to that of the most advanced. In
theory Lenin thought it "obligatory to risk defeat and even the Soviet
power," if necessary, to save the German Revolution. In practice no such
eventuality presented itself. Germany only accomplished a superficial
political revolution, and the Soviet Republic had all it could do to
save itself.

For the Civil War took on greater proportions with the end of the war of
nations. Thanks to the retreat of the German armies, the Reds hastened
to occupy the Baltic and Lithuanian provinces, which were immediately
converted into little Soviet States. In the Ukraine, where fifteen
governments or so succeeded one another in less than four years, they
disputed the ground with the reactionary troops of the Hetman
Skoropadsky, the nationalist insurgents under Petlura, the anarchist
peasants of Makhno, guerilla bands of all sorts and the _haidamaks_ of
the highways and byways. In the east they penetrated into the Urals,
after having dislodged the Committee of the Constituent Assembly from
Samara and the Directory of the Social Revolutionaries from Ufa, but
they had to retreat before Kolchak's White Army under the orders of the
Omsk dictatorship protected by the Allies. In Siberia their isolated
guerilla bands fought desperately against the generals and atamans who
exercised an unbridled tyranny over vast areas.

By decree of the Executive of the Soviets, the Republic had been
proclaimed in a state of siege. To unify the commissariat for the Red
Army there was created in November a Council of Workers' and Peasants'
Defence, presided over by Lenin, with the inevitable Bureau under
Trotsky. The various organs of the State and the Party were ill-suited
to the exigencies of the situation, and it was sought to remedy the
defect by supplementary organisations. In fact the same men were to be
found in all the superior courts, and the Political Bureau of the
Bolshevik Central Committee took over more and more of the
responsibilities of the dictatorship. Stalin was one of the six members
of the new Council, a proof that Lenin and Trotsky relied on his energy
in military organisation.

On the last day of the year, Lenin telegraphed to Trotsky: "From below
Perm there are a series of messages from the Party on the catastrophic
condition of the army and its drunkenness. _I send them on to you. They
ask for you to go down there_. I thought of sending Stalin, fearing that
Smilga might be too gentle towards X..., who is said to be drinking and
unable to restore order. _Telegraph your views_." In fact the Third Army
in retreat had evacuated Perm and was in danger of leaving Vyatka
exposed to the enemy. Trotsky replied, confirming Lenin's information
and said in conclusion: "I agree to the dispatch of Stalin empowered by
the Party and by the Revolutionary Council of War." Perhaps he was not
sorry to be rid of Stalin in a northern region. It certainly was wise to
send Stalin where a firm hand was required. The Central Committee, that
is, its all-powerful Political Bureau, chose Dzerzhinsky and Stalin to
inquire into the capitulation of Perm and the defeats on the Eastern
Front, charging them to "restore at the earliest possible moment Party
and Soviet activity in the zone of the Third and Second Armies."

This meant a journey of inspection on the Vyatka Front and a mission for
the political and administrative reorganisation of the rear. "Party and
Soviet activity," in other words the functioning of the official
institutions, was to be re-established by the two special envoys. This
shows to what an extent the Soviet State was separated from the people,
and how "superior" initiative was substituted for the conscience of the
masses. Lenin's thesis on the State without bureaucrats, police or
professional army had been forgotten. But the exceptional situation
seemed to justify exceptional measures.

In publishing not long ago Lenin's dispatch on the defeat at Perm,
Voroshilov thought it necessary to falsify it by the suppression of the
words: "I send them on to you. They ask for you to go down there....
Telegraph your views." There is evident intention to conceal Lenin's
constant references of difficult situations to Trotsky, and the
confidence between the two. Voroshilov pushes complaisance so far as to
impute the journey of Dzerzhinsky and Stalin to Vyatka to the fall of
Uralsk, nearly 1,000 kilometres to the south. The reports of Stalin and
Dzerzhinsky justify no such suppositions. All they do is to demand three
regiments to reinforce the morale of the Third Army.

According to Voroshilov, who cites no documents on the subject, Stalin
denounced "the inadmissible criminal proceedings of the Revolutionary
Council of War in the direction of the Front," an obscure allusion aimed
at Trotsky. If the statement is true, it shows how little notice Lenin
took of Stalin's denunciations. Trotsky remained in supreme command
throughout the Civil War and after it.

Stalin's last report briefly indicates the principal object of his
activity. "The district Cheka has been purged, and its numbers filled by
other militants of the Party." As at Tsaritsyn he was especially
preoccupied with the police coercion. Evidently his experiences
convinced him of the possibility of a weak government maintaining itself
by force, by the physical destruction of opponents and the intimidation
of waverers. His close collaboration with Dzerzhinsky, President of the
Cheka, was not fortuitous. Their Vyatka mission appears to have lasted
two or three weeks.

Stalin did not again appear at the Front until five months later, the
interval being devoted to organising activity. He was not one of the
theorists of the Party, but considered himself no less useful, to use
his own expression, as a "practitioner." He wrote little for the press,
and had no part in elaborating communist policy at this period, when the
Third International was founded. Taking little interest in theoretical
questions, or in international problems, he took no part in the
inaugural session.

The disaster of the Spartacus League in Germany, then the assassination
of Liebknecht and of Rosa Luxemburg, had darkened the prospects of
revolution. But Lenin renounced neither his hopes nor his plans, and he
had at heart the creation of a Communist International. No one in his
Party raised any objections when he proposed to summon to Moscow the
Conference, to which, in addition to Bolsheviks of the various
nationalities inside Russia, there was only one single delegate
representing a Party, the German Communist Party. The other
participants, recruited from refugees, émigrés, exiles, represented no
one but themselves. The Spartacus delegate brought with him the
posthumous view of Rosa Luxemburg, definitely hostile to the premature
formation of a new International. This was also the definite opinion of
the Central Committee of his Party. After much hesitation, Lenin ignored
it; the Communist International was born of his will. He was not
disturbed by a modest beginning. The political fortune of his own
original group, of which he had been the only fully conscious member,
seemed to him to promise the future victory of the Communist embryo
organisation on a world scale. A few days after the conference had
transformed itself into a congress the proclamation of a Soviet Republic
in Hungary and then in Bavaria, where no Communist Party even existed,
fortified him in his illusions.

But peace was not secured at home. On the contrary, the Civil War was to
be intensified in the course of 1919, with the concentric advance of the
armies of Kolchak and Denikin on Moscow, and the march of Yudenich on
Petrograd. The Soviet Republic, cut off from its natural resources, was
for a moment reduced, in the current expression, almost to the old grand
duchy of Moscow. A _levee en masse_ and superhuman tension of the
physical and moral strength of the Party were required for the
restoration of the frontiers.

Nevertheless, the mortal menace of serious military intervention by the
Allies began to be dissipated. On this question Lenin said: "If we have
been able to exist for a year after the October Revolution, we owe it to
the fact that international imperialism is divided into two groups of
wild beasts.... Neither of these groups can dispatch any considerable
forces against us." And later: "_They could have crushed us in a few
weeks_." Replying to the boasts of his associates he said: "A few
hundred thousands of the army of millions of the _Entente_ ... could
have crushed us by military force." In fact foreign intervention was
extraordinarily capricious and incoherent, and was limited to aimless
landings. The Czechoslovak anabasis, for want of men and guns, was not
an expedition but a retreat in good order. Clemenceau's bellicose
intentions were foiled by the opposition of President Wilson and Lloyd
George; the abortive project of a conference of the various Russian
Governments at Prinkipo was symbolic of the contradictory currents.
Moreover, war weariness in Army and Navy, shown especially on the French
ships in the Black Sea, were factors against the dispatch of an
expedition.

The Civil War remained "Russian versus Russian" and the mirage of armed
intervention only played into the hands of the Reds, who were placed in
the classic pose of defending the frontiers, and stimulated in their
favour what was left of Russian patriotism. Marx's remark on the
Revolution of 1848 -- "there were none of those great foreign
complications which might have excited the energy and precipitated the
course of the revolution, stimulated the Provisional Government or
destroyed it" -- explains why the Russian Revolution benefited in the
end by danger from outside. The Allies grasped the truth later. The
Mensheviks were the first to realise it, then the Social
Revolutionaries, both of whom repudiated any connection with foreign
intervention. The Georgian Social-Democrats only, disavowed by their
Russian comrades, persisted in reckoning on armed help from the Allies.
Lenin was able to state that "in all countries, the bourgeois
intelligentsia, the Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks -- that
race unfortunately exists everywhere -- condemned intervention in
Russian affairs."

At the Eighth Congress of the Communist Party, henceforward the single
political body in the country, the military opposition was disarmed
without appeal, after secret deliberations of which minutes have not
been published. Stalin dared not openly defend them and, as usual, did
not appear on the tribune. But he succeeded in being appointed to the
drafting Committee of the resolution as representing the majority, that
is to say by simulating an opinion he did not share. His special kind of
cleverness is seen in these tactics. In the absence of Trotsky, detained
at the Front, his army proposals, put forward for him by Sokolnikov,
were unanimously voted, with Lenin's support.

The adoption of the new programme led to an academic controversy between
Lenin and Bukharin on imperialism and to a new discussion of the
national question, but without any new arguments. Against Lenin and
Riazanov, advocates of the right of self-determination, Bukharin and
Pyatakov maintained the exclusive rights of the working classes.
According to the report of the debate, Stalin sided with the Left
section, but aware of the inconvenience of open difference from Lenin,
took no public part. Once more Lenin won the declaration on the
principle of self-determination, which the Bolsheviks violated in
practice.

The Congress decided on a volte-face with regard to the peasants, robbed
and persecuted by all parties in the Civil War, and exhausted by the
pillage practised by the "commissarocracy." For Lenin, as reported by
Sosnovsky, to have spoken of stopping the "'abominable Bashi-Bazouk'
policy" towards the "middle" peasant, the Reds must have exceeded all
bounds. A series of outrageous abuses of power by the Soviet village
authorities were denounced and condemned. The peasants were reducing
their sowings, and hiding their reserves, and were on the verge of
revolt. They had to be treated with consideration, and concessions had
to be made if agricultural production was to be restored. Recalling the
question of Engels -- "might it not be necessary to repress the rich
peasants by force" Lenin declared: "_We shall not permit any violence
against the 'middle' peasant; we do not insist, as resolutely as in the
case of the bourgeoisie, on complete expropriation_." The Committee of
Poor Peasants had done its work. The decision represented paper
concessions, problematical in its application.

Ossinsky and Sapronov had already criticised the rapid degeneration of
the Party and the Soviets into a parasitic bureaucratic system. In
practice, in spite of the Constitution promulgated the year before, the
Communist Central Committee was supplanting both the Council of
Commissars and the Bureau of the Executive of the Soviets. This same
Central Committee, moreover, no longer itself existed, as a whole. Its
meetings became steadily rarer. "One man always had the threads in
hand," Lenin in policy, and Sverdlov in administration. Contrary to
Lenin's thesis before October, officials were not elected, nor
responsible to the people, but formed a privileged social class. The
local committees of the Party substituted their authority for that of
the Soviet Executive Committees; the military and police organisations
had no respect for any legal institution. In vain Ossinsky proposed to
amalgamate the Council of Commissars and the Executive Bureau of the
Soviets, to introduce into the new body the principal members of the
Communist Central Committee to assure unity and continuity of direction,
and to rationalise the administrative machine. The resolution adopted
promised reforms which the Civil War and an uneducated people rendered
impossible of realisation.

The election of the new Central Committee produced six names _on all the
lists_ of candidates, those of Lenin, Zinoviev, Trotsky, Kamenev,
Bukharin and Stalin. These six men were really the secret directing
group of the Party and the State, and were accountable to no one.
Sverdlov's death from typhus was an irreparable loss to the regime of
which he had been the principal organiser. Zinoviev and Kamenev
gradually effaced their reputation as the "October deserters" by
submission to Lenin who required docile agents for minor tasks. Bukharin
had a reputation as a theorist, and was a pleasant colleague, relatively
open and friendly. Stalin, still unknown in the Party and the country,
patiently cultivated personal relations in the ranks of higher
officials; the disappearance of Sverdlov, his former comrade in exile,
left a vacant place. The position of Lenin and Trotsky was undisputed
and indisputable.

During the Congress, Zinoviev roused a storm of acclamation by reading
the message announcing the formation of a Republic of Soviets in
Hungary, adding on his own account: "Let us hope that in Paris the radio
will soon be in the insurgents' hands." Shortly afterwards he declared,
in a manifesto issued by the Communist International for May Day:
"_Before a year has passed, the whole of Europe will have gone over to
the Soviet system_." Lenin's language was very much the same: "The
Soviet system has conquered, not only in backward Russia but in the most
highly civilised country in Europe, Germany, and in the ancient
capitalist stronghold, England." Even in America, "the most powerful and
the youngest of the capitalist countries, the Soviet system has the
sympathies of the working masses." Lenin saw soviets everywhere, saw
them in the ephemeral English Shop Steward's Committees, in the most
insignificant Strike Committees, and ventured on the premature
announcement that "the soviets are winning throughout the world." In
hasty generalisations on passing phenomena he based his general plan on
halftruths and uncertainties, sometimes on pure mistakes. "No one," he
said, "will be able to pay these unheard-of debts, or make good the
terrible ruin; in France the production of wheat has fallen by more than
half, famine is knocking at the door, the forces of production are
destroyed." Hence he concluded optimistically: "_We are sure that we
have only six really hard months to face_." The Hungarian episode led
him to declare that "the bourgeoisie themselves have recognised that no
other power but the soviets can survive," and from this peaceful change
of regime he hopefully augured that "_other countries will attain the
Soviet system by other and more humane means_."

The most critical hour had not pet struck for the Russian Revolution,
abandoned to its own resources pending the realisation of these
grandiose dreams. It was at hand with the almost simultaneous offensive
of Kolchak in the east, Denikin in the south and Yudenich in the north.

Kolchak was the first to be repulsed, and his retreat roused dissension
even among the communists. Should he be pursued into the depths of
Siberia, or should forces be drawn from the Eastern Front to meet the
disturbing advance of Denikin in the south, Trotsky leaned towards the
second course, in error as the event proved. Stalin seized this pretext
to satisfy his bitterness; he had more than once denounced Trotsky to
Lenin, but in vain. Lenin stood firmly by his rival. Early in June,
Stalin again found fault with the southern command with the underlying
design of hitting Trotsky; he insisted on penalties in terms apparently
ambiguous, but clear enough to the initiated: "The whole question is to
know whether the Central Committee will be courageous enough to draw the
necessary deductions. Will it have sufficient character and firmness?"
Though he did not see this correspondence, Trotsky sensed intrigue, and
offered his resignation.

The incident had no immediate results. But it had the double interest of
making clear the Central Committee's attitude towards Trotsky and
Stalin's methods. In fact the Central Committee replied by confirming
Trotsky in his post, assuring him of their desire to do everything to
facilitate his task on the Southern Front, "_the most difficult,
dangerous and important at the moment, and selected by Trotsky
himself_," to put all possible resources at his disposal, and to
endeavour to hasten on the Party Congress, being "_firmly persuaded that
Trotsky's resignation at this moment is absolutely impossible and would
be the greatest disaster to the Republic_." This resolution is signed by
-- Stalin.

Fresh divergence of view arose over the operations against Denikin. In
substance, Trotsky's plan was for an offensive across the working-class
regions of Kharkov and the Donetz Basin, socially favourable to the
Reds. The plan of the general staff on this Front, on the other hand,
the plan supported by Stalin, was to cross the Cossack peasant country,
which was socially favourable to the Whites. At first the Central
Committee approved the second plan, but the event showed that Trotsky
had been right. The ill-timed attack on the Cossacks drove them into the
arms of Denikin, helped the enemy, and soon wore itself out. Meanwhile
the Whites advanced into Great Russia, captured Kursk, then Orel, and
were marching on Tula, the principal arsenal of the Republic and only
zoo miles from Moscow. The error of the Staff, of the Central Committee,
and of Stalin -- of Lenin in the last resort -- cost dear in life and
war material. Also it led to an alarming situation in the South at the
very moment of extreme danger in the North.

The Seventh Red Army, weakened by many desertions and demoralised by
long inaction, was retreating on Petrograd. Stalin had spent three weeks
on this Front in June-July, at the time of the surrender of the Krasnaya
Gorka fort, easily retaken four days later. The whole affair resolved
itself into a plot quickly repressed. In this matter Voroshilov
attributes to Stalin "immense creative work," and the liquidation of "a
dangerous situation in front of Red Petrograd." In reality there is no
evidence of this in any published document of that date or for ten years
afterwards, or in any memoirs; on the contrary the position of Petrograd
grew steadily worse until October, when Lenin thought it lost and
resigned himself to its evacuation.

The abandonment of Petrograd would have been a major disaster. Trotsky
hurried to Moscow to oppose it energetically, with the help of
Krestinsky, Zinoviev, and, this time, Stalin. He wanted to defend the
city at any cost, even if it involved street fighting. Lenin submitted
to his arguments, Trotsky's plan was adopted and the Commissar for War
went to the North-West Front.

If ever situation was remedied by one man, it was in this amazing case,
as was admitted in both camps. Petrograd was panic-stricken, its fall
was announced throughout Europe, the Whites were, so to speak, at the
gates. Trotsky was the soul of the resistance. His attitude revived the
confidence of the disheartened population, aroused day by day the
initiative and confidence of the defence, and galvanised the working
classes in their adhesion to the only revolutionary Party. He was to be
seen on horseback literally under machine-gun fire, bringing back
stragglers to the front line. In a fortnight, at the cost of heavy
sacrifices, Yudenich's army was definitely defeated.

"The saving of Red Petrograd was an invaluable service to the
world-proletariat, and consequently to the Communist International. The
first place in this struggle of course belongs to you, dear Comrade
Trotsky..." said Zinoviev emphatically, in a message from the Executive
of the new International. This was the general tenor of the resolutions
of thanks and of the unanimous congratulations sent to Trotsky. In this
case Lenin had all but committed an irreparable mistake in observing to
excess the retreat tactics consciously employed a year earlier. His
collaboration with Trotsky balanced the disadvantages arising from
unlimited personal authority. Happily for the regime, its founder did
not pretend to omniscience or omnipotence, and tried to secure
collective rule.

The Political Bureau bestowed on Trotsky the Order of the Red Flag. The
revival of decorations in the army, so contrary to communist ideology,
could be explained, if necessary, as a temporary stimulus for the
soldiers, most of them uninstructed peasants; but the practice was
extended and consolidated by bestowing orders on the leaders. Originally
there was no idea of creating a Civil Order, but the first step was to
lead to a second, then a third. Trotsky had neither the rigid sense of
principle nor the political intuition to limit the evil by his own
example. Thus the rapid resumption of past customs day by day belied the
scarlet colours of the Revolution.

On the same occasion, Kamenev proposed to decorate Stalin, to the great
amazement of Kalinin, Sverdlov's nominal successor, who asked: "For
what? I can't understand why it should be awarded to Stalin." Bukharin's
reply was instructive. "Can't you understand? This is Lenin's idea.
Stalin can't live unless he has what someone else has. He will never
forgive it." Lenin had discerned Stalin's jealousy and sought to avoid
anything which might excite his enmity to Trotsky. When the decorations
were given, Stalin had the sense not to appear and no one understood why
his name was mentioned.

The Republic of Soviets celebrated its second anniversary. Contrary to
all expectations it had survived, and might last -- if it denied its own
programme. But peril persisted, and' the Southern Front was too near
Moscow. Trotsky's plan, tardily approved by Stalin on his own account,
had to be adopted. In a letter full of insinuations, the date of which
Voroshilov carefully omits to give, Stalin proposed a new plan, in
agreement with that proposed by Trotsky, and in his turn threatened
resignation, "otherwise my work at the Front would be absurd, criminal,
and futile; this gives me the right, or rather the duty to go anywhere
else, to the devil if need be, but not to remain on the Southern Front."
A severe reply from the Political Bureau called him to order. "The
Political Bureau regards the framing of your demands in the shape of
ultimatums and resignations as inadmissible." Notifications of this
nature fed his repressed hatred, the virulence and effectiveness of
which were underrated by Trotsky.

Stalin's military historiographer, his close collaborator and
subordinate, Voroshilov, declares -- after ten years' reflection -- that
before starting for the Southern Front, Stalin had secured a ruling
forbidding Trotsky to interfere in the business of his sector. If this
were the case, the Commissar for War, President of the Revolutionary
Council of War, member of the Central Committee and of the Political
Bureau, would have been excluded from the main Front. It would have been
easy to extract the confirmatory document from the archives. Voroshilov
carefully abstains from all reference to it. On the other hand the
collection _How the Revolution Armed_, vol, ii, book I, contains no less
than 80 documents relative to Trotsky's activities on the Southern
Front. Not everything that Trotsky has to say in his later writings with
regard to his quarrel with Stalin is invulnerable, but the documents
cannot be refuted; Voroshilov has not taken the risk of attempting
contradiction. Indeed the actual state of affairs can be deduced from
this polemical literature without going into details.

Early in the following year, after Denikin's defeat, Stalin was
nominated to the Caucasian Front, but evaded the task on the ground of
the malevolent interpretation which would be placed on his frequent
changes from one post to another. In reply to Lenin, ordering the
dispatch of two divisions to the Caucasus, he said: "I do not see why
the care of the Caucasus Front should rest especially on me.
Responsibility for reinforcing the Caucasus Front rests normally with
the Revolutionary Council of War of the Republic, whose members to my
knowledge are in perfectly good health, and not with Stalin who is
overloaded with work." In answer to this discourteous telegram, Lenin
insists, with an implied reproof: "It is your business to hasten the
dispatch of reinforcements from the South-West Front to the Caucasus
Front. You must help in all ways and not dispute as to whose business it
is." The interchange is characteristic of the two men.

Stalin was again engaged in military affairs in 1920 during the Polish
campaign. During the summer, the former leader of the _bojowci_
expropriators, Pilsudski, forced the exhausted Reds into another war by
advancing with the Polish army into the Ukraine as far as Kiev. By an
ironic chance, Stalin, the virtuoso of the _boyeviki_ expropriations,
was at the headquarters of the retreating army. The reverses roused a
burst of fighting energy in Russia. The Red Army of the Southwest,
having been reinforced, pulled itself together, and the Poles had to
evacuate Kiev and retreat faster than they had advanced -- more than 600
kilometres in five weeks. These suddenly altered circumstances
occasioned a sharp strategic and political difference among the
communist leaders. Trotsky and Radek argued resolutely for the
conclusion of peace. But the majority, including Lenin and Stalin,
wanted to exploit the success to the full, to develop the offensive, to
take Warsaw, and to realise after their own fashion self-determination
in Poland by helping Polish communists to establish a Soviet Republic.

They were falling into the bellicose error of the "Girondism" of the
Left Communists, and forgetting Robespierre's clear statement: "The
wildest idea that can enter the head of any politician is to think that
it is sufficient for a nation to carry their arms among another nation
to make them adopt their own laws and constitutions. No one loves armed
missionaries." The result was to stimulate Polish national unity under
pressure of a foreign enemy, instead of stimulating the class struggle.
The Central Committee had agreed with Lenin, but events proved him to be
wrong. The advance of the Reds began as an adventure, and ended in
severe defeat.

One of the causes of the catastrophe, says Trotsky, was the action of
the Southern Front headquarters, where Stalin was the leading political
personage. This can be proved without going into all the details. When
the army group commanded by Smilga and Tukhachevsky on the north had
dangerously thinned its front towards Warsaw by too rapid a march,
Stalin proposed to lead the Southern Army towards Lemberg, contrary to
his instructions to help the Northern Army group by attacking the Poles
in the flank. Stalin endangered the main action in the desire to
inscribe on his banner the capture of a great city. "Only after repeated
orders and threats did the south-western command change the direction of
its advance. But the few days of delay had already had their fatal
effect." Voroshilov passes over this feat of arms in silence.

Lenin was not the last to understand the significance of his defeat. He
referred to it frankly on several occasions. Amongst his other
commanding qualities he possessed that of often acknowledging his errors
and of learning from them. "We were wrong," is a frequent phrase in his
writings and his speeches. With regard to the Warsaw mistake, Clara
Zetkin relates in her _Reminiscences of Lenin_ that he said: "Radek
predicted how it would turn out.... I was very angry with him, and
accused him of 'defeatism.' But he was right in his main contention. He
knew the situation outside Russia, especially in the west, better than
we did." Neither was he grudging in his praise of Trotsky. More than
anyone else, he was conscious of the lack of capable men in his Party,
and he did justice to the best of them. "Good staff officers are just
the element lacking in all revolutions," wrote Engels to Marx, half a
century earlier. Lenin knew something about it by experience.

Stalin also took part with Frunze in the operations against the last of
the great White armies, levied in the south by Wrangel; but sickness
shortened his military career. Voroshilov does not attribute to him any
exploit of any particular merit on this Front. Had he any responsibility
for the cruel massacre of unarmed prisoners ordered by Bela Kun in the
Crimea after the final victory of the Reds? It must not be assumed, in
view of the uncertainty of the dates of his presence at the Front.

With this last battle, which cost the Whites a hecatomb of victims, the
Civil War drew to a close, after two years of struggle comparable only,
in modern times, by the size of the forces involved and the bitterness
of the fighting, to the War of Independence. The Russian struggle was
shorter than the American, but the technique of armaments made it more
intense and the extent of country covered by its operations made it more
costly in life. More than a year elapsed before the remnants of the
insurgent troops were dispersed in Ukraine, Siberia, Turkestan, and
before the conquest of the Caucasus was achieved. Nevertheless, the year
1920 opened for the Soviet Republic a new era, that of peaceful work.

### 6.7

STALIN emerged from the war matured and tempered. He had won no
notoriety, but under Lenin he had acquired the technique of government,
a modicum of empirical political science and confidence in himself. At
the Front he learned to hold life and human suffering cheap. And this
"hard" man among the "hards" had become still more hardened to
repression in the rear.

Around him there were many gaps. Sverdlov, the master organiser of the
dictatorship, Uritsky, Volodarsky, Chudnovsky, and many others, were
gone; his comrades and rivals in the Caucasus, S. Shaumian, called "the
Lenin of the Caucasus," and P. Djaparidze had been killed by the English
among the twenty-six commissars executed after the fall of the Baku
Commune. The decimated cadres of Bolshevism had a new world to create.
Infinite possibilities seemed to lie open to the bold survivors. What
ambitions came to birth in Stalin From some lines which he wrote later
in memory of Sverdlov, it is clear that he felt himself misunderstood
and unjustly kept in the background of events: "There are men, leaders
of the proletariat, who are not talked about in the press, perhaps
because they are not fond of talking about themselves, but who are,
nevertheless, the vital sap and the authentic leaders of the
revolutionary movement." He is certainly speaking awkwardly about
himself, in honouring Sverdlov.

He was probably voicing long harboured bitterness, but also a certain
truth. In Soviet Russia, as elsewhere, writers and orators attract
public attention without always deserving it. Usually silent in great
assemblies and unnoticed in the press, Stalin remained unknown outside
the limited circle of official politics, although he shared the
effective power wielded behind the closed doors of the Political Bureau
and the Central Committee. But unresigned to his position in the
background and unsuspecting of the future in reserve for him, he was
biding his hour with the patience and typical prudence of the peasant.

During the revolutionary days of 1917, Lenin, envisaging the possibility
of assassination, asked Trotsky: "If the Whites kill us both, do you
think that Sverdlov and Bukharin will be able to carry on?" He did not
think of Stalin as an eventual successor, nor, of course of the "October
deserters." A careful observer of men, he was incapable of error in
assessing the intellectual and moral level of his comrades and
followers, however close their relations. He told Trotsky that Zinoviev
was bold when the danger was past, an opinion confirmed by Sverdlov:
"Zinoviev is panic personified." Of certain Left Bolsheviks he had
written: "Lunacharsky, Manuilsky and Co. have no brains." His estimate
of the others of his following was not more flattering. On the other
hand he valued at their true worth his serious collaborators, supporting
and encouraging them in every difficulty.

By the tragic light of the Civil War, he no doubt discerned that Stalin
and Dzerzhinsky were the strongest characters, with the exception of
Sverdlov and Trotsky. In 1919, between two campaigns against the Whites,
he secured Stalin's nomination as Commissar for Workers' and Peasants'
Inspection, the new control organisation which was neither more nor less
"workman and peasant" in character than the other Soviet institutions,
and which only added one bureaucratic complication the more to the
machine. The utility of this Commissariat, as in the case of the
Commissariat for Nationalities, was sufficiently expressed by the fact
that the Commissar who presided over both of them spent his time at the
Front. But the choice of Stalin at that time is significant.

There is no ground for Trotsky's hypothesis that Lenin, who had only
just met Stalin from time to time before he returned to Russia, formed
an unfavourable opinion of him after seeing him actually at work. That
appears to be an anachronism. Lenin respected Stalin not for his brain
but for his fist. It was several years before he changed his opinion of
the "wonderful Georgian."

Substantially different was his appreciation of Trotsky, whose
rhetorical and romantic quality he did not like, but whose intelligence,
culture, initiative and energy he understood how to use in the interests
of the revolution. With him he shared the direction of affairs and its
responsibilities, and with him he maintained a permanent friendship,
implicit or explicit, except in case of an open difference of opinion in
which controversy was admissible. On the Bolshevik attitude towards the
peasant question he wrote in _Pravda:_ "I entirely support Trotsky's
statement. There is not the smallest disagreement between us.... I
subscribe with both hands to what Comrade Trotsky has said." On another
occasion he defended Trotsky when he was charged with excessive
severity. "If we have defeated Kolchak and Denikin," he said, "it is
because discipline is stronger with us than in all the capitalist
countries of the world. Trotsky has established the death penalty, and I
approve of this." He even gave him a signed blank paper agreeing
beforehand to his most disputed acts: "Knowing the strict character of
Comrade Trotsky's orders, I am so convinced, so absolutely convinced, of
the correctness, expediency and necessity for the success of the cause
of the order given by Comrade Trotsky that I unreservedly endorse this
order." Their fundamental agreement was not one of the least factors in
the stability of the regime.

In the division of work, dictatorial power was divided between the
Political Bureau, the Revolutionary Military Council and the
Extraordinary Commission (Cheka) -- all three extra-Constitutional
authorities. Lenin directed the first, Trotsky the second, and
Dzerzhinsky the third. In the last resort decision rested with the
Political Bureau, but, practically, Trotsky and Dzerzhinsky, each
assisted by colleagues, exercised almost unlimited authority in their
respective domains. At one time _Pravda_ was able to state that the
formula "All power to the Soviets" had been replaced by "All power to
the Chekas." The country was covered with a close network of Chekas,
superior, local, departmental, provincial and regional, without taking
into account the special Chekas for transport and other departments. At
the top of this police pyramid, the Central Cheka was responsible in
theory to the Council of Commissars, in reality to the Political Bureau.
In fact it had means of securing automatic confirmation for its actions,
except for the very rare interventions of Lenin or Trotsky acting on
direct information. The end of armed hostilities reduced military
control to the camps and garrisons, but left a ramified Cheka which
perfected itself by simplification of its operation. The Political
Bureau and the Cheka, each the instrument of the other, held the
prerogatives of government in their hands, much as in France the
Committee of Public Safety and the Committee of General Security did
under Jacobin rule. The circumstances were parallel, but not identical;
the same causes had produced analogous results.

But in Russia the machinery for coercion forged in the Civil War period
survived the circumstances which had made it necessary and historically
justifiable. Peace was not immediately attained, the professional
revolutionaries, increased in number, remained on the alert, and the
state of war, theoretically abolished, persisted under new forms, by
force of inertia and as being the easiest governmental method.

Before the Constitution was in being, the Republic of Soviets enjoyed a
semblance of constitutionalism, complex and ill-defined. Local soviets
had some power. Social-Democrats, Social Revolutionaries and Anarchists
had representatives of precarious standing in the Soviet executive. The
harried Opposition, in spite of repressive measures, issued journals
with frequent changes of name. The Communist Party as yet only exercised
a relative dictatorship; its committees and sections shared authority
within limits under a domestic regime which tolerated controversy. The
outburst of terrorism and the counter-terror was soon to change this
state of affairs.

Lenin had not been caught napping. In this matter he had never changed
his opinion, for he had written in _Iskra_ in 1901: "In principle we
have never renounced, and cannot renounce terrorism. It is an act of war
... indispensable at a certain point in the struggle," though he agreed
that terrorism "was not in itself sufficient." He had never envisaged
the terror as a permanent instrument of his "democratic dictatorship."
At first events were stronger than he, and he afterwards found it
expedient to prolong the use of means intended for exceptional
circumstances. The word "shoot" recurred like a sinister _leitmotiv_
often simply as a threat, but the violent language was in itself a sign
of weakness.

In so far as Lenin and Trotsky adopted the terrorist theory they
travestied Marxist doctrine, of which they professed themselves faithful
interpreters. They had no reply ready when confronted with Engels's
statement that terror meant "_the domination of men who were themselves
terrorised_" that it consisted of "_useless cruelties committed to give
self-confidence to men who are themselves afraid_." A considered opinion
confirmed by Marx, who praised the Paris Commune for having "_remained
innocent of the violence common in revolutions and especially in the
counter-revolutions of the upper classes_." Twenty-five years earlier
Marx had written: "_Revolution will show less bloodshed, less vengeance
and fury, in exact proportion to the degree in which the proletariat is
reinforced by socialist and communist elements_." Regarded from this
aspect the Russian Revolution showed singular poverty in those elements.

Whites and Reds accused one another of beginning reprisals in the Civil
War and of the worst exactions and persecutions. Both sides produced
many doubtful documents and many wild assertions. But pending
examination of these, there is enough truth in them to make it
unnecessary to undertake a minute study of the truth of any individual
instance; given a certain degree of horror, the variants are
unimportant. The essentials are already known before the archives have
yielded their secrets and before all the witnesses are free to speak.
Hostages shot, prisoners exterminated, the innocent massacred, villages
burnt, rape, pillage, reprisals, hangings and torture -- the whole is
too generally true for it to be worth while to verify the details.

History proves that there is nothing specifically Russian about these
abominations. There is evidence of them in all wars and revolutions.
Jaurès justly observed: "Revolutions are a barbarous means of progress.
However noble, fruitful or necessary a revolution may be, it always
belongs to an inferior and semi-bestial epoch of humanity." And might
not Lenin be said to admit this in giving the advice "_not to shrink
front barbarous methods to combat barbarism_"? Also Trotsky, in speaking
of revolution "with its heroism and cruelty, its struggle for and scorn
of the individual."

In justification of the Bolsheviks, it is fitting to quote some other
reflections of the _Histoire Socialiste de in Révolultion Française:_

>When a great country in revolution struggles at the same time against
>interior factions which are armed, and against the world, when the
>least hesitation or the least fault can affect the future of the new
>order, perhaps for centuries, those who direct this immense enterprise
>have not the time to rally the dissidents, or to convince their
>adversaries. They cannot pay much attention to discussion or
>combination. They must fight, they must act, and to guard intact their
>full capacity for action, in order not to dissipate their strength,
>they use death to create around them that immediate unanimity which
>they need.

There is nothing specifically Russian, and certainly no connection with
"experiments in socialism," in the outburst of peasant savagery caused
by centuries of despotism and Ignorance, in the awakening of atavistic
brutality roused by war between so-called civilised nations. These are
phenomena natural in the backward state of Russia, the country of which
Gorky wrote in his _Revolt of the Slaves:_

>A people brought up in a school which dwells vulgarly on the terrors of
>hell, tutored with blows of the fists, with rods and whips, cannot have
>a tender heart. A people who have been trampled down by the police will
>be capable in their turn of trampling on the bodies of others. In a
>country where iniquity has been triumphant for so long it is hard for
>the people to realise in a day the power of justice. You cannot expect
>justice from those who have never known it.

Bolshevism could not escape the psychosis of systematised murder. At the
end of the Civil War it was soaked in it. Its principles, practice,
institutions and customs had been turned into new channels by the weight
of the calamities it had endured. It was its misfortune rather than its
fault. There is a remarkable disparity between Bolshevism conservative
and Bolshevism triumphant. But in passing from "War Communism" to
communism in peace, the chosen few owed it to their doctrine, their
culture, their socialist past and their revolutionary present to move
into the "more humane path" of which Lenin spoke. To renounce that path
by adopting the dictatorship in opposition to democracy, instead of
raising themselves to the height of a synthesis, was to compromise the
future irremediably and to make the boldest effort abortive. But by
following out their own programme the Bolsheviks, with the aid of the
workers of other countries, could have made a reality of this Socialist
Federal Republic of Soviets, which was neither republican, nor
socialist, nor federal, and could have revived the soviets which had
virtually ceased to exist. Their impotence to attune speech and action,
theory and practice, confirmed the truth of a prophetic saying of Rosa
Luxemburg's: "In Russia the problem may be posed: it cannot be
resolved."

## Chapter 07: The Soviet Republic

### 7.1

WHAT remained of the Bolshevism of yesteryear at the end of the Civil
War? A changed theory with the old vocabulary adapted to changed
circumstances. A veteran Party with a tried and tested hierarchy, but
whose ranks were gradually debolshevised by the army of recruits
attracted by the magnet of power. At the Eighth Congress in 1919,
313,000 Party members were represented; in March of the next year
611,000 members.

Though the Bolsheviks were victorious, the fundamental basis of
traditional Bolshevism was outlived. Nothing of it was left except the
organisation of professional revolutionaries -- a military conception.
It is true that the original phalanx, their ranks decimated, admitted no
change, convinced that they were faithful to their original tenets in
spite of concessions to expediency. But within a very few years the
impossibility of reversing the changes made became clear.

One by one Lenin's fundamental October theses were abandoned -- soviet
democracy, the suppression of privileges, equality of remuneration, the
abolition of the professional police, army and bureaucracy, peasant
usufruct of the land, the right of self-determination. Gradually faith
in the immediacy of a Socialist world revolution, the imminence of the
end of the capitalist regime, and the Messianic belief in the universal
spread of the Russian example faded from the minds of Leninists. Doubt
began to assail the minds of the leaders, and conquered the mental
passivity of the led. As for the non-political masses, overwhelmed with
privation and poverty, they thought of nothing but day to day existence;
they fled from the famished towns, and bitterly disputed with the rural
authorities for their black bread.

"_The dictatorship of the proletariat means that never yet has the
proletariat of the capitals and the industrial centres been placed in so
terrible a position as to-day_," declared Lenin roundly; "the industrial
proletariat, in attaining its dictatorship, is enduring unprecedented
sufferings from famine." He added that the hunger in Moscow was
abominable. Later on, insisting on the same truth, he said: "_The
dictatorship of the proletariat has imposed upon the ruling class, the
proletariat, sacrifices, suffering and poverty, unprecedented in
history_." Again in 1921 he wrote: "The situation of the working class
is very hard; they suffer frightfully." And a year later: "The people
think remedies must be found for famine and terrible poverty." At that
time relative sincerity in Government declarations was the rule.

Under these tragic conditions, the requirements of food supply and
defence took precedence of everything else, to the detriment of theory
and programmes. "We have committed many faults, but we had to act as
quickly as possible, to reorganise our army supply at all costs...." In
these words Lenin sought to excuse his divergences from his political
theory, and to warn his followers against making the divergences the
rule. But he was referring rather to economic expedients than to the
dictatorial measures taken at first against his opponents, then against
all classes of malcontents, whether workmen or peasants, revolutionaries
or socialists. In publicly admitting his mistakes he did not include in
them the abandonment of soviet democracy during the terror. On this
point practice contradicted theory without eliciting any retractions
from him.

He maintained that the dictatorship was exercised "by the proletariat
organised in the soviets directed by the Bolshevik Communist Party." In
practice nothing and nobody could withstand or mitigate this monopoly of
direction, which came to mean exclusive power.

Rival parties were outlawed, in violation of the Constitution, and the
remaining Social-Democrats, who had formerly been invited to sit on the
Soviet Executive, were to pass into exile. But Martov and his comrades
formed a "legal" opposition, having accepted the October Revolution as
historically necessary, abandoned the Constituent Assembly, and even
mobilised their members in defence of the Republic. "We will give you
legal status, but will reserve power for ourselves only," said Lenin,
who, however, kept power in his own hands, but did not legalise the
position of his peaceful opponents. The Left Social Revolutionaries,
like the anarchists, were ranked as counter-revolutionary. Afterwards
the same fate befell the trade unionists, the Zionists and the most
inoffensive Tolstoyans.

Liberty of the press and the right of assembly existed only in memory.
Lenin's decree promising "complete freedom of the press" had no value
except as a museum-piece. Not only the soviets, but the trade unions and
the shop committees, were transformed into docile tools of the ruling
party. To quote Lenin again: "All the committees of the great majority
of the trade unions are composed of communists and merely carry out the
Party instructions;" and the party was under the complete control of "a
Central Committee of 19, permanent work at Moscow being carried on by
two still smaller committees, the Orgbureau (Organisation Bureau) and
the Politbureau (Political Bureau), of five members each elected in
plenary session; a real oligarchy." Lenin did not shrink from the word
"oligarchy" in spite of its implication, and he went on frankly to
declare: "Not even the simplest question ... is settled by any of our
republican institutions without instructions from the Central Committee
of our Party," that is to say from one of the two all-powerful bureaux,
from this "real oligarchy."

These words, written in 1921, expressed a profound change in the
communists, who were determined to maintain in peace time the system and
the so-called provisional methods suggested by civil and foreign wars.
Trotsky, defending terrorism in special cases, had declared: "Our task
will be easier, every citizen will have more freedom, and the pressure
of the proletarian State will be lightened with every step of our
advance." The contrary happened. Lenin also promised an early relaxation
of the dictatorship, increasing mildness of the political system. But
the "oligarchy" established summary methods of government under the
state of siege and under martial law, which imperceptibly became second
nature to the new Bolshevism.

The death penalty, abolished after the Red victory in agreement with
their original intention, was restored three months later and maintained
permanently after fighting had ceased at home and on the frontiers. At
one time the Bolsheviks, in common with other Social-Democrats in Europe
and America, joined with the International in demanding the abolition of
the death penalty. Plekhanov's statement in 1903, which they quoted as
their authority, only referred to a few exceptional cases. Lenin,
referring to the defence of Hyndman, the English socialist, of the death
penalty, criticised him for his "bourgeois and Philistine ideas." And
when he had recourse to this extreme measure at the beginning of the
Civil War, there were numerous protests from the Party -- Dybenko went
so far as to resign. But after years of practice and custom the only
communist voice raised in 1922 against the inclusion of the death
penalty in the Civil Code, the corner-stone of the dictatorship, was
that of Riazanov.

Between 1917 and 1920 Lenin had successively declared for the democratic
dictatorship of the workers and peasants, then for the dictatorship of
the workers and the poor peasants, and then for the dictatorship of the
workers. After October he did not hesitate to declare: "Yes,
dictatorship of a single party, and we will not yield an inch." He came
to the dictatorship of the Communist Party, the only one qualified in
his view to interpret the history of the revolution, and finally to the
dictatorship of its Central Committee, of its Political Bureau, of an
"oligarchy." Such was Stalin's political education.

"At the bitter end, everything will revolve around one man who will, _ex
providentia_, unite all power in himself." Plekhanov's prophecy was not
yet accomplished but, in the opinion of many communists, it was on its
way to fulfilment. "Dictatorship _over_ the proletariat" -- Trotsky's
former criticism of Lenin -- was the formula adopted by all the
opponents of the new regime. The "Old Bolsheviks" of the Right recalled
in secret their warnings in October against the "maintenance by
political terrorism of a purely Bolshevik Government." Nevertheless
Lenin personally was not inclined to personal power or to violence; he
yielded to the force of circumstances and the development of a system.

It was the embodiment on the scale of an immense State of the military
idea of the close organisation of professional revolutionaries under the
orders of the "secret circle of leaders." But during the prolonged
anxiety of years in which none dared to hope for lasting security, in
economic distress and political and social peril, the democratic habit
of the Party inherited from Social-Democracy gave place more and more to
an increasingly autocratic centralism. The consequences of six years of
civil and foreign war were not easily effaced. The Tenth Congress of the
Party had to recognise "the militarisation of the organisation" and took
measures to put an end to it, but with what success? Dictatorship and
military discipline were essential in the "conditions of the struggle
and the positive action demanded by historical facts," Bukharin was to
write. "_But if our Party ... has a military organisation, it must
naturally construct Soviet institutions in its own image_."

Military exigencies were not the only cause of this evolution. Now, as
in the past, economic disorder and peasant anarchy engendered
counteracting military methods of organisation, subordination, and
command, applied in earlier times by Peter, Alexander I and Nicholas I.
Demobilisation might increase the trouble, and consequently an empirical
solution was sought in "armies of workers," the utilisation of military
units for urgent and elementary civil tasks.

Trotsky based great hopes on this partial application of the principle
of compulsory labour, though the Mensheviks had declared that it must be
uneconomic and parasitic and doomed to failure; one of them, Abramovich,
compared the attempt to the methods employed by the Pharaohs for
building the Pyramids, and, in Russian history, to the military colonies
of Arakcheyev, who, under Alexander I, sought to mould the peasants to
garrison life on the Prussian model, out of admiration for Frederick the
Great. But Trotsky maintained that "labour armies had demonstrated their
vitality," that "this almost scientific experiment lighted up our path."
He rebutted the Menshevik argument by declaring: "The militarisation of
labour is only an Arakcheyev method when it is carried out against the
wishes of the workers themselves." This was practically an assertion of
the identity of the proposal by the "oligarchy" with the workers'
wishes, and the statement was liable to be disproved by the event.
Trotsky's statement might be paraphrased as "the same methods with other
aims." Replying to the Egyptian allusion he put the rhetorical question:
"Who are the rulers? The working class or the nobility, the Pharaohs or
the peasants?" But this simplification of the problem did not
automatically simplify the solution, and the labour armies had to be
dissolved and their failure admitted. Stalin was president of the
Council of the labour army in the Ukraine; but left no trace or
recollection of his activity.

"Who are the rulers?" No one could have answered Trotsky with certainty
at this transitional period of upheaval of the economic and social
structure. The Political Bureau certainly ruled behind the facade of the
Council of Commissars and the Executive of the Soviets, in the name of a
particular conception of the interest of the working-class majority and
of historical progress, but how clearly was that conception interpreted
and how far could it reckon on the tacit assent of the people in the
absence of conscious approval? To form any opinion on these matters some
expression, however imperfect, was necessary of the wishes and
sentiments of those workers and peasants whose sole representatives the
Bolsheviks claimed to be.

Before the October Revolution Lenin had written: "The struggle of
parties for power might develop peacefully within the soviets on
condition that the latter _renounce distortions of democratic
principles_ such as allotting one representative for 500 soldiers and
one for 1,000 workmen. _In a democratic republic attacks on principle of
this kind cannot be tolerated_." He developed the thesis in his own
fashion: "_One workman's vote is worth those of many peasants_."
Contradictions grew: "We admit neither liberty, nor equality, nor
workers' democracy if they are contrary to the theory of the liberation
of labour." Who was to be the judge of whether they were contrary? The
Party alone, that is to say its officials from the lowest to the
highest, its super-imposed committees, its responsible militants
constituting what Anglo-Saxons call the "machine" and Germans the
"apparatus," and, in the last resort, the Central Committee, its two
bureaux, in short a sovereign oligarchy whose members were co-opted.

Ever since the terror, the soviets, originally elected by the workers,
then by the active minority, had been nominated directly or indirectly
by the Party Committees, except in insignificant villages where there
were no communists. But local power did not extend beyond minor
municipal business. On instructions from the administration, the
preponderance of the Party was ensured by the mechanical control of the
machine over all the wheels of the State. Congresses of Soviets
developed into meetings strictly regulated by paid officials, and were
compelled to obey instructions from above and to vote resolutions
automatically and unanimously. This metamorphosis of the regime was
realised step by step, unconsciously, without premeditated calculation
or preconceived plan; it was the result of the general lack of culture,
of the apathy of the exhausted masses and the efforts of the Bolsheviks
to overcome anarchy.

Lenin soon realised the facts, but he could not devise any other way of
preventing counter-revolution in Russia, pending the spread of
revolution in Europe. His well-known slogan, "_We shall only attain
final victory in association with the massed workers of other
countries_," is reiterated in his important speeches and reports. "The
Russian proletariat single-handed cannot bring the socialist revolution
to a victorious conclusion, he had written in 1917 in his farewell
letter to the Swiss workers. "The complete victory of the socialist
revolution is impossible in a single country; it demands as a minimum
the active co-operation of several advanced countries, of which Russia
is not one," he said at the Congress of Soviets in 1918. "It is obvious
that only the proletariat of all the advanced countries taken together
can win the final victory," he repeated in 1919. "Victory in Russia
alone will not accomplish the revolution, without its extension to other
countries," he reiterated in 1919. "Revolution will break out in other
countries, or we shall perish," he was to say in 1921 in summing up
frankly the ideas of the Bolsheviks in October. "We have always
pronounced and repeated this elementary Marxist truth that, for the
socialist victory, the joint efforts of the workers of several advanced
countries are necessary," he wrote in 1922. Trotsky always held the same
opinion. The _A.B.C. of Communism_, by Bukharin and Preobrazhensky, a
text-book circulated by the million, said: "The workers' communist
movement can conquer only as an international communist movement." The
isolation of the Soviet Republic justified, in Lenin's eyes, every kind
of coercion for maintaining the "dictatorship of a single party."

That did not prevent him from asserting, "we stand ... for a proletarian
State based on the proletariat, whose administrative organs are elected
by the proletariat. Our State grants the proletariat all political
rights and attracts the peasants to it through the proletariat." In
spite of these confused and contradictory statements, the Constitution
became an ideal removed more and more from reality. And indeed the
privileges "granted" to the proletarians by themselves, by their own
State -- as against communist principle, which by definition aimed at
the extinction of all privileges -- could not have been anything else
but fictitious in the "terrible situation," the "unprecedented
sufferings of the famine," "poverty unequalled in history," inflicted on
this same proletariat, as Lenin admits.

Among other reasons this last turn of events had drawn from him the
admission: "_The peasants have certainly gained more from the revolution
than the working class ... which proves, indeed, that our revolution
was, up to a point, a bourgeois revolution_." Had he not in 1906 warmly
approved Kautsky for having demonstrated that the Russian Revolution
would be neither bourgeois, nor socialist) Not bourgeois, "because the
bourgeoisie is not one of the motive forces of the present revolutionary
movement in that country," nor socialist, because the revolution "could
not in any way enable the proletariat to assume alone the hegemony or
the dictatorship." The only Russian Social-Democrat, therefore, to
foretell the approaching socialist revolution and the dictatorship of
the proletariat was Trotsky, violently opposed by Lenin and the
Leninists. Now Lenin no longer admitted the contradiction when he spoke
almost in the same breath of a bourgeois revolution and the proletarian
State, of peasants gaining economic advantages and of the political
privileges of the proletariat. He generalised by defining the task of
revolutionary dictatorship to be the building of "socialism"....

It was a singular reversal of roles: before the revolution the Social
Revolutionaries, carrying on the Populist tradition, attributed a
socialist character to the future revolution, while the
Social-Democrats, both Right and Left (except Trotsky), were preparing
for a bourgeois revolution; during and after the revolution both were to
perform the exact opposite of what they had promised, except the
Mensheviks, who had not gone back on this point, but were to ruin
themselves by abdicating on behalf of the liberal bourgeoisie. Chernov
and the Social Revolutionaries defended capitalism; Lenin and the
Bolsheviks undertook, despite their theory, to impose socialism by
force.

The latter were aware, nevertheless, that the great majority of the
nation had followed them in October, not for their programme in it
entirety, but to secure peace and land. They had no answer to Rosa
Luxemburg when she wrote: "_Socialism, by its nature, cannot be
established by_ ukase. Their inconsistency was to justify her
penetrating remark that "the greatest valour and the most sublime
sacrifices of the proletariat in a single country are inevitably caught
up in a whirlpool of contradictions and mistakes."

But while Lenin justified the "dictatorship of a single party," and
eventually an "oligarchy," in the name of the socialism which he was
trying to establish in a country of whose immaturity he was aware, he
replied to Kautsky's complaints by saying that "the soviet power is a
thousand times more democratic than the most democratic of the bourgeois
republics." He based his remarks on the text of the Constitution, which
reserved for the exploited on paper many of the liberties refused to
exploiters and parasites. But apart from the fact that the letter of the
Constitution remained dead, Rosa Luxemburg had refuted the sophistry in
advance, by showing that a franchise limited to workers would only be
useful in a society able to assure all its members of useful work, and
"a decent life worthy of civilisation." She admitted the impossibility
in Soviet Russia of satisfying this primary demand of the toiling
masses, who were thus deprived of all rights, and she concluded by
citing the Marxian axiom that "it is the mission of the proletariat on
attaining power to substitute for bourgeois democracy a socialist
democracy, not to destroy all democracy."

But in order to understand Lenin, driven to expedients by the necessity
of self-preservation of the Bolshevik State, and compelled to contradict
himself by the cruel paradox inherent in the situation of a
revolutionary vanguard in power isolated in the midst of a backward
country, account must be taken of his absolute disinterestedness in the
service of socialism and of his unyielding frankness to the working
people whose cause he espoused. So far from idealising either his own
acts or those of the helpers sheltered by his prestige, he looked the
bitterest reality in the face and called a spade a spade -- defeat,
retreat, compromise, error, bore their true names. If the policy of the
Party sometimes was guilty of demagogy, it was against his will; he
waged incessant war on self-satisfaction, and continually encouraged
healthy honest self-criticism among his followers, by precept and by
example. Less self-deceived than any of his comrades, he was always the
first to admit "we have made a mistake." In this connection his words at
the beginning of the new regime must be quoted: "We are only beginning
our task in Russia and at the moment we are making a bad beginning," and
his advice to European workers that they should say to themselves: "What
the Russians are doing badly, we shall do better." This was not the
first time that he told his followers bitter truths, and it was not to
be the last.

### 7.2

THE Political Bureau, the supreme organ of the dictatorship, whose very
existence remained unsuspected not only in Russia at large but for a
long time among the communist rank and file, was originally a secret
insurrectionary Directorate elected by the Central Committee at the
instance of Dzerzhinsky, a few days before the _coup d'état_. It
consisted of seven members: Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, Zinoviev, Kamenev,
Sokolnikov, and Bubnov. The rules of the Party did not provide for it,
but experience in action showed it to be indispensable. The difficulty
of calling urgent plenary meetings of the scattered Central Committee
had given rise before this to a "small Central Committee" of eleven
members who shared current responsibilities among themselves.

The seizure of power restored its function to the Central Committee, but
the course of events and the exigencies of intensive and varied activity
were soon to necessitate the creation of a new Political Bureau composed
this time of four members (chetvyorka): Lenin, Trotsky, Sverdlov and
Stalin, bound, before coming to any decision, to consult members of the
Central Committee who might be in the Smolny Institute at the time.
During the Civil War, Trotsky and Stalin were generally, like most of
their colleagues, at the Front; Lenin and Sverdlov carried on the work
of the Politbureau or of the Central Committee by themselves, seconded
by Krestinsky, and at times by Kamenev, Bukharin, Preobrazhensky or
Serebriakov, On important occasions, One body or other was specially
summoned. There was no conflict of powers; it was necessary to act
quickly and as effectively as possible, to shorten preliminaries and to
economise strength by sharing responsibility.

Alongside the Politbureau, there was the secretariat of the Central
Committee, conducted at first with the assistance of an energetic
fellow-worker, Helen Stassova. This modest task had gained no special
position in the hierarchy such as was afterwards confided to an equipage
of five persons under the control of Sverdlov. When Sverdlov died, no
successor of his calibre was found. Kalinin succeeded him as President
of the Executive of the Soviets, while Stalin gradually absorbed his
administrative functions at the Central Committee. Stassova continued to
act as secretary, assuming an increasingly dictatorial manner which
presently led to her being shelved.

As the Party grew in numbers and the dictatorship became stricter, it
became necessary to strengthen the permanent administration and to
define separate functions. With a membership of five -- Lenin, Trotsky,
Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev -- the Politbureau handed over some of its
administrative function to the Orgbureau (created in 1919) with the same
number of members. The two bureaux had a common secretariat consisting
of Krestinsky, Preobrazhensky and Serebriakov. This was the summit of
the edifice.

Under this system, the Central Committee properly so-called sat in
plenary session at long intervals, and could do no more than ratify the
reports and resolutions of its leaders and officials. In reality the
Politbureau was gradually to reach almost absolute power, qualified only
in decreasing measure by what public opinion was left within the Party
ranks, instructed, disciplined and directed by a monopoly press. The
Council of Commissars, the Executive of the Soviets, the Council of Work
and Defence, the Supreme Economic Council, the Revolutionary Council of
War, the Cheka -- all the administrative organs of the State, were
subject to it in fact, if not by Soviet law, and the Party was the main
bulwark of the bureaucracy under which "sympathisers" and "non-party"
men filled minor posts.

Trotsky alone of the Five of the Politbureau has published memoirs
throwing some light on the personal relations of its members. "When I
disagreed with Lenin," he says, "I mentioned it aloud, and, when I
thought it necessary, even appealed to the Party." But Stalin, Zinoviev
and Kamenev, if they disagreed with Lenin, "which happened much more
often than in my case, usually kept silent about it, or, like Stalin,
sulked and hid away for a few days in the country somewhere near
Moscow." Trotsky declares that differences between Lenin and himself
were rare; they understood one another with few words; spontaneously and
independently they reached the same conclusions. "Many a time," he says,
"Stalin, Zinoviev, or Kamenev disagreed with me on some question of
great importance, but as soon as they learned that Lenin shared my
opinion, they lapsed into silence." We may regard the readiness of the
"disciples" to renounce their own ideas in favour of Lenin's in any way
we choose, but this readiness clearly contained no guarantee that
without Lenin they were capable of arriving at the same conclusions.

The question arises of the value of Trotsky's testimony, necessarily
laid under heavy contribution in any study of the men and the events of
this period. Credence can obviously be given to irrefutable documents
and to facts well-known and verifiable in Russia and in the
international revolutionary movement. It is equally certain to anyone
knowing anything of the man and his character that remarks repeated from
memory have in no case been invented and may be accepted as genuine
except for the exact words. But caution must be exercised in using
passages dealing with internal dissensions in which Trotsky, sometimes
unconsciously, modifies statements to suit himself and changes the
facts, for example, by errors in date. His wilful temper leads him to
distort his recollections on lines to which everything is made to
conform in a more or less arbitrary fashion. Though he is exact in his
memory of ideas, he seems to Suffer from amnesia with regard to his
manifest errors and contradictions and his conflicts with Lenin, the
importance of which he tends to minimise. Moreover, he remembers only
the failings and misdeeds of personages who have broken with him, and
only the virtues and services rendered of the very few who have retained
faithful to him; he is more impartial if they disappeared too early to
have had the opportunity of disavowing him. He is malevolent towards
Stalin from a fundamental contempt which does not exclude the truth but
which calls for prudence and discretion in using his material.

Trotsky admits that his relations with Lenin were shadowed on the
occasion of a discussion on trade unions in 1920. Stalin and Zinoviev
obtained, so to speak, legal means of transferring their conflict from
the wings to the stage itself. They did their utmost to make use of the
situation. It is proved that Stalin cherished jealous and tenacious
enmity, dating from friction in the Civil War, against the most
brilliant of the revolutionary leaders. But even the reading of Trotsky
does not explain Zinoviev's motives. Trotsky does not explain why
Lenin's closest auxiliaries showed hostility to him on every favourable
occasion. Probably the old rivalries of the émigré period were revived
as soon as the counter-revolution was mastered. And Trotsky, rather
haughty and distant, convinced of his superiority, could not cause them
to be forgotten.

The Party, quite unaware of the dissensions at the top, was surprised by
the discussion on trade unions. The weariness caused by the years of
civil war and the iron discipline imposed induced a certain intellectual
and political torpor, shaken only on the occasion of the annual
deliberative assemblies. This time outspokenness in the ranks produced a
violent shock.

In 1920, at the Ninth Congress, there were signs of opposition against
the dictatorial methods of the Central Committee, and energetic attacks
upon the bureaucratic "degeneration" of the "oligarchy." According to
Yurenev, the high officials of the Party stifled the right of criticism
by getting rid of the protestors by measures amounting to administrative
exile. "One is sent to Christiania, another to the Urals, a third to
Siberia." Maximovsky denounced the despotism of the ruling bureaucracy
and declared: "_Fish are said to begin to putrefy from the head
downwards. The Party is beginning to suffer at the top from the
influence of bureaucratic centralism_." Sapronov, becoming more and more
the mouthpiece of these views, declared that no notice was taken of the
decisions of the Congress of Soviets; commissars took upon themselves
the illegal arrest of "whole provincial executive committees." He said
from the tribune: "It's all very well to talk of electoral rights, of
the dictatorship of the proletariat, of the tendency of the Central
Committee to the dictatorship of the Party; in fact, this leads to the
dictatorship of the bureaucracy of the Party." And he asked Lenin
_whether he believed that the salvation of the revolution lay in
mechanical obedience_. A workman, Lutovinov, said: "The Central
Committee, and especially its Orgbureau, has been transformed from a
supreme directing organisation into an executive dealing with the most
minute and unimportant matters"; it interfered arbitrarily in the
smallest details, and nominated even the most obscure officials.
Yakovlev declared that the Ukraine had become a place of exile.
"_Comrades unwanted for one reason or another at Moscow are deported
there_."

The Opposition chose solid ground in demanding _democratic centralism_
in accordance with traditional Party theory. But they put themselves at
a disadvantage by insistence on parliamentary forms and by the
inconsistency of their principal demand -- the collective or
"_collegium_" administration of businesses, in spite of the costly
lessons of experience which induced Lenin to restore personal technical
management. The Central Committee was unanimous in turning down this
proposal.

At the end of that year the inextricable difficulties of productive
enterprises, of the exchange, and of food supply led Trotsky to raise
boldly and fully the question of the place of trade unions in economic
life. He had saved the transport industry for the time being by applying
to it crude army methods, with a perseverance recognised by Lenin and
the whole Party. Inspired by these first results of the system, he
thought it opportune to extend it generally by incorporating the trade
unions in the State and transforming them into governmental institutions
for industrial purposes. This idea of a "democracy of producers" meant
obligatory trade unionism for the workers, and for the trade unions
subjection to the political and economic administration of the State,
that is, to the Communist Party. Under Trotsky's plan the trade unions
would have had no functions, other than participation in production, in
the workers' State.

Lenin did not agree. The War Commissar's methods had already caused
bitter conflict in the transport workers' union, and threatened the
destruction of the whole trade union movement. The failure of the
experiments in militarisation was conclusive. The hour had come to
alleviate the pressure exercised on the working classes, not to make the
yoke heavier. To make the trade unions State organisations would be
premature. Lenin summoned to his side his regular co-workers, Stalin,
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Kalinin, with trade union leaders such as Tomsky and
Rudzutak, and prevented Trotsky from carrying out his plan.

The State of which Trotsky spoke was an abstraction, he said in a heated
debate. "_Our State is not one of workers, but of workers and
peasants"_; moreover, "_one with many bureaucratic deformities_." The
trade unions had to defend the workers' interests against a State of
this kind. "_Such is the sad reality_." The notion of a producers'
democracy is inconsistent, a syndicalist error. "_Production is a
continuous, democracy an occasional, necessity_." And after referring to
the thousands of communist mistakes, he reiterated: "_We have committed
many mistakes, certainly. Perhaps most of our decrees require
modification. I agree absolutely_." But that, he thought, was no reason
for plunging into Trotsky's infinitely more serious error.

Trotsky was supported by Dzerzhinsky, Rakovsky, Bukharin, Sokolnikov,
Pyatakov, Andreyev, and by the three Party secretaries-Krestinsky,
Preobrazhensky and Serebriakov. For a moment Lenin was in a minority on
the Central Committee. Once more he had to manoeuvre, to temporise, to
wear down the solid bloc of his opponents. Keeping in the background as
much as possible, he used every possible means of checkmating them,
including Zinoviev's demagogy and Stalin's astuteness. The discussion
soon took a bad turn, and degenerated into venomous polemics. Trotsky
was very successful with large audiences, but Stalin and Zinoviev, under
the aegis of Lenin, easily counteracted him among officials who were
former militants, by lavish promises and by exploiting the various
resentments and grievances left by the Civil War.

The Party decided rather by intuitive and personal reasons than by
defined principles. The two "platforms" advocated at meetings held by
the two sides were not strikingly differentiated; indeed both used many
common formulas, democratic truisms, and pedantic and obscure terms.
Both sides talked of the great historic mission of the trade unions. But
had the time come to incorporate them in the State? The last Party
Congress had said so, and Trotsky might make use of it. Lenin did not
deny the fact but begged for no hurry in applying the decision. Trotsky
maintained that incorporation was already being accomplished. Zinoviev
accepted the principle and contented himself with discussing methods.
The trade unions are a school of communism, Lenin maintained, and
Trotsky did not assert the contrary. This Byzantine controversy,
regarded by Lenin as an "inadmissible luxury" and a threat of schism,
lasted for several months, rousing passion and even hatred. "_The Party
is sick, the Party is feverish_," said Lenin anxiously.

The Tenth Congress was summoned to effect a composition between the two
opposed groups. But more groups appeared in support of the great ones'
quarrels. The almost recognised Opposition for Democratic Centralism,
represented especially by Bubnov, Boguslavsky, Ossinsky and Sapronov,
regarded the two principal groups as representing two tendencies of "one
and the same group of former advocates of the militarisation of economic
life"; for their part they merely proposed practical measures of
reorganisation of the administrative centres of industry and of the
trade unions. The Workers' Opposition, with Shliapnikov, Alexandra
Kollontai, Lutovinov and others, advocated investing the trade unions
not only with the administration as well as With the work of production,
they desired also the "syndicalisation" of the State. Riazanov, almost
alone in his opinion, denied the trade unions any part in economic life;
their sole function Was the defence of corporate interests. Nogin
foresaw the disappearance of the trade unions through their fusion with
the State economic administration. But attention was concentrated on the
propositions advanced by Lenin and Trotsky.

Stalin's visible share in this crisis was limited to one article, _Our
Differences_, in which he paraphrased in simple phraseology,
didactically and with many repetitions, Lenin's arguments against the
application of bureaucratic, military methods in the trade unions.

After repeating that "our differences are not differences of principle,"
Stalin goes on to say:

>There are two methods: the method of force (the military method) and
>the method of persuasion (the trade union method). The first by no
>means excludes all persuasion, but such persuasion is subject to the
>exigencies of the method of force, which it is intended to supplement.
>The second method also does not exclude some degree of force, but this
>force is subject to the exigencies of the method of persuasion, which
>it is intended to supplement. It is as inadmissible to confuse these
>two methods as it is to put the army and the working classes into the
>same bag.

This stylistic example is very characteristic of his writings.

The army, Stalin continues in effect, is made up mainly of peasants;
that is why methods of force are necessary, as otherwise the peasants
would not fight for socialism. But the workers, "a homogeneous social
class, organise themselves voluntarily into trade unions, and are 'the
salt of the Soviet State.'" He summarises his argument as follows:
"Comrade Trotsky's mistake is to underestimate the difference between
the army and the working class, to put military organisations and trade
unions on the same level, to try by inertia to transfer the military
methods of the army to the trade unions, to the working classes." The
article reproaches Trotsky with "following out the same old
semi-bureaucratic, semi-military line," and, in a calm and judicial tone
giving no idea of the bitterness of the conflict, it argues for the
necessity of the "normal methods of proletarian democracy in the trade
unions" and for the use of "methods of persuasion."

In March 1921, the Tenth Congress put an end to the interminable
argument by supporting Lenin with 336 votes against 50 for Trotsky and
18 for the Workers' Opposition. The resolution adopted was modified a
year later, and the disputants agreed that the fevered discussion had no
real relation to the problem. Peremptory assurance on one side,
categorical certainty on the other -- without considering the injury
inflicted on the common task.

How came Trotsky and his friends to make the tactical mistake of
provoking a pitched battle in which defeat was a foregone conclusion? At
the time a struggle for supremacy in the Party meant raising the
question of power. Lenin did not so much criticise the principles of the
propositions themselves as the method of creating conflicting communist
groups, at the risk of schism. The rally of strong personalities round
Trotsky alarmed him as a symptom of future danger, and led him to lay a
tighter hand on the Party administration and to use only the most docile
instruments for the purpose. Instead of strengthening confidence in him,
Trotsky had awakened the distrust of former opponents, who now sought to
isolate him. All his supporters, except four, were driven from the
Central Committee -- limited to 25 members and 15 deputy-members, and
among the victims were the three too independent secretaries --
Krestinsky, Preobrazhensky and Serebriakov. They were succeeded by the
passively obedient Molotov, with two assistants. Stalin was a member
both of the Orgbureau and Politbureau and worked for his future in
silence.

The Congress carried on its deliberations in an atmosphere of suspicion
and vigilance; the session coincided with an outburst of popular
discontent. The Petrograd workers showed signs of revolt, the Kronstadt
sailors threatened violence, the Red Army grumbled, there were definite
peasant revolts in several districts, notably in the Tambov government.
It was not a matter of "growing pains" in the trade unions, but of a
real crisis in the revolution. It was no longer a matter of minor
defects in the machinery such as were daily noted in the official press,
but of a serious disease in the Soviet body politic. Bread, fuel,
essential foodstuffs were lacking in town and country. Production,
transport and trade were paralysed. In vain the terrorist dictatorship
hoped to meet the crisis by requisition and repression; without a rapid
change of tack the Soviet Republic would be on the rocks.

The Party had no foresight, but the first flicker of revolt sufficed to
show Lenin the mistakes in his policy. While the Congress, knowing that
the army could not be relied upon, was mobilising its members to crush
rebellion, Lenin prepared his New Economic Policy, substituting taxes in
kind for requisitions and restoring a limited freedom of internal trade.
A hundred and forty members of the Congress departed for Kronstadt, a
dangerous point because of its proximity to Petrograd and the
possibility of foreign assistance. Trotsky took charge of the sanguinary
business. Three hundred delegates were mobilised at a sitting. Before
the vote on the trade unions was taken, the delegates from the peasant
districts began to hurry home. "The Congress is fading away," said the
President, Kamenev. Stalin delivered his customary discourse on the
national question to a distracted audience, a discourse "with no
relation to time or space," said Zatonsky. The Democratic Centralist
Opposition did not push their argument. The Workers' Opposition, accused
of Syndicalist heresy, alone persisted against the majority. The
Congress, concerned with Kronstadt and guns, cut short its sittings.

### 7.3

THE economic situation steadily deteriorated from the first days of the
revolution onwards. Contrary to their programme, the Bolsheviks had
undertaken to introduce socialism -- that is communism-without any
transition, in a country whose unpreparedness they were the first to
admit, at a time when stocks of food in the depopulated towns and the
village reserves were exhausted. Driven by the desperate necessities of
civil war and by the mystical-romantic strain inherited from anarchism,
they destroyed all private enterprise, though they could not replace it
by popular initiative; they confiscated the product of individual labour
before they had created collectivist production.

The "privileged" classes, workers and soldiers, maintained a bare
existence on a wretched ration, while the peasants, many of them half
starved and all of them infuriated, defended themselves by concealing
supplies, by refusing to sow, and now and then by arms. The
"abominations of the Bashi-Bazouks," referred to by Lenin at a Communist
Congress, still went on. Official resolutions promising considerate
treatment of the peasants proved to be mere empty phrases, as were so
many decrees, laws, instructions and circulars, like the Constitution
itself. The 1920 harvest could not be other than disastrous. With an
industry twenty per cent less effective than before the War, finances
wrecked by the unlimited issue of paper-money, and foreign trade reduced
to illicit and secret barter, the Soviet economy was evidently
insolvent.

Later on Lenin called this War Communism, a formula designed to justify
his policy after the event by the extraordinary circumstances of the
time. But he contradicted himself once more by admitting the
responsibility of the communists for the policy of blind and cruel
spoliation. "_We have made many mistakes," he said, "and it would be
most criminal not to recognise that we went too far_." He admitted their
failure in this matter. "_We have been defeated on the economic front,
heavily defeated_," he said, and added more precisely: "Our attempt to
_attain communism straightaway_ has cost us a more serious defeat than
all those inflicted on us by Kolchak, Denikin and Pilsudski." Insisting
on past errors, he continued: "_Generally we thought it possible ... to
begin without transition to build up socialism_." In fact, at one time
his utterances were propagandist and encouraging to prevent despair, at
another critical and truthful to destroy illusions or over-optimism.

War Communism was in fact at first a partly unconscious effort, then a
conscious and determined one, towards establishing socialism "by
assault." The authorised theorists of a party which claimed to follow
Marxism had forgotten its least controvertible economic postulates in
the madness of political success, as is abundantly proved by their
conviction in 1920 that they could dispense with money. At that time
Trotsky wrote in a manifesto: "Money wages tend more and more to be
replaced by payment in kind; the continual issue of paper-money and its
rapid fall in value merely attest the disappearance of the old financial
and commercial system." At the end of that year the communist press
announced free food for workmen and employees as "a further step towards
the abolition of one of the capitalist survivals under the Soviet regime
-- the monetary system," as the end of the "fetish of money," since the
public services -- transport, housing, lighting, amusements -- were all
to be free. _(The A.B.C. of Communism_ provided for the use of money in
a socialist society before communism was attained.) Less than a year
later Lenin, in a metaphor perhaps inspired by Thomas More, was advising
strict care of gold in Russia until the time should come, "when we have
conquered the whole world," to build in the public squares lavatories of
gold.

Neither the socialisation of banks and of capital, nor the
nationalisation of industry, nor the collectivisation of agriculture
satisfied the plans of the October victors. Before the _coup d'état_,
Lenin, replying to the allegations of the bourgeois press that
nationalisation and confiscation were equivalent, declared his real
intentions with perfect frankness; he said the Bolsheviks on attaining
power would nationalise the banks "_without taking a kopeck from any
owner of property_," because for the Bolsheviks nationalisation simply
meant effective control. Similarly the syndicalisation of industry or
obligatory cartellisation "_would make no change as regards property and
would not take a kopeck from anybody_." Lenin repeated "not a kopeck"
several times. The suggestion of the expropriation of the peasants was a
malicious invention, "for even in case of a real socialist revolution,
socialists would not and could not expropriate the small peasant." These
various promises ended in the complete socialisation of banking,
industry and agricultural production. In the passion aroused by attacks
on the revolution, they went on from "the expropriation of the
expropriators" to the expropriation of the expropriated.

The seizure by the State of works and factories was no more a part of
the Bolshevist than of the western socialist programme. Combating "the
infantilism of the Left" in 1918, that is the utopists hoping for
immediate, outright socialism, Lenin wrote: "We have already
confiscated, nationalised, broken and destroyed more than we can do
with." But the hostility of the owners and the technical staffs, the
hopeless failure of workers' control, the incapacity of the trade unions
in technique and management, the Brest Treaty with clauses protecting
German property, pillage and the abandonment of industrial undertakings
following on civil disturbance -- all were incentives to the adoption of
a radical solution. (The State monopoly of cereals was adopted under
Kerensky in similar conditions, because no other course was open to
him.) Nevertheless, instead of seizing the earliest occasion of
demobilising the industrial army, the Bolsheviks were to end by
idealising a makeshift, and under pretext of "seizing stolen goods,"
were to exist by seizing goods that no one had stolen. This negation of
their principles, aggravated by misreading their own social theory, led
to the terrible miscalculations of which the Kronstadt insurrection was
the culminating episode.

The protest of the workers and sailors, originally absolutely pacific,
was reflected by the discontent of the Petrograd proletariat, worn out
by privation, disappointment and the brutal behaviour of the
"Commissarocracy." At the end of February there were a great many
strikes in the northern capital, and workers' meetings to demand bread
and liberty, reform of the Soviets and the restoration of trade.
Socialists of various shades seized the opportunity of shaping the
agitation in conformity with their views. The communists replied by
arrests, the closing down of factories where there was agitation, the
suppression of demonstrations. Zinoviev, President of the Petrograd
Soviet, simply used police methods.

But cold and hunger, lack of coal and the reduction of rations -- due
partly to the stagnation of the railways -- roused the people. The crews
of the ships and the garrison at Kronstadt held an important meeting at
which Kalinin himself was received With all the honours, with music and
bunting. They passed a resolution demanding, in accordance with the
Soviet Constitution and the Bolshevik October Programme, free elections
for the Soviets; liberty of speech and liberty of the press for workers
and peasants, Left Socialists, anarchists, trade unions; the liberation
of workers and peasants who were political prisoners; the abolition of
the privileges of the Communist Party; equal rations for workers; the
right of non-profiteering peasants and artisans to sell their products.
A deputation sent to Petrograd was Imprisoned. Zinoviev had no other
argument.

Thereupon a provisional revolutionary Committee was elected at
Kronstadt, where most of the communists had joined the movement. They
merely issued proclamations, but that was enough to alarm Zinoviev, who
infected Moscow almost with panic. The Council of Labour and Defence
replied by decreeing a state of siege and denouncing the
counter-revolution, Social Revolutionaries, the White Guards, the Black
Hundreds, French espionage, Russian Generals.... This was conflict, not
conciliation. Bloodshed became inevitable. After a fruitless summons to
surrender, Trotsky ordered the bombardment of those he had once called
"the pride of the revolution."

If the sailors and workmen of Kronstadt had meditated a plot or prepared
a plan, they would have waited for the thaw which would make their
fortress impregnable and expose Petrograd to the guns of the fleet. But
they hoped to win simply by the justice of their claim, and the
solidarity of the Russian labouring classes. The sons of poor peasants,
most of them destitute, they knew they were the interpreters of the
people's grievances. Their political sincerity and their fidelity to the
revolution were both beyond doubt. But the heavy "machine" of the
Bolshevik Party was no longer sensitive to the purity of the best
intentions. Attacked on the ice by the _Kursanti_ (selected cadets), the
mutineers defended themselves, becoming rebels in spite of themselves.
The Red Army, when ordered to attack the forts, refused to march. It had
to be purged, reorganised and strengthened with communists arriving from
the Tenth Congress. By a sinister and ironical chance the Kronstadt
Commune perished on March 18th, the fiftieth anniversary of the Paris
Commune.

Some victories do not inspire boasting. Trotsky devotes just two lines
in _My Life_ to the Kronstadt affair, drawing attention to it as a "last
warning" to his Party. Too much importance must not be attached to the
vulgar diatribes of Bolsheviks anxious to discredit the defeated party,
but it is probable that the counter-revolutionaries sought to share in
the rising in order to turn its course to their advantage. But who was
mainly responsible? Trotsky made it clear enough when he wrote: "The
system of famine rations was associated with increasing disturbances
culminating in the Kronstadt insurrection." And famine rations were the
consequence of the so-called War Communism, tardily abandoned by Lenin
after this "last warning."

But the legitimate character of the rebels' claims was implicitly
confirmed by the change in policy, proposed by Lenin at the Tenth
Congress, the adoption of the New Economic Policy, the N.E.P., which was
to correct disastrous utopian measures. The essential requirements of
the exhausted population were satisfied by putting a stop to rationing
and arbitrary confiscation, by permission to small producers to sell
their goods, by reopening the markets -- in short by the restoration of
limited and controlled capitalism. Even if political aspirations were
still brutally crushed, economic relief appeared to mark the first step
towards better times.

The N.E.P. brought solace to the country, but caused stupefaction in the
Party. The distracted militants obeyed, without understanding. Riazanov
was almost alone in daring to protest against Lenin's unusual procedure
in brusquely Imposing a volte-face of this kind without preliminary
consultation or any chance of consideration. The Workers' Opposition
echoed him, but raised no serious objection to the accomplished fact.
The gravity of the situation prevailed over formalism. "_If we had not
transformed our economic policy, we should not have lasted many months
longer_," Lenin told the next Congress.

The Party followed with docility, but somewhat unwillingly, before
expressing its astonishment once more at the clear vision of its leader.
But Lenin, in fact, acted late, and was by no means a pioneer. Had not
Trotsky, two years earlier, invited the Central Committee, through
Stalin, to wipe out the abuses which were overwhelming the "middle"
peasants on the Volga and to punish the Soviet officials responsible?
Did he not propose, next year, to replace requisitions by a graduated
tax in kind, to establish a fair exchange of manufactured goods for
agricultural products in order to stop the decay of rural life? Lenin
thought to refute him by accusing him of being a "free trader," and the
Central Committee rejected his proposal by eleven votes to four. Stalin,
as usual, figured among the majority. Two months before Kronstadt, at
the Congress of Soviets, the Menshevik Dalin advocated the tax in kind
and the right of the peasant to dispose of his surplus. Lenin was not
the first to make the proposal, and in this case showed none of the
genius claimed for him by his disciples -- genius which he really did
display in October; what he did show was a supple intelligence quick to
recover after a brief divergence into error.

With the N.E.P. Lenin yielded ground on the economic front in order to
maintain the political privileges of the Party. He returned to some
extent to his true programme and applied the tactic of compromise to
relations between classes at home which he had used with success in
relations with capitalist countries. In this matter his ideas were clear
enough. On the morrow of the Great War he dictated to Chicherin a note
to the Allies offering to recognise loans and debts, to give economic
and even territorial concessions. In 1921 he advised German Communists
to accept the Versailles Treaty as the Bolsheviks had accepted the Peace
of Brest-Litovsk. His belief in an inevitable world revolution enabled
him to reconcile rigid theory with the devices of concession and
compromise. He instinctively conformed to Napoleon's law of war, "the
art of which is merely to gain time when one has inferior forces," and
who considered principles as the ranges dominating the surrounding
valleys.

The complex problems to be solved at home did not lend themselves to the
relatively simple solutions adopted in foreign relations. Lenin felt
justified in tacking to meet the wind, in circumventing obstacles, in
zigzagging back and forth. More than once he emphasised the fact that
there were no books teaching how to make a successful revolution, and
that, as Marx had not settled all doubtful points, they must learn to
help themselves with his help. The N.E.P. was not a sudden idea, but a
change of orientation, followed by gropings and discoveries, by a series
of decrees successively rectified or completed. It implied the
restitution of houses on conditions, the leasing of small and
medium-sized enterprises to their former proprietors, the letting of
factories, concessions to foreigners, the re-establishment of wages, the
rehabilitation of money, the restoration of private trade, and the
suppression of free public services. Nobody knew quite how much ground
must be abandoned. "_We have been defeated in our attempt to attain
socialism 'by assault'_," explained Lenin, to encourage the shaken
morale of the Party, but "not defeat itself, but the fear of recognising
it is the greatest danger." Six months later he announced a "further
retreat," and within a year the "end of the retreat."

His many scattered and fragmentary definitions of the N.E.P. emphasise
now one aspect, now another, as occasion demands. One of the least
satisfactory is that which affirms the necessity "_of abandoning the
immediate building of socialism to revert in many economic matters
towards State capitalism_." On the subject of State capitalism he
directed attention to a pamphlet of 1918 in which he had written: "If
revolution is delayed in Germany, we shall have to study German State
capitalism, to imitate it as best we can, not to be afraid of
dictatorial measures to hasten the assimilation by barbaric Russia of
western civilisation, and not to shrink from barbarous methods to fight
barbarism" -- a rescript more deeply engraved in the memory of his
successors, and especially of Stalin, than any other.

It is not easy to find a brief textual statement of his general
argument, so important, in the later development of the Bolshevik
regime. Quotations from various writings, reports, speeches, and
commentaries, give a general idea of it.

First we notice a revision of his view as to the immediacy of an
international revolution: "Confident expectation of the world revolution
does not imply expecting it at a fixed date ... its development which
grows with increasing rapidity may bring revolution in the spring, but
it may not." In 1919 he still thought that "the disintegration of German
imperialism is leading Germany not only to republicanism but to the
socialist revolution." In 1920 he prophesied with conviction that "the
day is not far distant when we shall march hand in hand with the German
Soviet Government." In 1921 his embarrassment is shown by statements
contradictory in themselves, such as: "International revolution is
growing. But it would be simple folly to suppose that we are going to
receive immediate help in the shape of a lasting proletarian
revolution."

On State capitalism, which he considers a great step forward for Soviet
Russia, Lenin writes: "it is a capitalism which we can and should admit,
because it is indispensable for the peasant masses." He recalls the
well-known theory that "capitalism is an evil by comparison with
socialism; it is a good thing in companion with the feudal system, or
with small scale production." Concessions -- "alliance or economic
marriages with capitalism" -- are necessary in the most backward of
great European countries: "concessions are perhaps the simplest, the
cleanest, the most exactly defined form adopted by State capitalism in
the Soviet economy. Co-operation is also a sort of State capitalism, but
less simple, less clearly defined, more complex." Illusions in this
matter should disappear. "The rights and liberties of cooperation, in
the present state of Russia, mean rights and liberties for capitalism.
To hide one's head in the sand, to avoid having evidence of this, would
be either foolish or criminal."

Finally he constantly insists on economic alliance with the peasants,
indispensable after the military alliance; the only way of accomplishing
it is to give freedom of trade, and freedom of trade means a return to
capitalism. To refuse this freedom would be "folly and real suicide."
For agreement with the peasants "alone can maintain the socialist
revolution in Russia, unless there is revolution in other countries."
The peasants must be convinced that the communists are "really coming to
the help of the small peasant, ruined, destitute, and dying of hunger,
in his present horrible situation. Either you must convince him of this
or he will send us to the devil.... This is the meaning of the New
Economic Policy."

But the Bolsheviks were far from agreement on the historic significance
on the N.E.P., which was greeted by their opponents as a Russia
repetition of Thermidor. They were disposed to regard it as a Thermidor,
carried out by themselves and salutary for the revolution. Lenin said
nothing on this point; evidently he had nothing to say to Trotsky's
remarks:

>The Mensheviks all over the world talk of the Thermidor of the Russian
>Revolution. But it is not they, but we ourselves who have made this
>diagnosis. What is still more important is that the Communist Party
>itself has made concessions to Thermidorian aspirations, to the desires
>of the small bourgeoisie, the concessions which were necessary for the
>maintenance of the power of the proletariat without breaking up the
>system or leaving the helm.

Later on the spectre of Thermidor was to be evoked with less serenity in
new circumstances of internal struggle.

It is a common temptation to seek precedents in other revolutions for
the better understanding of the stages of a great contemporary political
and social upheaval. Parallels occur to the mind in many situations even
when they are not strictly alike, for instance between certain
personages. Real resemblances are indicated between Nicholas Romanov,
Louis Capet and Charles Stuart, between Alexandra Feodorovna, Marie
Antoinette and Henrietta Maria. Comparisons, if not drawn too exactly,
may well be made between Lenin and Robespierre or Cromwell as the
central figure of great revolutions. Circumstances sometimes suggest a
parallel with George Washington, and more often with figures in Russian
history. But men who "live in the future" are less given to identifying
themselves with the shades of past heroes. The Petrograd Soviet in its
time played a part somewhat Similar to that of the Paris Commune; the
Bolshevik Party to that of the Jacobin Club. Yet neither was to suffer
the fate of its forerunner. The Russian Civil War recalls in more than
one respect the American Civil War. The "Social-Democratic _Gironde_"
and the "Cossack _Vendée_" are not meaningless phrases. The destruction
of the Levellers and the "enrages" finds parallels in the Soviet
Republic. Every revolution has its Moderates and its Extremists. The
Terror, a "dictatorship of distress," as the younger Carnot called it,
was not a Russian discovery. Other examples are forthcoming. But all
comparisons of this kind are only useful in exemplifying the differences
and the real characteristics of interesting events in the lives of
individuals or groups. But, with all these superficial similarities,
history does not repeat, but moves onward. The most striking analogies
do not provide material for understanding, much less foretelling,
events, unless economic circumstances and historical conditions are
taken into account: In this respect differences of social significance
are more important than surface resemblances. Therefore the over-eager
prophets of a Thermidor, still more of a Brumaire, have now plenty of
leisure to meditate on the unique character, which they mistook, of the
Russian Revolution.

Lenin was wiser when he faced the dilemma of the liberals who supported
the new regime. He stated it correctly: Was the N.E.P. an evolutionary
or a tactical measure? To this "class truth propounded by a class enemy"
he replied frankly. "_A development such as that expected by Ustryalov
is possible. History has seen all sorts of metamorphoses.... Great
historical issues are decided by the masses_." And pending the great
conflagrations which are to set the multitudes in motion, the selection
of communists and the quality of their work may prevent, he thinks, a
temporary expedient from degenerating into an irremediable development,
and may pave the way for a future which will be decisive in favour of
the revolutionary point of view. The N.E.P., said Lenin, is settled
"definitely and for a long time." Therefore the choice of agents was of
the first importance. "We must not shrink from recognising that in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, responsible communists are not at
their posts, do not understand their job and need to learn." Every man
in his place. The opportunity for Stalin to take his was at hand.

### 7.4

PERSONAL conflict between revolutionaries has often precipitated the
decline of their movement, pre-determined by more deep-seated causes.
The Russian Revolution seemed to be an exception in this respect during
Lenin's lifetime; neither discords nor reverses were allowed to break
the fundamental solidarity of the leaders. The new fact which emerged
was the organisation of the founders and leaders of the revolution into
a coherent and disciplined party, whose unity was to be the essential
element of stability in the regime.

But behind this smooth facade obscure rivalries were undermining the
edifice. The discussion on trade unions had disclosed acute enmities,
which were not terminated by the N.E.P. In Trotsky's case there was no
longer any trace of disagreement with Lenin, who, for his part, was
anxious to secure co-operation between former opponents. With Lenin's
entourage it was otherwise. Trotsky, though he stood alone in the
Politbureau and almost alone in the Central Committee, still seemed
formidable to the fraternity of Old Bolsheviks, who were determined to
restrict him to certain departments and to lessen his influence by
scattering his supporters, so that they might keep their own hands on
the key positions in the Party and in the State. Zinoviev, Kamenev and
Stalin secretly winked at each other over this plan. To assure its
success they sought an effective instrument in the Secretariat of the
Central Committee, a position supposed to be limited to technical and
executive functions, though in fact its importance was growing
imperceptibly because it controlled appointments.

In 1922 they succeeded. After the Eleventh Party Congress, Stalin became
General Secretary in succession to Molotov, who was relegated to the
post of assistant. The operation passed almost unnoticed, so modest had
the duties appeared to be. Nobody objected, except according to Trotsky,
Lenin. But Trotsky's memoirs are at fault in the date, which is a year
too early, and his statement appears to he contradicted by Lenin's
praise of Stalin during the session of the Congress. It is true that
contradictions are a constant feature in the words and acts of the
Bolshevik leaders. "_This cook will prepare only peppery dishes_," said
Lenin of the new secretary, but no doubt later and among friends.

At that time Stalin was still unknown outside a small circle of
militants and officials, but those who had to do with him in their daily
work were disturbed by his rise to the top. Krestinsky's remark that he
was "an ugly creature with his yellow eyes" expresses an antipathy
fairly widespread. Perhaps Lenin under-estimated the ultimate role of a
subordinate official of the Politbureau, when he raised no objection to
Stalin's nomination. However that may be, his failure to do so left the
field open for the moment to the small clique which occupied the
strategic points in the administration.

Thus an important event in the revolution was accomplished silently, and
its promoters neither understood its Importance nor foresaw its
consequences.

At the height of his power, Lenin exercised almost judicial functions of
arbitration in disputes between his colleagues, while he was mainly
responsible for the direction of the Soviet State and of international
revolutionary activity. His bold policy in introducing the N.E.P.,
following on the success of the Brest-Litovsk tactics, strengthened his
reputation for infallibility in communist circles. Thanks to him, the
Soviet Republic could celebrate its Fifth Anniversary in peace. No one
dared to criticise him openly, though he maintained his habitual modesty
of demeanour. If his tone was at times imperative in discussion, it was
the expression not of pontifical certainty but of conscious superiority
in political experience over his opponents. If he censured his own
errors, he did not spare other people's. He might have adopted as his
own the well-known saying: "My esteem for myself is small when I examine
myself ... but when I compare myself with others it is considerable."
Hence the contrast between his intellectual reservations towards great
problems and his assurance in controversy. To drive home his points he
said sharp things either in the interests of simplification or with the
intention of waking up his audience. Nevertheless he showed constant
kindliness to less gifted colleagues, endeavouring to keep them up to
the mark and to give them their share in the common task. His moral
ascendancy in the Party was associated with an anxious solicitude for
one and all; he husbanded their strength, sought for mutual
understanding and helped them by advice and support. He was prodigal of
his own strength.

The qualities which first attracted Lenin to Stalin, says Trotsky, were
his "firmness and his practical mind, which is three-quarters cunning."
But in the end he had to admit Stalin's "ignorance ... his very narrow
political horizon, and his exceptional moral coarseness and
unscrupulousness." He says that Lenin sought out Stalin, Zinoviev and
Kamenev for the execution of current business and minor tasks on his
instructions and under his control. In the Central Committee, as
elsewhere, he needed docile auxiliaries of the type of Rykov and
Tsiurupa, who with Kamenev acted as his deputies at the Council of
Commissars when he was obliged to save his own strength. This statement
is correct but summary, and further explanations are necessary to
understand a situation already pregnant with crisis.

The whole system of government depended on the personality of Lenin,
whose greatness, under given historical conditions, had created a state
of affairs strangely different from that laid down in the Soviet
Constitution.

Political, economic and administrative institutions were subject to a
parallel series of strictly communist organs at each stage. The Party
was superimposed on the State like a lid of the same shape on a pyramid.
At the top, the Politbureau held in its hands the threads of all the
powers delegated to inferior bodies. As President of the Council of
Commissars, Lenin merely put into effect decisions made in the
Politbureau under his direction, allotting the work to the departments
concerned. Latterly he abandoned this formal task, and Trotsky also
ceased to waste time at the Council, now transformed into an executive
committee of high officials. A "Small Council" was added, for drafting
laws.

The Executive Committee of the Soviets, deprived of the prerogative
assigned to it by the Constitution, was a sort of parliament, an
occasional assembly of secondary officials committed beforehand to vote
automatically for the Bills submitted to it by its Permanent Bureau, but
free to discuss minor details. Under the Politbureau there was also the
Council of Labour and Defence, whose powers were indefinite, and which
tended to handle all subjects; the Supreme Economic Council, intended to
deal with production and trade, but absorbed in industry; the Gosplan,
charged with estimating national resources, and preparing plans and
devising means. All these organisations, with the Commissariats of
Finance, Transport, Agriculture, Foreign Trade, Workers' and Peasants'
Inspection, the Soviets of the two capitals, and the central committees
of the co-operatives and the trade unions, etc., were incessantly
competing for bureaucratic authority, since they had no power of
initiative, and were for ever in conflict. Lenin was not exaggerating
when he declared they had a chaos of authorities of all sorts.

In the chaos he alone had the authority to mediate between the
contending bureaux and to ensure the dominance of a clear idea of the
general interest. But this role involved the employment by him of agents
less and less capable of acting except on his instructions. Stalin in
the Party Secretariat, Zinoviev at the Petrograd Soviet, Kamenev at the
Moscow Soviet, Bukharin at the Press Bureau, Kalinin at the Executive
Committee of Soviets, Kamenev at the Council of Labour and Defence,
Rykov at the Supreme Economic Council and later at the Council of
Commissars, Zinoviev, Radek and Bukharin at the executive of the
Communist International -- this placing of the pieces on the chess board
was not ineffectual while a Lenin was there to direct it. Left to
themselves, as they had been on several earlier occasions rather
unfortunate for their reputation as communists, where would these
epigones be?

Two of the principal departments of State -- the police and the army --
had acquired a measure of autonomy, by reason of the confidence reposed
by Lenin in their respective heads.

The powers of the Cheka, theoretically reduced in 1920 and again in 1922
when the Extraordinary Commission was merged in the "State Political
Direction" (sic) or G.P.U., were not, in theory, unlimited. The
_Collegium_, presided over by Dzerzhinsky, had to submit its proposals
to the Commissariat of Justice. In fact, an official of the Commissariat
was ex-officio attached to the _Collegium_. This was subject only to
surveillance in principle by the Politbureau, which deputed one of its
members to represent it in exceptional cases. Thus Stalin, as
representative of the Politbureau on the G.P.U., continued the police
activity he had begun during the Civil War. Of course, neither Lenin nor
any of his immediate colleagues could verify, except in rare cases, the
statements made by Dzerzhinsky and Stalin, while the _Collegium_ had
extensive opportunities of shaping opinion in the Politbureau on
questions of repression. Like all political police, the G.P.U. tended to
ensure its indispensability by exaggerating dangers, real and supposed.
Dzerzhinsky had recourse repeatedly to the classic means of securing
sanction for his severity-resignation, because of the impossibility of
being responsible for public order and the security of the regime
without sufficient powers. Eventually the G.P.U. recovered the
omnipotence of the Cheka, contrary to the earlier intention of the Party
and to the spirit of the 1922 reforms; it took on monstrous proportions
in the Soviet Republic, which Lenin had prematurely defined as a "new
type of State, with neither bureaucracy, nor police, nor permanent
army."

Trotsky held a place apart. In the Politbureau his agreement with Lenin
was decisive. The Party felt itself incarnate in these two men. Their
names seemed indissolubly connected in the popular mind, and their
persons permanently associated with the supreme responsibility. By
comparison with the bureaucratic chaos described by Lenin, the
Commissariat for War was a model institution, consulted by the
Politbureau on many matters other than military. Trotsky had got
together a personnel adapted to his rational, orderly, exact and
effective methods of work, and he used them for the successful execution
of the most varied missions. Wherever disorder or carelessness demanded
salutary intervention, as in the Education Commissariat, fallen into
discredit under Lunacharsky, Trotsky was appealed to, in the hope of
results similar to those obtained for the war services, the Ural
industries and transport. He was esteemed for his intellectual
fertility, his active contribution to the press and to the world of
thought, as much as for his qualities as a statesman and an organiser.
He dominated without effort the congresses of the Third International.
And yet he exercised no authority in the governing sphere of the new
State, in the "machine" of the dictatorship, corresponding with his
many-sided prestige.

The machine, more and more differentiated from the Party as the Party
was more and more isolated politically from the State, represented the
whole of the varied parts of the bureaucratic Soviet regime built up on
the ruins of the former Imperial administration, the product of
persisting social conditions. A quarter of a century of industrial
progress, still negligible in spite of the modern equipment of the great
enterprises financed by foreign capital had left Russia far behind the
civilised countries and had not created either a middle class or
proletariat to counterbalance peasant barbarism, "the semi-barbarism and
the very real barbarism" which Lenin had described as the greatest
obstacle to socialism. The presumptuous intelligentsia had been swept
away by the revolution, driven to emigrate or scattered over the
country; the working class were repeatedly decimated in the Civil War,
and partly driven back to the rural districts by famine, partly absorbed
in the new bureaucracy. There remained the immense rural population whom
Gorky had described as "a great flaccid body, destitute of political
education, almost inaccessible to ideas capable of ennobling action,"
and "brutalised by the conditions of their life, patient to an almost
revolting degree, and with a cunning of their own." Unless this human
material could be regenerated by vigorous democratic methods which would
encourage the development of its best elements, the new regime, in the
opinion of sincere, clear-sighted revolutionaries, would be condemned to
develop in the bureaucratic and police tradition of the Imperial regime,
until the time came for a supplementary revolution. It was the task of
the Party, that is to say of its "machine," to give this great inert
mass the direction and the impulse to that democratic progress inscribed
on its programme. But the democracy promised by primitive Bolshevism was
disappearing in the privileged Party as it had disappeared in the
enfeebled country. The "machine" was already living its own life, with
its interests distinct from the aspirations of the people whose sole
interpreter it claimed to be. The concealed opposition which Trotsky
encountered in this machine was not fortuitous. If it was not yet openly
declared, this was owing above all to Lenin.

To what extent did individual antagonisms vitiate the relations among
the "summits" of the machine? Gorky saw fit six years afterwards to add
to his report of Lenin's eulogy of Trotsky, some alleged remarks by
Lenin: "Still, he is not one of us. With us, but not of us. Ambitious.
There is something wrong about him, something of a Lassalle." If corky
did not invent this doubtful addition, the date is enough to reduce its
significance. In any case, it is clear that to old Bolsheviks like Gorky
he was not "one of us" in the sense that he did not fit into any given
category. In the same way the men who directly handled the "machine,"
Zinoviev, Kamenev, and especially Stalin, felt ill at ease with a man
who had none of their familiar and sometimes vulgar preoccupations.

In a healthy, normal party acting in accordance with democratic ideas,
questions of precedence would not have assumed such alarming
proportions. But the Bolshevik Party, as it developed physically, was
transformed still more profoundly in the moral and political sense.
Arrogating to itself the monopoly of revolutionary conscience, it denied
all liberty to the workers alleged to be non-class-conscious, that is,
to the whole of the working population not enrolled in its books, and
eventually forbade it to its own members for fear that, under popular
pressure, they might become the interpreters of grievances of all kinds.
As the number of their adherents increased after the victory, the circle
of privileged persons enjoying civic rights was more closely drawn
together, so as to form a sort of Masonic hierarchy, thus translating
into fact Trotsky's old prophecy: "_The Party Organisation is being
substituted for the Party, the Central Committee for the Organisation,
and finally the Dictatorship for the Central Committee_." There was not
yet any single dictator, because Lenin refused a personal dictatorship
and shared power with the Politbureau. But would the equilibrium of the
oligarchy be stable without its founder?

At the Eleventh Communist Congress the Party numbered about 515,000
members, instead of the 730,000 at the preceding Congress. A party purge
had eliminated about 150,000 on various charges of corruption, bribery,
ambition, drunkenness, chauvinism, anti-semitism and abuse of
confidence. Many militants resigned in disgust at the passive obedience
imposed on the rank and file communists. Most of the new members were
inspired by narrow and interested motives. Protests against the internal
organisation of the Party were again made at this Congress, which
defeated a proposal to exclude the Workers' Opposition; permitted by
Lenin, this was the last manifestation of independence against the
leading officials.

"The English Parliament can do anything except change a man into a
woman. Our Central Committee is more powerful -- it has already changed
more than one extremely revolutionary man into a woman, and the number
of these women has increased incredibly," said Riazanov, reproaching the
oligarchy with "violating the most elementary rules of democracy."
Stukov criticised the "original privilege," thanks to which Lenin alone
was free to do as he liked. "We must," he said, "give other comrades the
possibility of speaking freely within the Party without threatening them
with damnation for saying to-day what Lenin said yesterday." Shliapnikov
cited in his defence Frunze, who "promised to convince me with a
machine-gun" a figurative, but significant, remark. V. Kossior commented
on the diminution in numbers. "Many workmen," he said, "are leaving the
Party.... The reason is the rule of force, which has nothing in common
with real discipline and which is practised among us. Our Party carries
wood and sweeps the streets, votes but decides nothing. The not
over-healthy proletariat cannot stand this atmosphere."

But the severest accusation of all brought against the Politbureau was
by Lenin _à propos_ of a purchase of jam which exhibited the
pusillanimity, the red tape and fear of responsibility of the high
Soviet bureaucracy. "How is it," he asked, "that in the capital of the
Soviet Republic two inquiries, the intervention of Kamenev and Krassin,
and an order from the Politbureau have been necessary for a purchase of
jam?" Lenin put it down to lack of education among communists, the
necessity of taking action against incapable officials, etc., but
omitted the real cause of the evil -- the undemocratic Soviet regime. He
persisted in justifying in vague terms the exorbitant powers of the
Politbureau: "All serious affairs of State should be brought before the
Politbureau," forgetting that civic inequality, the lack of guarantee of
legal security for most citizens, make every jam contract an affair of
State, because the avoidance of responsibility, shifted from lower
authorities to higher authorities up to the Politbureau, is the only way
of securing impunity. He gives excellent platonic advice. "We must," he
says, "learn to tackle the simplest business in a civilised way," but
turns a blind eye on an essential cause of the backwardness of
civilisation: the suppression of all liberty. He evades the difficulty
by using a metaphor: "Our apparatus is bad perhaps, but the first steam
engine is said to have been a bad one. Our State machine may be
execrable, but it exists, the greatest of all inventions is
accomplished, the Proletarian State has been created."

The confusion of the functions of the Party and the State, leading to an
accumulation of duties, was strongly criticised, and Preobrazhensky
cited Stalin as a case in point: "Take, for instance, Comrade Stalin, a
member of the Politbureau and in charge of two Commissariats. Is it
conceivable that one individual is equal to the work of two
Commissariats, besides that of the Politbureau, the Orgbureau, and a
dozen committees of the Central Committee?" To which Lenin replied in
general terms that "there were no men available," and with regard to
Stalin, silent in the Congress, that "we must have someone to whom any
national representative can appeal and tell his story. Where is he to be
found? I don't think Preobrazhensky can point to anyone but Stalin. It
is the same for the Workers' and Peasants' Inspection. The work is
stupendous. But to cope with it there must be a man with authority at
the head; otherwise we shall be disgraced and ruined by petty
intrigues." These remarks were made a few days before Stalin was
nominated to the Secretaryship of the Party. If Lenin really held at
that time the bad opinion of Stalin which Trotsky attributes to him, he
hid it very well.

The truth apparently is that Lenin's opinion was altered by experience
in this as in other matters. He did not always weigh his words, nor
attribute such importance to them as not to contradict them on occasion.
His intellectual honesty enabled him frankly to revise opinions proved
to be erroneous. After the Congress, relations between Lenin and Stalin
were modified as relations between Stalin and Trotsky had been at an
earlier date. The Commissariat of Nationalities was soon to be
abolished. Lenin made an inquiry into the Workers' and Peasants'
Inspection which proved devastating to the Commissar. And, as Secretary
of the Central Committee, Stalin was soon to be irretrievably
discredited in Lenin's eyes.

But, meanwhile, an unexpected event happened, upsetting the personal
aspects of the dictatorship. At the beginning of May 1922 Lenin
succumbed to his toil; the brain of the revolution showed signs of
paralysis. It was merely a first attack of arteriosclerosis, but a
definite malady. The Party could not believe that Lenin was lost to
them, and Trotsky shared the irrational optimism. Others, devoid of
sentiment, had a clearer vision, and calculated coldly on the eventual
repercussions of the inevitable loss; they were the three members of the
Politbureau, who felt themselves, as a group and as units, inferior to
the fourth.

### 7.5

STALIN had begun a secret and unprecedented task in the secretariat of
the Party. One by one he rearranged the personnel of the machine, on
mysterious considerations known to himself alone.

Only a pretext was needed and often even this could be dispensed with.
As a rule, discipline was sufficient reason for nominations and
transfers. In the heroic period, the Party preserved its equalitarian
principles, the maximum wage, solidarity, and devotion to the cause. But
in so vast a country as Russia, with few means of communication, and a
dull provincial life, disgrace or advancement was a matter of a few
kilometres. Removal from one institution to another might involve moral
and material advantages. Then, at various stages in the hierarchy, the
particular employment might offer more or less advantages in the present
and prospects for the future. "Anybody being good enough for anything,
anybody can be moved at any time to any place" -- this ironical dictum
of a French politician was very applicable to Soviet Russia. At the last
Congress, Lenin had said that _the choice of men was the crucial point_,
but without laying down the criteria of choice. Stalin had his reasons.

He never formulated them in so many words, but they may be deduced from
a number of circumstances.

The main idea of his Party was crystallised in the simple and almost
mystical belief that the interests of humanity should be represented
exclusively by an ideal proletariat, this proletariat in its turn by a
transcendent Central Committee, and that Committee by its
Politbureau. In his capacity of Secretary Stalin might, then, regard
himself as the pivot of the Soviet system, a miniature Russian model of
the future universal socialist republic, the Party being identified with
the State and the immanent dictatorship being incarnate in an
irremovable "oligarchy," recruited by co-optation.

This tier upon tier of abstractions of which the topmost only was a
tangible reality, the immeasurable power of the Politbureau over
130,000,000 people, had nothing in common with the Marxism which the
Bolsheviks religiously invoked as their model. "We took the Marxist
doctrine all ready made from western Europe," said Lenin. A conception
of this kind "taken" from outside, a synthesis of German philosophy,
English economics and French socialism, could not be assimilated in a
generation by so backward a people, not even by its vanguard.

Like all ordinary Bolsheviks -- of whom he was typical -- Stalin hardly
knew anything about Marx except through Lenin, and he adopted the letter
of Marxism without comprehending its living spirit. Having accepted as
dogma once for all the mixture of conditional truths and proved errors
which constituted Bolshevism, the Russian approximation to Marxism, he
displayed his inflexible determination in the service of this faith by
incorporating himself in the machine to such a degree that for a long
time Stalin, the instrument of the machine, and the machine, the
instrument of Stalin, were indistinguishable.

He did not invent the passive obedience which he exacted by all sorts of
means from his subordinates. He only accentuated to excess the military
notion of discipline inherited from War Communism, and erected into a
theory by Lenin and Trotsky against their own principles. "_The remedy
invented by Lenin and Trotsky, the general suppression of democracy, is
worse than the evil it was supposed to cure_," wrote Rosa Luxemburg as
early as 1918. "_At a time when political life is being stiffed
everywhere_," she added, "_it is a calamity that life should be more and
more paralysed even in the Soviets_." This was equally true of the Party
itself, reduced in a few years to a state of lethargy. The evolution of
Bolshevism in this respect is worth exhibiting at both ends of the
curve.

In 1917, at the Executive of the Soviets, the Bolshevik Chudnovsky
"ventured" to criticise Lenin, Stalin and Krylenko for their
"unparalleled tactlessness and frivolity" in the address to the army
enjoining negotiation with the enemy. Lenin replied that "there can be
no question of 'venturing' or 'not venturing' the most violent
criticism; such criticism was _a revolutionary duty_, and the People's
Commissars did not claim infallibility."

In 1921 at the Trade Unions Congress, at which there were 3,500
delegates of whom only eight were Social-Democrats, a committee
nominated by the Central Committee of the Party to "direct the Congress"
dictated the resolution to be passed by the "Communist fraction," which
nevertheless adopted a resolution of Riazanov's. The Committee
instructed Tomsky to defend its resolution, but he faltered, confronted
by the strong conviction of his comrades. The Central Committee then
decided to disallow the resolution passed, dismissed the bureau of the
Congress, sent Tomsky to Turkestan and Riazanov abroad, and intimidated
the fraction which was compelled to retract under threat of reprisals.
Another special committee in which Stalin and Dzerzhinsky, experts in
repression, took part, inflicted a "severe censure" on the exiled
Tomsky. On his return, the impenitent Riazanov was forbidden to speak at
any meeting or to lecture at the University; he was only permitted to
speak at the annual congress of the Party where the congress members are
carefully selected, and where conformity is assured.

This one case out of a thousand indicates how roughly humble militants
may be called to order, and one may guess how ordinary mortals, outside
the privileged communist circle, are likely to be treated. Bearing in
mind Lenin's remark that "the vote of a single workman was worth several
peasants' votes," and the consideration accorded to the rights of trade
unions, there can hardly be any illusions as to the effectiveness of
public opinion in the Soviet Republic at the beginning of the N.E.P.

In resigning himself to concessions and compromises in the economic
sphere, Lenin thought it necessary to reinforce the dictatorship in the
political sphere. "We need the iron hand," he said. Alluding to the
abuses perpetrated by "pseudo-communists" in the rural districts, he
wrote in 1921: "Clean all that up by terror -- summary procedure, the
death penalty with no appeal." Presently judicial procedure would appear
to be superfluous; the death penalty alone would remain. "Mensheviks and
Social Revolutionaries, openly confessed as such or disguised as
non-Party men, we will keep in prison," he continued. A year later the
tone is worse: "It's a case of machine-guns for the people called
Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries." The weight of the iron hand was
soon felt by all citizens, including trade unionists and communists. In
the Party there was henceforward only one valid dogma, that of the
Politbureau, an orthodoxy of which Trotsky had once said: "Anyone who
denies it should be expelled. Doubt is almost denial. Questioning is
almost doubt." But Trotsky had forgotten his youthful polemics, and
Stalin had no notion of salvation outside the official and ever-changing
ideology of his Party, settled from time to time by its accredited
leaders.

Recourse to the "iron hand" did not displease Stalin, who was naturally
disposed to this method of government. Lenin had not foreseen all the
effects of the method carried to extremes and without his instructions.
When he returned to work after several months of illness and
convalescence he seemed to scent the danger of a misuse of the
dictatorship by his disciples.

Lenin saw with uneasiness the evil development of the bureaucracy of
which the Party machine was the spinal cord. At first he thought the
degeneration of the communists into irresponsible and despotic
bureaucrats could be cured by placing them under the supervision of a
new Control Commission independent of the Central Committee and the
Inspection Commissariat. He thought of a special commission to "fight
bureaucracy" to be directed by Trotsky and himself in order to purge and
regroup the personnel of the Party. Anxious to secure more initiative
and freedom of action for the People's Commissars, he wanted to make
Trotsky his deputy and his eventual successor at the Council of
Commissars, and to reorganise the governing personnel with this end in
view.

In this series of reforms at the top, the political consciousness of
communists was not taken into consideration, and the system of the
Bolshevik Central Committee remained intact, with its Politbureau, its
Orgbureau, and its Secretariat. There was no idea of reviving the life
of the Party or of giving back their rights to the workers.

Trotsky seemed to Lenin the safest of his successors, most capable of
ruling in the spirit of socialism. All that was needed was to
incorporate him in the small body of traditional Leninists, but there
the difficulty began. It was unanimously agreed that Trotsky was the
most eminent person in the Central Committee both in intellectual
eminence and in strength of character. But that did not make him Lenin's
natural successor; what he lacked was a special political sense without
which no man can claim to be a party leader. Had not his past shown him
to be incapable of forming a permanent group or of attaching himself to
any section of Social-Democracy? Even in the Communist Party his
personality seemed to be autonomous. During the revolution he was able
to measure himself with Lenin. But what would he do in the Politbureau
without Lenin, and could he associate himself with those Leninists, who
thought six of themselves not too many to act as counterpoise to him?
Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev, the secret triumvirate at the top, were
supported by their deputies at the Politbureau, Bukharin, Kalinin and
Molotov. With his knowledge of men and his psychological instinct, Lenin
soon saw that the obstacle to this future arrangement would be Stalin.

Stalin was the most obscure member of the Politbureau, but the only one
who was a match for Trotsky in temperament and in will-power. He easily
surpassed his colleagues in ordinary political action by his dexterity
in intrigue, his suppleness as a tactician, and the use he made of small
means. Too wary to enter into doctrinal controversy, he gained his ends
by his chosen methods of "practical work," seizing every opportunity to
withstand either Lenin or Trotsky, and to get his way on details. On his
favourite subject of nationalities he thought he could escape from
Lenin's guidance, and on this point came the definite evidence of
incompatibility between the recognised theorist and the misunderstood
practical man.

The origin of the rift appears in secret correspondence of 1922.
Revision of the Constitution was under consideration, with the idea of
transforming the Socialist Federative Soviet Russian Republic into the
Union of Socialist Soviet Republics, in which the various component
nationalities were to have equal rights. On paper Russian hegemony would
be done away with, Moscow would become the seat of two Executive
Committees of Soviets, that of the Russian Republic and that of the
Federated Republic. Stalin opposed the scheme by criticisms correct
enough in form. "The co-existence of two Central Executive Committees at
Moscow," he said, "of which one would doubtless be an Upper and the
other a Lower Chamber, will give rise to friction and conflict."
(Strangely enough, he still took constitutional fictions seriously.)
Touched on the raw by an allusion of Lenin for his excessive haste, he
returned the compliment by reproaching him with dangerous "national
liberalism"; according to Stalin, acceptance of Lenin's "liberal" views
would give too much importance to minor nationalities and would
encourage nationalism in the States. Lenin on the other hand suspected
Stalin of the crude pan-Slav chauvinism of a Russian whose nationality
was newly acquired. All the theses, dissertations and resolutions they
had drawn up in common led only to irreconcilable divergence when
confronted with facts.

Among the contradictions of Bolshevism there is none more violent than
that between theory and practice in regard to nationalities, and Stalin
emphasised it with characteristic roughness.

Harsh historical necessity had substituted for the right of
self-determination the right of Bolshevism to dispose of the small
neighbouring peoples faced with imperialism and revolution. What the Red
Army could not accomplish in Finland and Poland it did accomplish first
in the Ukraine, then in the Caucasus, by methods similar to those
adopted by the United States in the annexation of Texas. The Georgian
Socialists' dream of creating a new Switzerland between Europe and Asia
was nothing but a dream in the circumstances. In the elections for the
Constituent Assembly in Georgia the Mensheviks scored 640,000 votes, the
Bolsheviks 24,000. In spite of this imposing demonstration of popular
sentiment expressed with approximate freedom, the Red Army had the last
word three years later by helping the 24,000 to dispose of the 640,000
by armed force. All the rest was pure talk.

"The relative stability of the Menshevik regime," wrote Trotsky, "was
due to the political impotence of the scattered peasantry," but that
argument was still more applicable to the Bolshevik regime in "All the
Russias." In 1920 a European socialist delegation visited Georgia, and
on his return E. Vandervelde described the enthusiastic throngs of
peasant converts to socialism. He recalled a day, at Gori, Stalin's
native place, "when a whole village came to meet us, bearing the red
banners of the International." A few months later foreign communist
delegates visited the same spot and found the red flags honouring
another International.

The course of events confirmed Rosa Luxemburg's prophecies and
dissipated the sophism of the right of self-determination. When it came
to deeds the Bolsheviks trod their principles underfoot by invading
Georgia, as the Mensheviks -- conscious, in Tseretelli's words, "of the
community of interest binding together all the peoples of Russia" under
the autocracy -- defied the Bolshevik programme by separation from the
Soviet Republic.

Lenin's apprehension was not solely due to Stalin's expression of
Russian chauvinism, but still more to his increasingly dangerous
activities. After the sovietisation of the Caucasus by armed force, the
bureaucracy and the police of the victors followed the army. And, just
as in Russia and the Ukraine, so in Georgia, the "iron hand" fell
heavily on communists, workmen and poor peasants, after having first
struck at socialist opponents of all shades. Stalin went to the spot in
1921 to organise the administration after his own fashion.

The Berlin _Sozialisticheski Vestnik_ reported on this mission
substantially as follows: Stalin, armed with large powers, arrived in
Tiflis, dismissed Makharadze for inadequate firmness and replaced him by
Mdivani; similarly Tsintsadze was replaced by Atabekov. (The former was
President of the Council of Commissars, the latter President of the
Cheka.) Makharadze apparently refused to imprison respected socialists
like Djibladze, and was roughly handled by Stalin. All this was done in
the name of the Georgian Communist Central Committee, but really on his
own initiative. After summoning a workers' assembly, Stalin delivered a
speech outlining a programme, received in hostile Silence, and the
meeting was followed by arrests. The People's Commissars of the little
"Sister Republics" were unceremoniously dismissed by the General
Secretary of the Party, but this was only a foretaste. At that time
Lenin agreed, often without knowing the truth. Within less than a year,
Stalin was in open conflict with Mdivani, a comrade of his youth, as he
had been earlier with Makharadze and with Tsintsadze, the famous
_boyevik_, Kamo's comrade in ambushes and expropriations. For the
Georgian communists subjected to Stalin's caprice, there was only one
resource, first and last -- to appeal from Lenin ill-informed to Lenin
better-informed. Five years after the October Revolution the rights of
the nations of the former Empire were reduced to a vague hope of the
providential intervention of one man. And it was the rights of
communists of the first rank that were in question.

The progress realised at this stage must be stated: the Soviet nations
of Russia, Asia, the Ukraine, and the Caucasus were on an equal footing
in their common deprivation of liberty. In complete contrast to the
circumstances of the French Revolution, the number of "passive citizens"
steadily increased until the category of really "active citizens" was
reduced to the equivalent of an Upper Ten Thousand, though on a lower
economic level. The masses, levelled downwards, suffered the unwritten
law of a new kind of patriciate, divided into several ranks under the
Politbureau and its Secretariat. The final corrective to all abuses --
Lenin's relative wisdom.

### 7.6

"WE ARE living in a sea of illegality," was one of Lenin's first remarks
on his recovery, in a letter from the Politbureau addressed to Stalin.
He had recovered his speech, if not the use of all his faculties, and
had resumed a limited intellectual activity permitted by his physicians.
In the summer of 1922 he followed more important affairs, gave advice
and dictated notes from a retreat near Moscow. He was no longer the
indefatigable and encyclopaedic Lenin of former times, but he was
perfectly clear on controversial matters.

In September he attacked Stalin on the national question after hearing
from Mdivani about the Georgian situation. He discussed the matter with
both sides and prepared for a formal debate. In October he resumed
effective work at the Politbureau and took cognisance of the enhancement
of the evils he had noted before his illness: everywhere carelessness,
parasitism, the impotence of the "machine."

He had already bluntly commented on the ignorance of communist
officials, their beastings (com-boasts), and their lies (com-lies).
"Every day," he said, "we hear, I especially on account of my position,
so many glib communist lies, so many com-lies, that it's enough to make
me sick, violently so, sometimes." The quaint expression "com-boasts"
had a great success, so well did it fit the facts. "The communist
kernel," he continued, "lacks general culture. If we take Moscow with
its 4,700 responsible communists, and the whole bureaucratic machine,
which is the directing spirit? I doubt very much whether it is the
communists. They do not lead, they are led." The general culture of the
middle classes in Russia was "inconsiderable, wretched, but in any case
greater than that of our responsible communists."

Signs of degeneration were now obvious not only in the machine but at
the top. Military decorations were followed by the Order of the Red Flag
of Labour, a pseudo-revolutionary imitation of the honours of a despised
society. In Lenin's absence, to the general surprise, Stalin had
arranged for the name the Secretary of the Party placed, removed and
replaced many militants. Soon Elisavetgrad was to become Zinovievsk. The
same personages gave their names to schools, factories and ships. Plenty
of officials were ready to flatter those in power. Others showed a
mistaken zeal in the wrong quarters -- thus Gachina became Trotsk. It is
significant that no one dared to flatter Lenin in this way; he would not
have tolerated it. At Petrograd, the State printing press had printed a
pamphlet by Zinoviev with the profile of the author vignetted like a
Roman consul, and Lenin was weak enough to pass it over. Trotsky had not
the political sense to object. Riazanov alone protested. The decadent
Jacobins of the proletariat were heedless of the famous warning of a
bourgeois Jacobin, Anacharsis Clootz: "France, beware of individuals."
Barras gave his name to a ship launched at Toulon, but that was under
the Directory.

In November of the same year, Lenin intervened by letter against a
decision of the Central Committee on the State monopoly of foreign
trade, a monopoly establishing socialist protectionism in the shelter of
which nationalised industry was beginning to recover. Krassin, Commissar
of Foreign Trade, explained clearly one of the advantages of the system:
"The interests of the capitalist countries -- and of individual
capitalists in each country -- are conflicting, and, thanks to the unity
and concentration of our commercial system, it will not be difficult to
arrange matters so as to interest any capitalist group or firm, with
which agreement on certain conditions is possible." But Stalin and his
colleagues shortsightedly adopted a resolution against the trade
monopoly, under the influence of Sokolnikov and in the absence of Lenin
and Trotsky. Without its unquestioned advisers, the Central Committee
showed itself incapable of taking any step without going wrong. Pressure
from Lenin, Trotsky and Krassin was necessary to make them reverse their
decision.

At the Fourth Congress of the Communist International, the two leaders
of the revolution shared between them the main topic: _Five years of the
Russian Revolution and the prospects of World Revolution_. As at former
Congresses, they gave the young international organisation the best of
their ideas, ripened by experience and adjusted to the hard lessons of
historical fact. Once more Lenin reminded them that "we have committed
many follies, and shall commit many more," giving as the reason Russian
ignorance and isolation, and the inefficiency of the "machine." "At the
top," he said, "we have perhaps ten thousand -- I don't know how many --
of our own people; in the lower ranks hundreds of thousands of former
Tsarist officials." He concluded by strongly insisting on the necessity
of study: "We must first learn to read and write, and to understand what
we have read." Study -- he recurred to this recommendation, his constant
theme, under various aspects, until he died.

In November he delivered a last address to the Moscow Soviet,
emphasising one aspect of the N.E.P., the offer to capitalists of
advantages which would compel any State whatever to conclude an
arrangement with them. He advised communists to learn the arts of
reckoning and of trade, he condemned the "machine," and demanded its
reconstruction -- "the old machine persists, and our immediate task is
to rebuild it otherwise." More than ever, he concluded, the N.E.P. is
our watchword, and the "Russia of the N.E.P. will develop into socialist
Russia."

In December, he dictated letter after letter on the foreign trade
monopoly, and entrusted Trotsky with the task of defending their common
idea at communist meetings. Simultaneously he was anxiously occupied
with the question of nationalities, which took an unexpectedly serious
turn in the conflict provoked by Stalin in Georgia, and with the problem
of renewing and reorganising the "machine." He saw in Stalin's
personality the incarnation of the deviations, the development of which
threatened the future of the revolution. The most urgent task seemed to
him to be to prevent Party schism, the cause of which he discerned, and
for that purpose to maintain the stability of the directing group in the
Central Committee. On December 25th he wrote a confidential note, every
word being carefully considered, for the next Party Congress, in which
he feared he might not be able to take part:

>I think that the fundamental factor in the matter of stability -- from
>this point of view -- is such members of the Central Committee as
>Stalin and Trotsky. The relation between them constitutes, in my
>opinion, a big half of the danger of that split, which might be
>avoided, and the avoidance of which might be promoted, in my opinion,
>by raising the number of members of the Central Committee to fifty or
>one hundred.
>
>_Comrade Stalin, having become General Secretary, has concentrated an
>enormous power in his hands; and I am not sure that he always knows how
>to use that power with sufficient caution_. On the other hand Comrade
>Trotsky, as was proved by his struggle against the Central Committee in
>connection with the question of the People's Commissariat of Ways and
>Communications, is distinguished not only by his exceptional abilities
>-- personally he is, to be sure, the most able man in the present
>Central Committee; but also by his too far-reaching self-confidence and
>a disposition to be too much attracted by the purely administrative
>side of affairs.
>
>These two qualities of the two most able leaders of the present Central
>Committee might, quite innocently, lead to a split; if our Party does
>not take measures to prevent it, a split might arise unexpectedly.

Thus Lenin hoped to prevent the disastrous consequences of the open feud
between Stalin and Trotsky simply by increasing the membership of the
Central Committee. At the last Party Congress, the Eleventh, membership
of that committee had been increased to 27 members and 19 deputy
members. The Control Commission had five members and two deputy-members.
This was not enough as counterpoise to the "two most able leaders," one
of whom was isolated from the machine, and the other unknown outside it.
But the influence of the Central Committee decreased as its numbers
grew. Its increased dimensions compelled it to delegate its powers to
the Politbureau, which had all the means at its disposal for the
creation of a clientele of its own in the ancient acceptation of the
term. Lenin, looking at political phenomena from the angle of power, was
blind to this; he no longer conceived of reform except as emanating from
the top. This note, long kept secret, but gradually becoming partially
known in the upper circles under the name of Lenin's _Testament_ before
it was divulged abroad, goes on briefly to characterise four other
personalities.

"The October episode of Zinoviev and Kamenev was not, of course,
accidental," says Lenin, advising that it ought as little to be used
against them as the earlier non-Bolshevism of Trotsky. He gives an
apparently self-contradictory opinion on Bukharin, "the most valuable
and biggest theoretician of the Party"; but his "theoretical views can
only with the very greatest doubt be regarded as fully Marxist, for
there is something scholastic in him (he has never learned, and I think
never fully understood, the dialectic)." Finally, Pyatakov is
distinguished "in will and ability, but is too much given over to the
administrative side of things to be relied on in a serious political
question." Here "administrative" means "bureaucratic," in Pyatakov's as
in Trotsky's case.

In this remarkable document Lenin gives careful appreciations, and
expresses himself in subtle nuances. But his intention is clear enough;
it is to induce modesty in his near colleagues by indicating their
weaknesses, so that they may not continue the old grievances; at the
same time he describes Trotsky as the most capable; as regards Stalin,
he contents himself with a warning against the tendency of the Secretary
of the Party to abuse his powers. But, a little later, he thought it
necessary to emphasise the warning, and to give it categorical
expression. On January 4th he added a few lines, this time without any
diplomacy:

>Stalin is too rude (grub), and this fault, entirely supportable in
>relations among us communists, becomes insupportable in the office of
>General Secretary. Therefore, I propose to the comrades to find a way
>to remove Stalin from that position and appoint to it another man who
>in all respects differs from Stalin only in superiority -- namely, more
>patient, more loyal, more polite and more attentive to comrades, less
>capricious, etc. This circumstance may seem an insignificant trifle,
>but I think that from the point of view of preventing a split and from
>the point of view of the relation between Stalin and Trotsky which I
>discussed above, it is not a trifle, or it is such a trifle as may
>acquire a decisive significance.

Between December 25th and January 4th, fresh information on the Georgian
business had roused Lenin's indignation and made him regret not having
attacked Stalin more energetically and actively. Stalin had made use of
Dzerzhinsky and Ordjonikidze to maintain his oppressive policy in the
Caucasus which Lenin considered a disgrace to the regime, Ordjonikidze
having gone so far as to use violence on a Georgian comrade. Lenin,
outraged, wanted to exclude him from the Party and to make Stalin
responsible for his subordinate.

On December 30th he writes in one of his confidential notes that "if
Ordjonikidze so far lost control as to use physical force, as
Dzerzhinsky has told me, that shows into what a morass we have sunk." He
describes the Russian State machine as "_borrowed front Tsarism and
barely touched by the Soviet world_." It is a "bourgeois and Tsarist
mechanism." Under these conditions the liberty of the nationalities to
"leave the Union," provided by the Constitution will be a "_scrap of
paper_, impotent to defend the races of Russia against these true
Russians, chauvinist Great Russians, essentially cowardly and cruel like
the typical Russian bureaucrat." Have we taken, he asks, the necessary
measures to protect the persecuted races from their tyrants? To ask the
question was to answer it. And after these transparent allusions to
Stalin, he mentions him by name: "_In this matter Stalin's hastiness and
bureaucratic enthusiasm, and his spite against the notorious 'social
chauvinism' played a fatal part: generally speaking spite is a most evil
factor in politics_." He accuses Dzerzhinsky and Stalin, both of them
Russians by adoption, of "true-Russian" nationalism, observing that
Russians by adoption are worse than native Russians when they become
chauvinist.

The next day Lenin supplemented this note, insisting on the necessity of
distinguishing between the intolerable nationalism of the oppressor
country and the excusable nationalism of the oppressed country. "_He who
has not understood that distinction certainly knows nothing about the
attitude of the proletariat on the national question_." After this
direct hit at Stalin, he explains the urgency of giving the smaller
races not only formal equality, but compensation for the outrages they
have suffered during centuries. "The Georgian who neglects this aspect
of the matter and accuses others of 'social chauvinism' (when he himself
is not only a real 'social chauvinist' but an uncivilised rascal in the
service of a Great Power), is really attacking the solidarity of the
proletarian class...." Thus were Stalin and Ordjonikidze definitely
judged by their master.

On that same day, December 31, Lenin wrote a third note drawing
practical inferences from the general considerations just stated. Among
others -- "Ordjonikidze must receive exemplary punishment"; and "the
enormous mass of unjust and prejudiced verdicts of Dzerzhinsky must be
revised"; finally, "Stalin and Dzerzhinsky must be held politically
responsible for this nationalist Great Russian campaign."

Lenin did not stop there. He dictated another article against Stalin's
policy on the national question. "He was very much worried about it and
was preparing to intervene on this question at the Party Congress,"
wrote his secretary to Kamenev. "Just before his last relapse he told me
that he would publish this article, but later on. After that he fell ill
without having given definite instructions." The article was shown to
Trotsky, on whom Lenin relied for the defence at the Congress of their
common point of view.

Meanwhile the "chaos of all kinds of authorities" and its disastrous
effects on economic life made Lenin extremely anxious, and he wrote to
the Politbureau in support of a proposal of Trotsky's. The latter
attributed the disorder and wastefulness to the want of planning. As
early as 1920, generalising his experience with transport, he had
advocated a unified economic plan to correlate, control and stimulate
the activities of the various offices responsible. He would have liked
to amalgamate the commissariats dealing with economic questions, and to
assure unity of direction by the Council of Labour and Defence -- the
Supreme Economic Council having become virtually the Commissariat of
Industry. But this project involved the use of "labour armies," the
failure of which had its repercussions on the notion of any general
plan. The Gosplan, a State planning institution, created to co-ordinate
partial plans, had no influence. Trotsky proposed to extend its
competence and strengthen its powers, to make it an economic general
staff under the Council of Labour and Defence. The electrification
scheme, drawn up at the end of the Civil War, did no more than meet
immediate needs within narrow limits. The Gosplan would draw up and keep
up to date a methodical scheme for the direction of production,
distribution and trade. Lenin now approved Trotsky's "sensible idea"
with some reservations on detail. The very Lenin who at the beginning of
the revolution had said "There is not and there cannot be any concrete
plan for the organisation of economic life. Nobody can produce one. The
masses alone can do it, thanks to their experience...." It remained to
realise it in the face of rival institutions.

Lenin knew he was so ill that he had to think of the revolution in the
future without himself, but he did not sufficiently realise the gravity
of his position to use his last reserves of Strength to the best
advantage. He hoped to take a personal part in the Twelfth Congress of
the Party and himself to secure the adoption of the salutary measures he
had in mind. His thoughts evidently revolved round a main point, the
reform of the bureaucratic machinery of the State, and dwelt insistently
on two or three questions the importance of which was insufficiently
grasped by the Party -- general education, the relations between
nationalities, co-operation.

He published _Leaves of a Journal_ on the stagnation in public
education, that is, "public ignorance" in the Soviet Republic, censuring
empty phrases about "proletarian culture" and urging efforts first of
all to reach the "ordinary level of a civilised State in Western
Europe." On January 25th, _Pravda_ published his article, "How to
reorganise the Workers' and Peasants' Inspection." There was no mention
in it of Stalin, for the Bolsheviks avoided discussing their private
affairs in public, but the criticism of the Inspection was directed
against him personally and injured him among the initiated. Improvement
was necessary in the State machine, "_a survival to a large extent of
the former bureaucracy_," and "_with only a superficial new coat of
paint_." Lenin proposed to elect from 75 to 100 new members to the
Control Commission, which should meet the Central Committee in
periodical Party conferences and should be amalgamated with the
reorganised Inspection. Unconsciously he was accelerating the movement
towards a complete confusion of authorities, the annulment of all
effective control and the autocratic omnipotence of the Politbureau.

In February he dotted the "i's" in an article entitled "Better less, but
better," overwhelming for Stalin. "Our condition is _so sad_, not to say
_so repugnant_, as regards the State machine," that reorganisation from
top to bottom is essential. The lack of elementary education is the most
serious matter for Russia. "To renew our State machine, we must set
ourselves -- first, to learn; secondly, to learn; thirdly, to learn."
The Inspection ought to be the instrument of this renewal. But in what
condition had Stalin left his Commissariat? "Let us speak plainly. The
Inspection has now no authority at all. Everybody knows that there is no
worse institution that our Inspection.... I ask any present leading
official of the Inspection or anybody in touch with it to tell me
honestly what use such a Commission is to us." Then follows a minutely
detailed scheme of reorganisation, covering some years of work.

Discredited both as Commissar of Nationalities and at the Inspection,
Stalin did not think he was directly threatened in his position as
Secretary of the Party. But he instinctively prepared to resist. At his
suggestion the Politbureau not only opposed Lenin's scheme, but objected
to the publication of the article. The "machine" understood the allusion
to the Party bureaucracy and stood on its defence. Lenin grew impatient;
Krupskaya telegraphed; Trotsky intervened. A certain Kuibyshev, a
colleague of Stalin's, suggested printing the article in a single copy
of _Pravda_, to quiet "the old man." In the end the Politbureau gave
way, and the article appeared in the ordinary way, on March 4th.

Next day Lenin addressed himself to Trotsky: "I beg of you to look after
the Georgian affair at the Party Congress. The 'persecutions' carried
out by Stalin and Dzerzhinsky must be considered, and I do not trust
their impartiality. On the contrary. If you agree to undertake the
defence, my mind will be at rest." On the following day he wrote to
Mdivani, Makharadze and others: "I am following your business with all
my heart. Disgusted with Ordjonikidze's brutality and the connivance of
Stalin and Dzerzhinsky, I am preparing notes and a speech on your
behalf."

Fresh machinations by Stalin in Georgia decided him to have done with
it. "_Vladimir Ilyich is preparing a bomb for Stalin at the Congress_,"
said his secretary on that same day, March 6th, repeating Lenin's own
words. Feeling that his health was worse, he sent Trotsky the material
for his "bomb," an article and notes on the national question. Trotsky
wanted to inform Kamenev. Lenin sent word: "Under no circumstances."
Why? "Kamenev will immediately show everything to Stalin, and Stalin
will make a rotten compromise and then deceive us." But a few minutes
later, finding speech already difficult, Lenin feared he would be able
to do nothing, and, on second thoughts, sent Kamenev a copy of his
letter to Mdivani. "Vladimir Ilyich is worse, and hastens to do all he
can," explained the secretary. The sick man put all his strength of will
into a last mental effort, but sclerosis of the arteries increased
rapidly. There was an interview between Trotsky and Kamenev. The latter
was coming away from Lenin's house, where Krupskaya had told him:
"Vladimir has just dictated to the stenographer a letter to Stalin
breaking off all relations with him." It was Lenin's last letter.

### 7.7

AT THE moment when its founder was losing consciousness, on the eve of
the Twelfth Communist Congress, the Soviet Republic, more firmly
established, was recognised _de facto_ by six and _de jure_ by twelve
States. In the ranks of the Powers it took a place implicitly granted
the year before at the Genoa Conference, and then renewed commercial
relations, concluded treaties, and sent missions and ambassadors to
foreign Powers. It was even able to contract the semblance of an
alliance with Turkey and an entente with Germany. Thanks to the
antagonism between the United States and Japan, the vast areas conquered
under Tsarism in Asia up to the Pacific coast were returned. There was
no longer any immediate threat on the frontiers. The Red Army passed to
a peace footing.

At home the last rebel bands were broken up in the Ukraine and in the
Near East; Soviet rule was everywhere established and consolidated. Two
years of the N.E.P. were already reviving the forces of production, in
spite of the great famine of 1921 which surpassed in horror the similar
calamity of 1891, and struck down from 15 to 20 million human beings,
half of them children, and even gave rise to cases of cannibalism. The
population, decimated by war, revolution, counter-revolution and famine,
resumed the vigorous increase common to backward countries, and numbered
more than 133 millions at the census of March 1923.

But the economic thermometer fell sensibly in spite of the first good
effects of the N.E.P. Public revenue, or rather the total value of
production, had fallen from 11 milliard roubles in 1913 to 5.3 milliards
in 1922; agricultural production from 6.7 to 4 milliards, industrial
production from 4.4 to 1.3 milliards. (Other statistics give rather
higher figures, but in identical proportions.) The relative share of
small artisans in industrial production had greatly increased; it
represented more than one-half in 1922, whereas in 1913 it was less than
one-fifth. The explanation is to be found in the larger fall in large
and medium industrial undertakings.

In the country 51 million _dessiatins_ were sown in 1922 as against 82
million in 1916 and more than 100 in 1913. The gross grain harvest was
2.8 milliard poods in 1922 as against 3.8 milliards in 1914 (and about 6
milliards in 1913). The reduction was still greater for industrial
crops, hemp and flax, sugar-beet and cotton. There was a corresponding
fall in livestock: 124 million head of cattle in 1923 as against 183
million in 1916. Export had ceased. The peasantry as a whole were still
in want, in spite of the division of the expropriated land and the
abolition of the former dues.

More than three-quarters of the arable land and pasturage were cut up
into small holdings, lessening in proportion to the increase of "souls,"
the multiplication of "hearths"; the scattered strips did not permit of
intensive cultivation. Generally speaking the routine of the _mir_
continued to exist side by side with the fictitious soviet, together
with the periodical redistribution of strips and the triennial survey.
In many villages, individual holdings had diminished, for lack of any
State or landowners' estates to be nationalised. In theory there were no
longer landless peasants. But in fact there were such, and millions had
no horse to draw their mediaeval wooden plough.

Social equalisation to a "medium" level between the _kulak_, supposed to
be rich, and the _bedniak_, undoubtedly poor-such was the result of the
revolution for the peasant at this time. There were no even approximate
statistics for the _kulaks_, "hose relative prosperity was dissimulated
in various ways.

Enterprises of a socialist character were said to cover about two per
cent of the cultivated land, divided between 4,000 _sovkhoz_ (Soviet
domains, State farms), and 13,000 _kolkhoz_ (collective undertakings --
_artels_, co-operative farms, agricultural communes).

In the towns, where works, factories and workshops employed only about
half the labour employed before the War, the average wage had fallen
from 32 roubles a month to 7 roubles in 1922, rising in 1923 to 16
roubles. But most of the workers, divided into 17 categories according
to their skill, received less than the medium wage. Serious
unemployment, which could not be computed, was aggravated by the
competition of masses of the lower middle class and by the influx of
surplus peasants. Relief of unemployment was practically non-existent.

Industry and transport were working at a loss, with exorbitant costs of
production. The consumer paid three times as much as in former times for
manufactured goods, absolutely necessary and of the poorest quality.
Lack of goods produced uncontrollable speculation in which even the
Co-operative and State shops shared. There appeared the greedy and
crafty N.E.P. man, the incarnation of a new trading class formed to meet
every risk and danger. Very soon retail trade was mainly in private
hands.

But the State, controlling heavy industry, transport, foreign and
wholesale trade, had nothing to fear from this limited revival of
capitalism. The monopoly of political power in the hands of the
Communist Party enabled it to regulate legislation and finance in favour
of socialised enterprise in the competition opened up by the N.E.P.
Concessions granted to foreign capitalists were few and might remain
very small. Lenin was not wrong in justifying retreat, "difficult
especially for revolutionaries accustomed to advance," by saying "having
conquered so vast a territory, we had space to retreat without the loss
of essentials."

The October Revolution had not only destroyed the material survivals
from the Middle Ages, slavery and feudalism, as Lenin said modestly
in 1921\. There remained a great positive inheritance as a basis for the
creation of the most democratic republic in history and for taking the
first steps towards a socialist regime. The internecine differences of a
hostile world gave Soviet Russia more than one respite, and offered
great possibilities for taking advantage of international division of
labour and for safeguarding her subversive independence by exploiting
the rivalries inherent in a society based on competition. The future
then would depend largely on the heirs, on the ability of their
victorious party to become a constructive party, and, as Lenin wished,
to associate in their grandiose effort, the whole of the working people.

Clandestine pre-revolutionary activity and the Civil War were a bad
preparation for the Bolsheviks' future task. Former conspirators,
agitators and destructive agents had to turn into the omniscient
technical experts of a new economic and social order in an undeveloped
country, described by Bukharin as a "gigantic laboratory," in which a
willing personnel had to be improvised at the same time as the
instruments of production. They had to learn by experience. Lenin did
not leave behind him infallible recipes, but only general directions and
advice which might be useful to his followers when left to themselves.

"_Above all don't let us be afraid of constant self-criticism, of
correcting our mistakes and frankly avowing them_." This open sincerity
towards himself and the workers and peasants should have survived as a
cardinal principle of his theory and practice. "We are not afraid of
mistakes. Men have not become saints because the revolution has begun,"
he wrote in his _Letter to the American Workers_. This is no rhetorical
phrase. He often quoted a sentence of Marx on the "part played by
stupidity in revolutions," knowing no other antidote to this poison than
self-criticism, of which he gave examples in the fight against
"com-lies" and "com-boasting." In the costly apprenticeship stage "we
must not be afraid to admit and to study our mistakes in order the
better to repair them."

He was as conscious as anyone of the gap between his schemes and their
realisation. "Up till now, we have been drawing up Programmes and making
promises. The world revolution could not be started without programmes
and promises. The essential thing is cool consideration of where and
when mistakes have been made, and the knowledge of how to begin over
again." He did not confess his errors either to encourage them or to
wash his hands of them. "We have certainly committed errors and suffered
failures, many of them. But was it possible to realise a type of State
new in history without mistakes and failures? We shall not cease to
correct our errors and to seek a better application of Soviet principles
-- by trying to correct ourselves."

Nevertheless Lenin seems to have been blind to one most important
phenomenon -- the organic transformation of the Party on which his hopes
and his optimism were founded, a Party which he thought was the "real
vanguard of the vanguard class."

At the beginning of 1923 the Party had 485,000 members, nearly all of
whom were members of the bureaucracy. A never ending purge eliminated
the bad elements. "No profound and powerful popular movement in all
history has taken place without its share of mud, without adventurers
and rogues, without swaggering and noisy elements," said Lenin, before
admitting, at the time of the N.E.P., that "a ruling party inevitably
attracts careerists and industrial speculators who deserve to be shot."
But the purge was apt to hit the best brains, those least docile and
most refractory to the passive obedience which was gradually substituted
for discipline by consent. Subjected to a hierarchical system aggravated
by the force of inertia and by economic distress, the Party lost the
habit of thinking for itself and acting of its own accord. The
Politbureau's methods of government and the administration of the
Secretariat intensified the torpor consequent on the tension of
revolution and war. As in France in 1793, where sections and districts
were bureaucratised by the division of functions and the lassitude of
the sectionaries, so the average Bolshevik militant became enslaved to
the Soviet State for the sake of a job. In this period of unemployment
and privation, the Party membership card was as good as social
insurance. Selection on the ground of fidelity and ability gave way to
advancement for the careerist.

In this new caste with its petty privileges there were subdivisions: at
the bottom a plebs to be mobilised on occasion for the worst and most
thankless tasks; at the cop intellectual work and the little perquisites
of power fell to the aristocracy of the so-called "responsible
officials"; for the intermediate classes, the main anxiety was to avoid
disgrace, to get a foot on the ladder. Civic rights were reserved to
registered communists; they enjoyed relative security and had easier
access to the seventh rank in wages, better lodging, a less uncertain
future.

"It is useless to deny that many militants are mortally weary. They have
to attend 'Saturdays' twice or four times a month, out of working hours;
excessive mental strain is demanded; their families live in difficult
conditions; they are sent here to-day and there to-morrow by the Party
or by chance; the result is inevitably psychological exhaustion." These
words of Zinoviev, true in 1920, were not less true in 1923, but only of
a decreasing number of the lower ranks. As the regime acquired greater
stability, the others had increasing advantages, intrinsically small but
valuable by contrast with the surrounding poverty. The "Saturdays" in
question disappeared. The "great initiative" hailed by Lenin, voluntary
Saturday work, rapidly degenerated into compulsory work, and was
admitted to be an illusion. In the same speech Zinoviev, repeating
Lenin's words, demanded, "_criticism, great freedom of criticism within
the Party. We have always asserted it in theory; now is the time to put
it into practice_." But at each Congress, at each Conference, the same
phrases, never translated into fact, were used to calm the same
discontent.

The remnants of the earlier freedom of criticism fell to the Upper Ten
Thousand, to the new political patriciate. "With what human cargo did
the Communist Party enter the revolution?" asked the exiled Menshevik,
Dalin. "Not more than five or ten thousand, a third of whom were
intellectuals. That is the original capital producing so large a
dividend." This ten thousand constituted the upper stratum of the
amorphous Society grown up in penury. The symptoms of decadence had not
obscured their revolutionary mentality, and a chosen few kept intact the
spirit of traditional Bolshevism, maintained a communion of ideas with
communists of no rank, with obscure units scattered among the labouring
masses. How many were to persevere in the original path? Only experience
would show.

The Party, then, is a complex which escapes summary definition, in which
old forms exist side by side with new types, where habits are met by
innovations. Discussion between the various ranks of the organisation
becomes more and more rare. At the top, a few men give orders which the
machine executes as it pleases. The regular offices transmit the
instructions. All initiative, all driving power comes from above.
Official institutions, which but yesterday were consultative assemblies,
now merely register decisions from above. The Party Statutes are treated
in the same way as the Constitution. Many Congress decisions never get
farther than the paper they are written on, especially if their tendency
is towards the restoration of liberty. Committees of all sorts abound,
there are ramifications of the Party in towns, cantons, districts,
provinces, federated countries. The committees become more numerous,
jostle one another and build up a many-storied machine which retards the
movement of the heavy State machine. The executive institutions of the
Soviets, on an analogous but even more complicated model, are each under
the orders of the corresponding Party institution. Generally the
directing element is identical in the two. In factories. State
institutions, dwelling-houses, schools, trade unions, consumers'
co-operative societies, the army, the militia, the police -- communists
are grouped into cells and sections which delegate their authority. The
Union of Communist Youth, the Comsomol, with its 400,000 members, has
its own cells everywhere. Where communists are not numerous enough,
"sympathisers" act as auxiliaries. This extraordinary network extends
irresistibly. A system of administration and government altogether
unforeseen, but explicable by Gorky's remark that "we live in the midst
of a mass of persons destitute of any political or social education."

"The Party will endeavour to guide the activity of the soviets, but not
to supplant them" -- a vain resolution passed in 1919, but, like many
others, never applied, and confirmed many times since, without thereby
becoming any more applicable. The decisions adopted at the last Congress
under Lenin's inspiration -- to restore a certain amount of power to the
People's Commissars, to reduce the machine to the minimum -- these had
the same fate. The Party had guided the revolution, had won the Civil
War, had mastered anarchy, forged the mechanism of power, and breathed
life into an embryonic economy. Its driving power was to carry it beyond
the objectives originally fixed. Time was needed to assimilate the new
conditions. Six months after Kronstadt did not Russia suffer the ravages
of a terrible famine which could not be made good all at once the next
year? Only in 1923 did the N.E.P. create circumstances propitious for a
return to normal constitutional methods. But Lenin was no longer there
to direct the operation implied in his latest writings. Some hoped that
he would once more surmount his physical disability. Meanwhile it was
for the Politbureau to put into force the popular democracy formulated
in the theory and the programme of Bolshevism.

Now if the Party was "entirely apart from and above everything,"
according to Bukharin's tremendous admission, the Politbureau in its
turn, in relation to the Party, was "entirely apart from and above
everything." The interest of the cause, popular aspirations,
revolutionary progress, became for it so many abstractions divorced from
reality. By its isolation it lost all sense of the situation and any
power of interpreting it in the light of principles. Its opinions were
based on reading official reports and police dossiers. As early as 1922,
when Lenin and Trotsky sanctioned the theatrical trial of the Social
Revolutionary Party, their only knowledge of the terrorist deeds to be
condemned was derived from the biased information of the Cheka. In the
Communist International, bloody deeds were and are fomented without the
knowledge of the regular Executive Committee. For one affair such as
that of Georgia in which Stalin almost succeeded in deceiving the
Central Committee, how many others were prepared and decided on the word
of officials. With Lenin laid aside -- and even if his last counsels had
been followed -- if Stalin had been removed from the Secretariat and the
Central Committee enlarged to a hundred members as the unknown
_Testament_ suggested, there would have been no fundamental change
without giving back to the Party, the trade unions and the soviets the
right to make their voices heard. But that does not seem to have entered
the minds of the people at the top, and the voices from below were
stifled.

At the beginning of the revolution Gorky had said opportunely, "The old
order of things is materially destroyed, but it lives on morally among
us and in us. The hundred-headed hydra of ignorance, barbarism,
stupidity, treason and villainy is not slain." The warning remained
necessary when the N.E.P. was introduced. Bolshevik theorists, it is
true, were expected to abolish in five years the spiritual inheritance
of the past, the centuries old atavism of oppression and servitude.
Driven by extraordinary conditions to extraordinary measures, they only
proposed action in the direction of their ultimate aim, and for that
purpose to harmonise sooner or later the means and the end. But they had
to take care, while there was yet time, to avoid the tendency to follow
the line of least resistance in making a virtue of necessity, in
perpetuating a dictatorship of distress, and in losing their _raison
d'être_ in order to keep themselves in power.

## Chapter 08: The Heritage

### 8.1

MISUNDERSTANDING within the Political Bureau grew steadily more acute
during the second phase of Lenin's illness in 1923. Stalin, Zinoviev and
Kamenev coalesced to form the dominant triumvirate -- the troika -- and
organised in secret a section to oppose Trotsky, to lessen his influence
and to isolate him in the machine. Faced with the prospect of the
definite disappearance of their master, they already began to reckon on
the vacancy and to take the necessary steps to assure the succession,
which was virtually theirs. Trotsky might easily have thwarted their
plans and cut short their intrigues by a public revelation of the
matters in dispute. But he hesitated to move because of the uncertainty
about Lenin's health. This is his explanation, made, however,
afterwards. He feared a wrong interpretation of the part he would be
called upon to play -- a vulgar parallel with a historic precedent.
Their obsession with the French Revolution sometimes misled the Russian
revolutionary leaders. For instance, the accusation of Bonapartism had
been brought by Lenin against Kerensky, by Martov against Lenin; and
Trotsky temporised in order to avoid the same comparison.

The Party knew nothing of these underlying discords, and for a long time
Trotsky did nothing to enlighten them. By his silence he played into the
hands of the troika, who alone stood to gain by concealment. Lenin's
notes on the national question were kept secret, and only communicated
to a few initiated persons. Only Krupskaya knew of Lenin's _Testament_.
No one had any ground for suspecting a breach between Lenin and Stalin.
The immediate cause of this last complication was Stalin's rudeness to
Krupskaya, who, by keeping her husband informed, hindered the General
Secretary's operations. That Lenin should act on such a pretext proved
that his mind was made up finally with regard to Stalin. The latter
extricated himself by sending to Krupskaya, at Trotsky's suggestion, a
letter of apology which arrived too late for Lenin to read. By a tacit
consent, which was natural, all the principal antagonists admitted the
necessity of maintaining secrecy on the real nature of internal
discussions tending to discredit the Party. Under cover of this general
silence Stalin was able to intrigue unhindered.

At the Congress of Soviets in December 1922 he had reported in favour of
a closer union between the various Federated Republics, his reports
being based on a pretended initiative of the Transcaucasian delegations.
The scheme required a session of the First Congress of the Soviet Union,
to sanction the "treaty" concluded between the principal nationalities
for the political and economic centralisation of the regime, with a
simultaneous assertion of the theoretical right of the contracting
parties as free agents, and of their administrative and cultural
freedom. In reality everything was regulated, prescribed and ordered by
the Political Bureau; neither nations nor parties were consulted at all;
the delegates were elected by regional committees nominated from above
by other committees in Moscow. As for the Treaty of Union, it was to be,
as Lenin had foreseen, merely another "scrap of paper" in the archives
dealing with the Constitution; so true is it that the Bolshevist
theories on the national question had no relation to facts under the
conditions of a terrorist dictatorship indefinitely prolonged.

Stalin deferred his defence of his Caucasian policy for the Twelfth
Congress of the Party. It was incontestably a clever one. Trotsky made
his task easier by moving an agreed amendment to the resolution. For the
first time the deliberations of the Party took place without the
participation, direct or indirect, of its founder. Krupskaya abstained
from transmitting to the Congress the _Testament_ that Lenin had
prepared for them under the modest title of "Notes" _(zapiski)_; she
still hoped for his recovery, and for his return to the work of
government. The National programme was not divulged either, and Lenin's
notes on that subject, communicated in committee, had only a limited and
unauthorised circulation among bored officials. Stalin spoke from the
tribune as _rapporteur_ for the Political Bureau and the Central
Committee combined. He denounced the nationalism of those Georgians who
were hostile to Transcaucasian federation from dislike of Armenians and
Tartars, a hostility manifested in Mdivani's decree expelling recent
immigrants from Tiflis. Thus instructed, the Congress registered
approval of the general policy adopted in Georgia by the Party
Secretariat, with a mild reproof of the excesses of Ordjonikidze and his
friends. In any case the delegates were chosen by the machine, and
therefore prepared to vote en bloc for the proposals put forward by the
directing organisations. Agreement in the Political Bureau carried with
it automatically unanimity in the Congress, led and dominated by a
_praesidium_, just as the Party was by its Central Committee -- always
under the same triumvirate.

But in 1923 the increasing gravity of the economic situation drove the
national question into the background. The country passed through
successive crises: scarcity of commodities, industrial products at
prices below cost, lack of raw materials, prolonged delays in wage
payments, increasing unemployment, currency depreciation, fall in
agricultural prices, paralysis of trade, etc. Under the incitement to
production provided by the N.E.P., industry fell behind agricultural
production, State production below individual and family production.
Resources were insufficient to subsidise industry up to the standard of
its requirements, to reconstitute working capital and enlarge the basis
of operation. Foreign loans were impossible, and the yield of domestic
loans inconsiderable. Concessions were negligible, export was hardly
beginning to recover. The Party was anxiously Seeking a policy. In these
troubles and uncertainties Trotsky alone expressed any clear ideas. The
Political Bureau had instructed him to present to Congress an official
report on industry, and Stalin had even pretended that he would like to
see him entrusted with the report on general policy, formerly assigned
to Lenin.

Trotsky found the principal cause of this permanent crisis in Soviet
economy in the disparity between the prices of industrial and
agricultural products. "The peasant, paying for manufactured goods,
coal, petrol, etc., in terms of wheat, is buying two and three-quarter
times as dear as in 1913." Graphically expressed, the disproportion was
shown by an acute angle like that formed by the blades of a pair of
scissors. If the phenomenon is aggravated or persists, the scissors
would sever all exchange between town and country. By this metaphor
Trotsky clearly indicated the danger, and stressed the urgency of price
adjustment.

A rise in the price of cereals was primarily dependent on export; a fall
in the price of manufactured articles depended on a more rational
utilisation of machinery, materials and labour. It was therefore
necessary to reduce overhead costs, to suspend the operation of
non-essential undertakings, to concentrate scattered industries, to
suppress waste, to establish rigorous calculations and strict
accountancy -- an enormous task to look forward to, and a prosaic one
for romantically-minded revolutionaries. "To put it mildly, there is
absolute chaos," said Nogin, describing the State economic
organisations; and he was confirmed by Trotsky, who said: "There is
information in the Workers' and Peasants' Inspection showing that about
eighty per cent of our calculations are unfounded." According to him,
the other twenty per cent were not much better. For example, a certain
State Trust declared a profit of four trillions of paper roubles, when
the Inspection was able to prove a real loss of 750,000 gold roubles,
and this was no exceptional case. With a view to the institution of a
new economic order in line with the communist programme, the progressive
development of production and the rationalisation of its methods,
Trotsky insistently urged the elaboration and application of a general
plan, under the direction of a competent "great General Staff," in the
shape of the Council of Labour and Defence assisted by the Gosplan
(State-Planning Department). He recalled simply a primary truth of
socialist theory, one of its fundamental criticisms of capitalist
society, providing for the substitution of planned production,
distribution and exchange for a free market, competitive rivalry and
unregulated supply and demand. But, though by no means new and though
approved in principle, his idea was not accepted without scepticism by
the bureaucracy, who pretended to applaud it while opposing the force of
inertia against its realisation in practice; it was interpreted as a
cloak to a secret intention by Trotsky of making himself dictator in
economic matters by assuming the direction of the departments concerned.

Where were the indispensable new resources for industry to be found?
Some thought by increasing the taxes on agriculture; according to them
two years of the N.E.P., one of which was a famine year, would have
increased sufficiently the taxable capacity of the peasantry. Against
this "Left" point of view, Trotsky recommended that taxation should not
exceed limits permitting "_peasant economy to be brought to a higher
level and greater future wealth for the peasant_." This declaration of
the necessity of enriching the cultivators was by no means a chance
expression on his part, for before the Congress he had already said to
the Ukrainian Communist Congress:

>Those comrades who, like Larin, maintain that we are not demanding
>enough from the peasant masses are certainly mistaken. _We ought not to
>exact from the peasant anything more than he can really give. We ought
>to act so that he will be richer this year than last year_. He will
>understand this formula if we put it as the foundation of our internal
>policy; it is profoundly different from War Communism. Then we demanded
>from the peasant the whole surplus of his production over his immediate
>needs; but with no surplus, an enterprise totters and falls. To-day we
>say to him: a surplus is indispensable to advancement of your business,
>keep it. _For, unless there is advancement in agriculture, we shall
>have no industry_.

In conclusion Trotsky proposed simplification of taxation, that it
should be made intelligible to the peasant and easy of payment, and that
a money equivalent for the tax in kind should be fixed to improve the
peasant's lot. This proposal was adopted at the Moscow Congress as it
had been at the Kharkov Congress.

A member of the Political Bureau certainly did not take a step of this
kind without the preliminary assent of his colleagues. Their intimate
co-operation assured a minimum unanimity in action, if not in opinion.
The Bolshevik idea of discipline, reinforced by the administrative
methods and organisation of the ruling bureaucracy, presupposed the
obligation of unanimity in deliberative assemblies, after debate
sometimes impassioned but always reticent; there was also the anxiety
not to furnish arguments to the watchful enemy. The average Bolshevik
had to reckon with the probable unpleasantnesses consequent: on too
crude frankness. What militant from Moscow, Petrograd or Kiev would
expose himself with a light heart to transfer to Archangel, Irkutsk or
Vladivostok, real exile in accordance with Tsarist tradition, even
though the pretext were the necessities of the service? After so many
sacrifices, heroism was no longer the fashion, and those who were
incapable of adapting themselves fell back on the old practice of
subterranean propaganda. At the Party Congress Ossinsky might still
throw doubt on the infallibility of Lenin; the very same reflexion
uttered outside the Congress would expose an ordinary mortal to the
suspicion of counter-revolutionary tendencies. If Kossior permitted
himself to allude to the attitude of the triumvirate towards Trotsky,
this was only possible within closed doors and then not without risk. So
all the decisions of the Twelfth Congress were accepted without
subsequent opposition.

Nevertheless the discussion revealed many differences. The open tribune
of _Pravda_, an intermittent survival of democracy reserved for
privileged members of the Party, had permitted beforehand the expression
of very various opinions following Lenin's articles on the Workers' and
Peasants' Inspection. The opposed solutions were the subject of polite
and prudent controversy at the Congress, but only among delegates with a
consultative status, none of whom could modify any vote by their
speeches.

Krassin and Ossinsky criticised Lenin's suggestions, the former raising
objections to the "hypertrophy of control" by the inspecting
organisations of the Party or the State, the second combating the
confusion of functions between the State and the Party. "Our weakness
lies in incapacity to organise production, not in insufficient control,"
said Krassin. "Our aim should be the maximum of production with the
minimum of control." Contrary to Lenin, who advised the union of the
Soviet Inspection with the Communist Control Commission, Ossinsky
desired to separate the functions of the Party from those of the State
and to reform the various superior organisations with their overlapping
prerogatives and functions. His sensible idea of putting order into the
chaos of superior authorities of all sorts, denounced by Lenin, was
bound up, however, with a juridical pedantry compromising its scope. On
the other hand the importance attached to "bourgeois specialists" seemed
to him excessive, while Krassin thought it inadequate. The latter also
considered that increase of capital investment in industry inevitably
demanded larger concessions to foreign capital. Opposition was raised
this time by isolated individuals rather than by groups or sections.
There was no looking to the Left or to the Right, as was pretended by
Larin, an ex-Menshevik who had gone "Left" and constituted himself the
unseasonable defender of the working class against a hypothetical "swamp
of the Right" or an indefinable pro-peasant tendency. Larin demanded an
increase in wages and the maintenance of unprofitable undertakings at
the cost of the rural districts. The _Praesidium_ called on
Preobrazhensky, the recognised mouthpiece of the traditional Left, to
refute him. This Congress was inspired by optimism to Order, in spite of
the atmosphere of uncertainty caused by Lenin's absence, and a subtle
malaise due to "the Trotsky question" which was in the air.

In accordance with Lenin's last public suggestions the membership of the
Central Committee was increased to 40 members, and that of the Control
Commission to 50. The central organisations were henceforward to meet in
joint session. Lenin had not foreseen, and no one realised, that this
would mean a lessening of their authority in their respective statutory
functions, since a governing body of a hundred persons could only meet
rarely, and then only to register accomplished facts and to invest with
full powers the two supreme Bureaux, consisting now of seven members
each with four deputy-members. In practice the triumvirate, surrounded
by trusted partisans, maintained the authority they had achieved.
Stalin, confirmed in his functions, emerged unscathed from a Congress at
which Lenin had intended to turn him out of the Secretariat. Krupskaya
had informed no one, and Trotsky, waiting on events, allowed the
proceedings to go on without saying anything to clear the atmosphere or
prepare for the future.

### 8.2

UNANIMITY was only apparent, at the bottom as at the top of the Party.
Various clandestine opposition groups were persecuted by "the machine"
and tracked by the G.P.U. Anonymous pamphlets were secretly circulated.
Communists expelled for disobedience and militants acting with them
immune for the time being because of their obscurity, used
conspiratorial devices to counter the Government's police measures,
operating now within the only legal political organisation after they
had secured the suppression of all opposing parties.

The troika had easily got rid of their first critics by sending them on
missions far away from Moscow, in the supposed overriding interests of
communism; if the Party was the permanent incarnation of the revolution,
if the Political Bureau was the sole qualified Interpreter without
appeal of the opinion of the Central Committee, no Bolshevik worthy of
the name could raise any objection if he received from the Secretariat
marching orders and a new post. In this respect the principal
personalities to be removed owed it to discipline to resign themselves,
the more so since the Soviet Union, in creating diplomatic relations
with various European and Asiatic States, had embassies to fill. Exile
under these conditions was endurable, sometimes even attractive, and in
some cases corrupting. Thus Krestinsky, Ossinsky, Yurenev, Lutovinov,
Kollontai, Rakovsky and others were to go abroad, where they had been
preceded on valid pretexts by Krassin and Joffe. Less prominent
objectors were unceremoniously dispatched to Siberia, Mongolia and the
Far East.

To isolate Trotsky and make him impotent was the unavowed plan of Stalin
and his partners. After sending Krestinsky to Berlin, the change in
Rakovsky's position, on the ground of the necessity of having an
imposing ambassador in London, tended to deprive Trotsky of his best
supporter and to separate him from his closest friend, the President of
the Ukrainian Council of Commissars, guilty of the further crime of
disapproving Stalin's national policy. The change entailed a complete
upheaval of the bureaucracy at Kharkov and Kiev. All the secretaries of
the Ukrainian provincial Communist Committees were scattered to the four
points of the compass for having demanded the maintenance of Rakovsky at
his post in the interest of the common cause.

As for the attempts at resistance against the official policy among the
workers by less notorious militants, the triumvirate did not shrink from
any method of coercion to break them.

Only small local groups of the old, broken-up Workers' Opposition
survived. But a more active section, the Workers' Truth, issued some
proclamations from the end of 1922 onwards. It attacked as a "new
bourgeoisie" the higher and middle officials of the Party, of the trade
unions and of the State, denounced the political and material advantages
they enjoyed, and refused to acknowledge as a dictatorship of the
proletariat a regime of tyranny and exploitation." "_The gulf between
the Party and the workers is steadily deepened_," they wrote in their
appeals. The workers, subjected to "implacable exploitation," housed in
"frightful tenements," were, moreover, "deprived under threat of
repression and of unemployment of all possibility of using their votes."
The Labour Code was no more effective than other illusory charters.
"_The dictator class is in fact deprived of the most elementary
political rights_." This dissident section demanded freedom of the press
and freedom of association for "the revolutionary elements of the
proletariat."

In 1923 another opposition was secretly organised, the Workers' Group,
which expressed similar grievances, undertook the defence of
proletarians "absolutely without rights," declared the trade union
organisation to be "a blind instrument in the hands of the bureaucracy
and a bureaucratic appendage of the Political Bureau," and accused the
Party of having established "_not the dictatorship of the proletariat,
but the dictatorship of the triumvirate_." This group took part in
increasingly frequent strikes with the intention of giving them a
democratic-revolutionary direction, demanded unrestricted freedom of the
press, and made preparations for a general strike by way of protest
against the abuse of power.

Outside these two secret communist groups of small numerical importance,
smaller ones were created here and there without knowledge of one
another. All these expressed the same criticisms, but with many
differences in theoretical matters, confusion arising on those points in
which Bolshevism is tinged with liberal or anarchist ideas. These groups
did not produce a single leader capable of guiding them in a tangled
situation. But the significance of the movement, parallel with
effervescence among the workers themselves, is undoubted. The Party must
already have become divorced from its social origins not to be aware of
it.

In the course of that year, especially from July onwards, strikes of
increasing dimensions broke out, revealing the reality too long
unrecognised by the Kremlin -- the proletariat, struggling for its
morsel of bread, in unconscious rebellion, against the "dictatorship of
the triumvirate." Compensation for the intolerable privations inflicted
on the workers was not provided by Congress voting one thesis after
another, formally satisfactory, but inoperative and rapidly forgotten.
There were continuous economic crises, and famine wages, paid after long
delays in depreciated currency, did not cover the elementary
requirements of the wage-earners. Extended unemployment, reduced
production, the high price of commodities beyond the means of working
people -- all testified to the blindness of the rulers and explained the
exasperation of the ruled. The salutary decisions on economic matters
adopted by the last Communist Congress -- for the concentration of
industry, rationalisation in technical and administrative matters --
were not enforced any more than other resolutions, laws and decrees
impossible of application; all the evils of the regime grew steadily
worse until September 1923, when the workers' demonstrations became so
serious as to compel the Political Bureau to carry out the most pressing
reforms.

It was not difficult to take penal measures against the so-called
fomenters of disturbance, to arrest the leaders, to exclude their
followers from the Party, and to deprive the heretics of work and the
means of existence. The causes still had to be remedied if a repetition
of the trouble was to be avoided.

Although they were consenting parties at the rigorous measures adopted
against their comrades, Trotsky at the Political Bureau and his
supporters in the Central Committee were not, nevertheless, quite
satisfied with this purely repressive policy. A committee of inquiry,
presided over by Dzerzhinsky, demanded from communists the immediate
denunciation, either to the Control Commission or to the G.P.U., of
illegal groups within the Party. Another special committee of the
Central Committee, with powers superior to those of the ordinary
economic organisations and the regular State Commissariats, took
extraordinary measures to stop the crisis, to mitigate it, and to lessen
the angle between the blades of the "scissors." Having no illusions as
to the efficiency of these various expedients, Trotsky determined to
break silence.

In a letter, dated October 8th, to the Central Committee and the Control
Commission, he recapitulated his accumulated complaints, his criticisms,
and his defence.

Substantially, he blamed the Political Bureau for the "alarming
symptoms" which had shaken the Party from its torpor. "The best
militants," he wrote, "felt anxiety about the methods employed in the
arrangements for the Twelfth Congress, and since that time everything
had gone from bad to worse." This was a clear allusion to Stalin and to
his astute methods of handling and placing obedient officials, and
removing the refractory to other posts. The unhealthy internal condition
of the Party and the discontent of the workers and peasants provoked by
the mistakes made in economic policy were the two essential causes of
the new difficulties to be faced. The alliance _(smychka)_ between town
and country, insisted on by Lenin, was becoming an empty phrase, instead
of a practical effort to reduce costs of State production. Far from
assuming increased importance, the Gosplan was neglected and the main
economic problems were settled by the Political Bureau without
preliminary study or serious method. Thus "chaos began at the top." The
disparity between industrial and agricultural prices tended to liquidate
the N.E.P., for the peasant could no longer buy when he found that a
_pood_ of wheat was worth two boxes of matches. Industry was loaded with
unproductive financial charges, as, for example, the useless
advertisements imposed by the local committees of the Party to meet the
deficit on their publications.

In developing these accusations, Trotsky attacked Stalin without
mentioning his name. After the Twelfth Congress the Party Secretariat
had nominated officials in economic affairs, on the grounds not of their
competence, but of their subservience to the Party. The General
Secretary himself selected the secretaries of the provincial committees
who, in turn, chose the secretaries of subordinate committees, and so
on, down to the smallest "cells." Thus there was a hierarchy of
secretaries, a machine of secretaries, a psychology of secretaries.
Elections ceased. The workers' democracy talked of in official
literature was pure fiction; the dictatorship of the bureaucracy was
further from it than War Communism had been. At the worst moments of the
Civil War the Party had been able to discuss openly the interests of the
revolution; now any exchange of opinion was impossible. A large class of
communists no longer took the trouble to think; the masses only learned
the decisions that had been taken by the decrees issued, and discontent,
deprived of expression, produced internal abscesses, in the form of
secret groups.

The Political Bureau, continued Trotsky, had come to the point of
balancing the Budget by restoring _vodka_ (spirit made from grain,
forbidden under Tsarism in 1914) as a State monopoly. The legislation on
alcohol and alcoholism involved, among other things, the danger of
making the Soviet revenue independent of the progress of national
prosperity, and the bureaucratic hierarchy independent of the Party. The
prohibition of any discussion even of this unfortunate scheme was an
indication of danger, corroborated by the dismissal of an editor of
_Pravda_ for the sole crime of having demanded free examination of the
project.

In another connection, the Political Bureau had arranged to make Stalin
a member of the Revolutionary Council of War, for considerations other
than military. Voroshilov and Lashevich were appointed to it for reasons
openly avowed by Kuibyshev, who said to Trotsky: "We think it necessary
to combat you, but cannot openly treat you as an enemy; that is why we
must have recourse to these methods." Identical measures had been
employed against Rakovsky in the Ukraine.

In conclusion, Trotsky demanded an end to the bureaucratic rule of the
secretaries, and the restoration of the Party democracy within proper
limits, to prevent irremediable degeneration. For a year and a half, he
said, he had abstained, vainly, from carrying the struggle outside the
Central Committee. "I now think it not only my right, but my duty, to
tell those members of the Party, who are sufficiently prepared,
experienced, politically conscious, and therefore able to help the Party
to emerge from the impasse without convulsion or shock."

The Political Bureau felt compelled to reply to this indictment. In a
document, a secret one like Trotsky's own, they charged Trotsky with the
ambition of an "economic and military dictatorship," reproached him with
having declined Lenin's invitation to act as his deputy on the Council
of Commissars, of failing to attend either the sittings of that
organisation or the Council of Labour and Defence, of taking no
initiative in economic, financial or budgetary questions, of acting on
the formula of "all or nothing," and of refusing to work in economic
matters, contenting himself with constant criticism of the Central
Committee. Evading their antagonist's indictment, the Political Bureau
recalled earlier disagreements between Lenin and Trotsky, and proceeded
to accuse him of repeated imprudences in foreign policy, of rash acts
which might have precipitated armed conflicts now with Poland, now with
England.

Trotsky replied on October 24th. He referred to the differences which
had arisen in the course of a single year between Lenin and those
desirous of exploiting the prestige of his name, especially in regard to
the monopoly of foreign trade, the national question, and the Workers'
and Peasants' Inspection. He emphasised his agreement with Lenin on
these various questions as well as on the fundamental question of
economic planning. He referred to Lenin's devastating criticism of the
Inspection, that is of Stalin, following on the Georgian affair which
had been equally awkward for the General Secretary; he revealed the
hostility of the Political Bureau to the publication and to the tenor of
the last article written by Lenin. Kuibyshev, who had proposed to print
a single issue of _Pravda_ containing the article, to deceive Lenin
while concealing his ideas from the country, had been placed at the head
of the Control Commission, which had been perverted from its proper
function and subordinated to the Secretariat, to that bureaucracy which
it was its business to supervise....

The Party knew nothing of all this, and, even later, was never to know
much about this epistolary controversy, the cautious style of which ill
concealed a cold violence restrained with difficulty. Neither side was
anxious to shatter popular illusions about the men in power.

Meantime the Central Committee received on October 15th a letter signed
by forty-six well-known personages, who expressed themselves in the same
sense as Trotsky, some of them with reservations on points of detail.
The greater part were former "Left" communists, with some
representatives of "Democratic Centralism": Pyatakov, Preobrazhensky,
Serebriakov, I. Smirnov, Antonov, Ossinsky, Bubnov, Sapronov, V.
Smirnov, Boguslavsky, Stukov, Yakovleva, V. Kossior, Rafail, Maximovsky,
and other well-known militants: Byeloborodov, Alsky, Muralov,
Rosengoltz, Sosnovsky, Voronsky, Eugenia Bosch, Drobnis, Eltsin, etc.
Rakovsky and Krestinsky, on mission abroad, had not been able to sign.
Radek, in a separate letter, declared agreement with Trotsky to be
indispensable.

The forty-six called for the convocation of a special conference to take
the measures dictated by the circumstances, pending a Congress. Radek,
on the other hand, urged the settlement of the difference within the
Politbureau itself. He was just about to start for Germany, where the
economic and political situation indicated the approach of a
revolutionary upheaval, in consequence of the French occupation of the
Ruhr, passive resistance and a currency catastrophe. He invoked the
gravity of these events in support of his opinions.

But the prospects of revolution in Germany, confidently reckoned on by
communists in all countries, provided a new motive of discord among
Bolsheviks. The German Communist Party, subordinate in principle, like
all national Communist sections, to the Executive Committee of the
Communist International, was to follow in practice the instructions of
the Russian Political Bureau, which exercised the predominant influence
in the international Executive, and which alone disposed of the various
resources essential to the revolutionary movement. Now there were
contradictory opinions in the Political Bureau. Zinoviev, President of
the Executive of the International, undecided without Lenin, hesitated
and maneuvered, consulted Radek, who had the reputation of an expert,
and sought a mean between premature action and sterile delay. Trotsky
advocated offensive tactics, advised preparations for insurrection, and
even the fixing of a date. Stalin, on the contrary, walked warily in his
first essay in world politics. In August, he had written to B Zinoviev
and Bukharin as follows:

>Should Communists strive, at the present stage, to seize power without
>the Social Democrats? Are they ripe for that? That is the question, in
>my opinion. In seizing power we had in Russia certain reserve
>resources: (a) peace; (b) the land for the peasants; (c) the Support of
>the immense majority of the working class; and (d) the Sympathy of the
>peasants. German Communists have nothing like that. They have, indeed,
>a Soviet country as neighbour, which we had not; but what can we give
>them at the present moment? If the Government in Germany falls now, so
>to say, and the communists seize it, they will end in a smash. That, at
>the best. At the worst, they will be hewn in pieces.... The fascists
>are certainly not sleeping, but it is to our advantage for them to
>attack first; that will attract the whole working class to the
>communists.... Moreover, all our information indicates that fascism is
>weak in Germany. In my opinion we should restrain and not incite the
>Germans.

At this time the acute turn of events weakened Stalin's point of view.
Secret information from Berlin convinced the Political Bureau of the
imminence of social revolution. At the end of September preparations
were hurried on for an expected "new October." German communists asked
for a leader from Moscow, naming Trotsky. Consternation and annoyance on
the part of Zinoviev, who offered himself! The Political Bureau refused
both, choosing Radek and Pyatakov, who started in mid-October, when the
internal crisis of Bolshevism was acute.

It was not the moment for a war on theories. This had been adjourned by
common accord in order to concentrate attention on the new revolution on
the march. The truce was short; it ended with the disappointed hopes of
communist victory in Germany. On November 7th, on the occasion of the
sixth anniversary of the Soviet Republic, Pravda published an article by
Zinoviev, who in the name of the leaders and under pressure by Trotsky
and the forty-six, announced "workers' democracy" within the Party, and
opened a public discussion. Communists were free to speak.

After such a long period of silence the Party felt the need of
self-expression, but dare not open their mouths for fear of reprisals.
The "workers' democracy" of which Zinoviev spoke, prescribed in its
statutes and its programme, and in the decisions of all the Congresses,
notably of the Tenth, had for long been an empty phrase. There was no
reason to expect a real change.

Outside the communist ranks, nobody was interested in a democracy
reserved for privileged persons, for a tiny minority. At that time the
Party only numbered 351,000 members, all officials with the exception of
54,000 workers who were favoured in the workshops. In addition there
were 93,000 aspirants on probation, and the Young Communists. The
discussion started dully. It was hard to overcome inertia and mistrust,
hard to obtain the first articles, the sense of which was contained in
the formula, "better late than never." The intervention of
Preobrazhensky and Sapronov gave the polemic a start; an opposition of
the Left on undetermined lines began to develop against the dictatorship
of the triumvirate.

Simultaneously the Political Bureau sought to establish agreement among
the leaders, and, on December 5th, they adopted a resolution giving
satisfaction to Trotsky -- on paper. In this document they praised the
N.E.P., together with Trotsky's propositions at the Twelfth Congress in
regard to the Gosplan, the general staff of the Socialist State,
concentration of industry, and general rationalisation. They condemned
"excessive material inequality" among communists, the "luxury" of some,
the "bureaucratic narrowness" of others, the "demoralisation" of
militants with a bourgeois tendency, and the "bureaucratisation" of the
Party machine. Communists were promised workers' democracy, the right of
criticism, liberty of investigation, appointment by election of their
officials, representatives and committees. This was the "new course"
demanded by a Bolshevist elite, by Trotsky and the forty-six, with the
intention of applying it to their Party, to the trade unions, and to the
Soviets, to the advantage of the whole working population.

There was still time to orient the revolution in the direction of a
Soviet democracy, relative only, it is true, but real as far as it went.
If the bureaucratic and militaristic tendency of the regime, the product
of bitter civil war in an immense undeveloped country, had lasted beyond
the conditions which gave it birth, it is certain that no human force
would have been capable of bringing it to a full stop. The
circumstances, historical and social, incontestably lessened individual
responsibility in this matter. Nevertheless, three years of peace with
other nations, and two years of comparative calm at home made it
Possible to embark upon a new stage. The democratic opposition
understood this and worked for it. The triumvirate pretended to
understand, but their mental reservations soon hardened. The
ill-informed majority gave their approval to both without clearly
understanding the divergences. Clearly the "new course" could
only be realised by the collective intelligence and energy of the Party;
a handful of well-meaning men would be powerless against the
conservatism inherent in the machine. Failing this unanimous effort, the
specific characteristics of the former Russia would reappear sooner or
later under new forms, for they were inevitable in any autocratic system
established in the same barbarous environment.

Evidently the "new course" could not be accomplished in a day. The Party
had to be prepared to resume the responsibility for its own fate,
together with the future of the revolution, and to effect a fundamental
transformation which would affect other Soviet Institutions. The prime
movers in this matter must themselves be the active and vigilant agents
for carrying into effect the promises of the Political Bureau, and for
re-educating the members of the bureaucratised system to carry out the
common work. But instead of adopting this point of view, the new
opposition decided to demand there and then a radical change in the
equipment of the Party, and the immediate election or re-election of all
its officials. Fearing that the prospect of democracy would prove as
evanescent as former hopes they wanted to secure the destruction of the
machine.

The opposition led by Preobrazhensky and Sapronov was doomed in advance
by this initial blunder in tactics. The threatened bloc felt it had a
good case, and struck unsparingly. The discussion opened quietly, but a
storm developed, rousing the 50,000 "cells," the innumerable groups, the
many committees and the various higher organs of the Party. As many as
thirty columns of _Pravda_ were filled daily with an arbitrary selection
of articles, resolutions and reports, misrepresenting the views of the
Left, perverting their plans, and spreading inaccurate or tendencious
information without giving an opportunity for denial, refutation or
explanation. There could be no doubt as to the issue of the unequal
struggle between the masters of the machine for the formation of
opinion, and a few unarmed militants. At the moment when their ideas
were in the ascendant, the impatient "oppositionists" courted the fate
of their predecessors by their lack of political tact and their clumsy
strategy.

Trotsky, who had been ill since the beginning of November, took no
direct part in the debates. Outside a small circle of initiates, he was
thought to be a supporter of the Political Bureau and the Central
Committee. After one very cautious article, "ideas on the Party," on the
occasion of an anniversary, he only published two essays, "On
Officialdom in the Army and Elsewhere" and "On the Connection between
Town and Country," in the same sense as his earlier interventions in the
Central Committee; but the underlying implications were not intelligible
to the general public. Suddenly he thought it necessary to define his
position with more frankness, and, without abandoning his diplomatic
reserve or openly approving the Opposition, he addressed, on December
8th, a letter to the meeting of militants in Moscow, which was published
two days later in _Pravda_.

Under the title of _The New Course_ he commented on the resolution
adopted with his support on December 5th, explaining his view of the
dangers of bureaucracy and the possible degeneration of the "Old Guard"
of Bolshevism. Against those who hoped once more to bury the workers'
democracy, he demanded the dismissal of "mummified bureaucrats," and
summoned the younger generation to emancipate themselves from passive
obedience, servility, and careerism. "The new course Should, as its
first result, bring home to all that henceforward no one should dare to
terrorise the Party."

This gave a sharp turn to the discussion. Attention was directed to
Trotsky, whose attitude seemed to be different from what was commonly
supposed; in spite of careful drafting, the letter confirmed the thesis
of the malcontents. The triumvirate took fright at the implicit support
given to the Opposition of the Left, and, interpreting it as a threat to
themselves, resolved to seize the opportunity to discredit the principal
adversary. Stalin gave the unexpected signal for personal attacks on
Trotsky. The latter was faced with what he would have liked at all costs
to avoid -- an open struggle for the succession to Lenin.

### 8.3

ON DECEMBER 2nd, in the course of the public controversy, Stalin had
delivered before the "enlarged assembly of group committees, group
organisers, members of discussion clubs and bureaux of cells of the
group of Krasnaya Presnia" (the lesser Party officials or candidates for
permanent office), an address in his elementary schoolmaster style
suited to a childlike audience. For the sake of greater clearness and
simplicity and so that nothing might be omitted, he proceeded by way of
enumeration of ideas and arguments borrowed from Right and Left, not
avoiding detailed repetitions and incontestable truisms. He listed five
causes of the "defects in the internal economy of the Party," describing
them imperturbably, first, second, third and so on. He then enunciated a
series of eight remedies, developing them without haste, first, second,
third and so on, down to the eighth. As usual he took pains to stand
midway between the extremes, and carefully delivered his well-conned
theme which his subordinates were carefully to recite to _their_
subordinates. At the close of his discourse he referred politely, even
deferentially, to Trotsky, whose name had been invoked in the press by
an opponent. His discourse was only a paraphrase in anticipation of the
general ideas embodied in the Resolution adopted by the Political Bureau
three days later.

But after Trotsky's letter, there was a change of tone. On December 15th
_Pravda_ published an article by Stalin in which the leaders of the Left
were taken to task, by insinuation and obscure allusions rather than by
direct attack. "Among the Opposition, we see comrades such as
Byeloborodov, whose _democratism_ cannot be forgotten by the Rostov
workers; Rosengoltz, whose _democratism_ has long excited emotion in the
Donetz Basin; Alsky, whose _democratism_ is universally recognised,"
Etcetera. To sum up, he accused the new champions of workers' democracy
of being no more democratic than himself in their current activities. As
for Trotsky, he evokes his unorthodox past with an undercurrent of
would-be irony.

>As is apparent from his letter, Comrade Trotsky counts himself as one
>of the Bolshevik Old Guard, declaring his readiness to share in the
>responsibility arising from this fact, if charges of later heresies
>were brought against the Old Bolsheviks. In expressing his willingness
>for self-sacrifice, Comrade Trotsky no doubt displays nobility of
>sentiment. Agreed. But I must undertake the defence of Trotsky against
>himself, because, for reasons which will be readily understood, he
>cannot and should not hold himself responsible for any later heresies
>of the original group of Old Bolsheviks. His offer of sacrifice is no
>doubt a very noble thing, but do the Old 'Bolsheviks need it? I do not
>think so.

This reference to the past had no particular inherent interest and does
not seem, _a posteriori_, especially aggressive. But, in the atmosphere
of that time, it was understood by "the machine" as indicating a target
and as an authorisation to strike; henceforward Trotsky was no longer to
be immune from attack as Lenin had been, and ambitious officials would
know what was expected of them. Behind the scenes the great leader of
yesterday could be secretly disparaged and whispers of Bonapartism were
permissible.

The troika did not yet feel strong enough to attack Trotsky openly. It
was to be enlarged for the conduct of the campaign into a semiorka, a
secret committee of seven members, by the addition of Kalinin, Tomsky
and Rykov of the Political Bureau, also of Kuibyshev. They had their
agents, emissaries, auxiliaries, their cypher for correspondence, their
own sectional discipline. They disposed of considerable State resources,
of all sorts of means of persuasion, pressure, intimidation and
corruption. Lacking the intellectual resources of their adversaries,
they enjoyed the compensating advantage of long experience of internal
strife and were not embarrassed by any scruple in attaining their ends.
Stalin held the threads of the conspiracy in his hand.

As compared with so formidable a coterie, determined to maintain
themselves in power at any cost, the opposition were indefinite, and
lacked cohesion and continuity of effort. Far from constituting a
fraction, as they had been accused of doing, they acted intermittently,
often as occasion offered and with sharp changes of front, and were
incapable of pursuing a steady policy. Their spokesmen relied on
individual initiative, without unanimity and sometimes in direct
contradiction of one another. Instead of confining themselves to the
actual question of democracy, a claim in harmony with the interests of
the workers and the principles of communism, and the only battlecry
which would keep awake the critical consciousness of the Party --
Pyatakov, Preobrazhensky and I. Smirnov decided to create a diversion by
discussing the most difficult problems of finance and industry. Ossinsky
defended other ideas on similar subjects. Radek improvised more or less
able spoken journalism. Sapronov and his friends fought ardently and
rashly for "democratic centralism." Shliapnikov came forward once more,
in disagreement with them all, in the cause of the old Workers'
Opposition. Trotsky, confined to his bed, committed the irreparable
mistake of laying himself open to blows he could not return, and had to
endure all the inconvenience of the struggle without being able to hope
for the smallest advantage to the cause to be defended.

The troika easily got the better of such opponents. They were able to
bribe the least determined, like Bubnov, and to punish the clumsiest,
like Antonov, by nominating the one to the other's post as head of the
political education department of the army. Others were neutralised by
skilful nominations and punishments, some by promises and threats. The
remainder were submerged in the sheep-like loyalty of the interested
bureaucracy. In the complicated network of the meetings of the bureaux
of the cells, enlarged group committees, conferences of responsible
militants, etc., the officials, under the authority of the Secretariat,
enjoyed an automatic preponderance. Working-class opinion, already
misrepresented by open voting, because of the danger of victimisation,
hardly penetrated through the six stages of Party organisation -- cell,
group, locality, province, republic, Soviet Union -- the stages below
the Central Committee, the seventh rung of the system.

In the last resort the triumvirate only had to diminish the importance
of the man who towered above them in prestige, to disparage him
sufficiently to destroy too flagrant a disproportion between the members
of the Political Bureau. For that purpose Trotsky offered an adequate
pretext by his cautious letter on _The New Course_, which said either
too much or not enough. Too much, for a leader accepting responsibility
for the regime; too little, for an opponent determined to reinstate
forgotten truths and to reanimate a supine movement.

Nevertheless, Stalin's polemic created a very disagreeable impression on
Soviet public opinion. No serious revolutionary admitted the suspicion
cast on the most eminent personage of the revolution now that Lenin was
gone. The triumvirate sensed the breath of general disapproval, and
promptly manoeuvred to appease anxiety.

On December 18th _Pravda_ published a reassuring statement from the
Political Bureau, briefly defending Stalin and roundly asserting that:

>The Political Bureau denounce as malevolent invention the suggestion
>that there is in the Central Committee of the Party or in its Political
>Bureau any single comrade who can conceive of the work of the Political
>Bureau, of the Central Committee or its executive organs without the
>most active participation of Comrade Trotsky.... Believing friendly
>co-operation with Comrade Trotsky to be absolutely indispensable in all
>the executive organs of the Party and the State, the Political Bureau
>hold themselves bound to do all in their power to assure this friendly
>co-operation in the future.

As if by chance a _Letter from the Petrograd Organisation_, remarkably
similar in terms, appeared on the same day:

>Without concurring in the errors of Comrade Trotsky, the Petrograd
>organisation declare that, in agreement with the Central Committee of
>the Party, they naturally consider friendly co-operation with Comrade
>Trotsky in all the governing institutions of the Party to be
>indispensable. There has been, and probably will be again, more than
>one disagreement in the Central Committee. But certainly no comrade
>conceives of the governing institutions of the Party without the active
>participation of Comrade Trotsky.

The simultaneous appearance of formulas so closely in agreement leaves
no doubt of the origin of these "spontaneous" utterances. Similarly, a
flood of resolutions adopted in the most remote provinces and
reproducing word for word the Moscow text, condemning the "sectionalism
of the Opposition" and the "errors of Comrade Trotsky." The hierarchy of
secretaries carried out their functions. Exceptions were not yet
impossible, but nothing could alter the rule; when _Pravda_ received
from Kiev a resolution favourable to the minority, a certain Nazaretian,
Stalin's secretary, falsified it by a stroke of the pen. Trotsky,
Pyatakov and Radek, armed with the original document showing the
falsification as irrefutable evidence, appealed to the Control
Commission, which, in obedience to the all-powerful Secretariat,
censured the plaintiffs, not the forger. The machine presented a united
front, and the Opposition were much mistaken if they thought it
vulnerable.

The triumvirate had no intention of losing Trotsky's collaboration in
the Government. They were content with diminishing the prestige of the
"organiser of victory" sufficiently to remove him from the plenary
succession to Lenin, which they proposed to divide amongst themselves.
They were no longer willing to serve in the second rank, and, indeed,
they denied Trotsky's possession of the qualities which gave Lenin, the
founder of the Party, his unique importance. Trotsky's supremacy would
have meant, for them, at an early date, the advent of a new ruling group
and the gradual elimination of the Old Guard of which they professed to
be the nucleus. Faced with this eventuality they would shrink from no
means to wear down Trotsky's influence and to strengthen their own
dominance.

In spite of unlimited administrative pressure, the Opposition obtained
half the votes in Moscow, because the "new course" expressed the
democratic desires of the lower stratum of the Party. The young people
in the communist universities, among others, rallied to their side. The
revolutionary tradition was still maintained, beneath the cloak of
bureaucratic obedience. But the hierarchy of secretaries, though still
not perfectly organised, was already strong enough to break any attempt
to threaten its existence. Sympathisers with the Left, charged with
"deviation from the Right," with semi-Menshevism, with opportunism, and,
finally, with "Trotskyism," were prevented, in the interests of the
dictatorial demagogy, from sending delegates to the regional conferences
supposed to reflect party opinion. Clearly, the course of the central
conference arranged for January 1924, at which the Opposition would be
reduced, by various artifices, to a minimum, was fixed in advance on the
lines laid down in the offices of the Secretariat.

If circumstances as a whole favoured the machine, the Opposition
nevertheless owed its defeat primarily to the illusions of its leaders.
They need not have provoked a premature shock without counting the
consequences, without fixing practicable objectives, or assuring
themselves of sufficient chances before running the risk. At the start,
they had undertaken the impossible in a frontal assault -- without any
preparation and at a moment of declining revolutionary enthusiasm --
against a position impregnable to all but indirect attack. In no case
would the quality of their theories have compensated their strategical
blunders in method. At the best, this Party of 351,000 members,
including some 300,000 officials, could not support an imprudent
declaration of war against the bureaucracy. The timid action actually
taken bore little resemblance to the high-sounding and aggressive
phraseology used, which was empty and dangerous if it was not to be
translated into effective attack.

But their mistakes in these circumstances were due to the deep-seated
cause of their final defeat: the Bolshevist mystical theory of the Party
"entirely apart from and above everything else," an abstract identity,
essentially invulnerable. The Opposition were lost by their idealisation
of the very evil they proposed to attack under another name, and it was
in vain that they differentiated between the Party on the one hand and
its organisation and leaders on the other, without in fact driving a
wedge between them. Since the bureaucratic State and the bureaucratic
Party were inextricably bound together and the communist monopoly was
declared inviolable, the reform of the regime was only possible by the
slow process of evolution or the rapid method of revolution; the
Opposition could make up their minds neither for one nor for the other.
Alone in complying with the constitutional fiction of the Party, openly
mocked by the majority, they wanted to act rapidly without recourse to
force, that is to say, with due respect to the forms of the
Constitution, which were to be used for their destruction.

Trotsky, their responsible head, could not be ignorant of what his
opponents, once aroused, might do. He had had to do with them in similar
circumstances when Lenin was there to intervene and to prevent the
worst. He had had experience of Stalin from the time of the Civil War
onwards, in constant personal contact with him at the Political Bureau;
he had known the other two even longer, since the bitter disputes in the
emigration. Before the War of 1914 he had clearly seen in the Bolsheviks
certain "negative aspects," which he defined as "theoretical formalism,
legalist rigidity, a police-officer's distrust of historical evolution,
egoism, and conservatism in organisation" -- faults stereotyped after
their accession to power and after the transformation of the Party into
the framework of the State. He knew that, with Lenin's disappearance,
Bolshevism would lose its great capacity for self-criticism, a source of
life-giving energy which attenuated and to some extent compensated the
original flaws.

Then, at what he thought the decisive moment, he took action to
reinvigorate the Party, without taking into account the circumstances
and the state of opinion, as if the Party conformed strictly to its
statutes and principles, and its leaders to the laws of fair play. He
repeated, in an exaggerated form, the tactical mistake he made in the
trade unions discussion of 1921, by raising, indirectly, the question of
the supreme power without any chance of settling it, thus arousing the
hostility of his rivals without gaining anything by so doing. After
having supported unanimity "at the top" and the roughest means of
imposing it on the rank and file, he suddenly gave the impression of
infringing that unanimity when he was not in a position to undertake the
struggle. It is not certain whether he opposed the arbitrary arrest of
Bogdanov (who had stood outside the Party since his rupture with Lenin
and had devoted himself to scientific studies), who was imprisoned after
the 1923 strikes on the bare suspicion of connivance with the Worker's
Truth. However that may be, he associated himself with the severe
repression of the intrigues of this dissident section and of the
Workers' Group. Yet now he condemned police methods and demanded
democratic reform in the Party. After the Political Bureau had met his
demands, at any rate in theory, he appeared to be taking the offensive
against his colleagues, perhaps so as not to leave to its own devices
the Opposition, whom he had inspired but had failed to guide and
restrain. But, if his published letter provided his supporters with
arguments, it also provided the triumvirate with weapons against him and
an admirable pretext. The inevitable retort put him on his defence. In
the name of the interest of the Party he declined to reply to the
campaign of defamation fomented by Stalin. Nevertheless he wrote three
articles defining the grounds of his intervention, and, on the eve of
the January conference, he collected them under the title of _The New
Course_, with some additional chapters. By this hesitating procedure, he
lost the advantages of silence. On the other hand, the lofty ideas, the
subtle allusions, and the discreet polemic of the book were
comprehensible only to a picked few, who did not weigh heavily in the
bureaucratic scale; moreover the little pamphlet, published in a small
edition, was very soon unobtainable, owing to precautions taken by
Stalin. After this, on medical advice, he left for the Caucasus....

On this disconcerting line of action, his own memoirs provide valuable
comment drawn from the unpublished journal of his wife, N. Sedova.

>Trotsky [she writes], was alone and ill, and had to fight them all.
>Owing to his illness, the meetings [of the Politbureau] were held in
>our apartment; I was in the adjoining bedroom and heard his speeches.
>He spoke with his whole being; it seemed as if, with every such speech,
>he lost some of his strength -- he spoke with so much "blood." And in
>reply I heard frigid and indifferent replies. Everything had been
>settled beforehand. Why should they get excited After each meeting of
>this kind, Leon Davidovich ran up a temperature; he emerged from the
>room drenched to the bone....

Trotsky exhausted himself utterly in eloquent speeches to an audience of
six, from whom he had nothing to expect but implacable hostility. In the
meanwhile he was being busily discredited in Party circles. There could
be no better proof that intelligence, culture, many-sided talent,
powerful temperament and high character are not enough to make a great
politician. Outstanding as was his personality, the Trotsky of the
October Revolution and the Civil War had only reached his full stature
as a man of action owing to his contact with Lenin.

Stalin, "endowed with all the astuteness that Trotsky lacked" -- notes
Max Eastman, the American communist writer and the scrupulously accurate
annalist of this crisis -- was then entering on the decisive phase of
his arid career. The capture of the heritage of October did not demand
the qualities of a Lenin and a Trotsky necessary for its achievement.
There was no question at all of filling the place of a man who was
irreplaceable, for Lenin's eminence arose from his brain, not from his
functions. What was required was to have the last word in the Political
Bureau, to have practical control of the Central Committee, which could
arrange the composition of the Party Congress as it pleased. Stalin was
to succeed in this by ranging against Trotsky a sort of syndicate of
mediocre Old Bolsheviks, of whose moderate opinions he made himself the
spokesman and whose faithful agent he pretended to be. The Political
Bureau ordinarily sat once a week, and left the Secretariat, which met
daily, a certain margin of initiative and interpretation. For the moment
Stalin asked no more.

The Opposition did not have the elementary good sense to absent
themselves from the Conference of January 1924, and found themselves
reduced to three delegates with voting powers. Stalin played an
important part. In his report on the "construction of the Party," he
reproached the absent Trotsky with "six serious errors," commenting on
these at great length. "First error": the publication of his letter on
the "New Course" after the adoption of the official resolution. "Second
error": the adoption of an ambiguous standpoint. "Third error":
differentiating the Party and its machine. "Fourth error": ranging the
younger generation against the older ranks and imputing degeneration to
the latter. "Fifth error": describing the students as the most accurate
barometer of the Party. "Sixth error": the demand for freedom of
grouping within the Party. To the Oppositionists who had invoked an
explicit decision on democracy from the Tenth Congress he replied by
quoting a secret clause of this decision providing for the exclusion of
the recalcitrants in certain cases of indiscipline.

In any case he showed some respect to "Comrade Trotsky, whom I should
certainly not put for one moment on the same plane as the Mensheviks,"
but he consistently decried him. In his concluding speech he said: "We
have taken all the necessary measures to ensure friendly co-operation
with Trotsky, although I must say that it has not been at all easy to do
so."

The troika felt obliged to respect in Trotsky the famous name, which,
together with Lenin's, personified the revolution among the Russian
people and in international opinion. Zinoviev had declared in a report
at Petrograd in December: "Comrade Trotsky's authority is recognised as
completely as his merits. Amongst ourselves, there is no need to say
more. But error is still error." On the other hand, it was necessary to
reckon with the possibility, more and more remote indeed, of Lenin's
restoration to health and return to business, and to do nothing
Irreparable in view of such an eventuality. In concluding the conference
Kamenev announced: "Vladimir Ilyich is better," and he spoke of "the
moment when Lenin will return to his post." The Opposition based great
hopes on this vague prospect.

On his way to the Caucasian Riviera, Trotsky received a telegram at
Tiflis station, on January 21, 1924. Stalin informed him of Lenin's
death.

### 8.4

THE event was not unexpected; for more than a year Party members had
been growing accustomed to the idea of the master's final disappearance.
But the grief of his disciples was none the less poignant, especially
after the disappointments of the immediate past. If the people as a
whole, weighed down by poverty and weariness, received the news without
apparent emotion, it was a hard blow to the communists, the only
politically active section of Soviet citizens, and painful even to the
most hardened.

Even though Lenin had no longer taken any part in the administration of
the Party or of the State, his very existence nevertheless compelled
some respect for a certain formal Marxist tradition in Bolshevism; it
exercised some restraint over his heirs, too ready to sacrifice
principles to the immediate interests of the Government, and over the
ambitions centred on the inheritance of the revolution. After his death
his successors, liberated from all doctrinal scruples, gave free course
to their initiative, and gradually revealed the true nature of their
domination.

The first measures taken by the Political Bureau imposed mourning in
various forms on the whole population, with the intention of exploiting
it for their own ends. At Moscow, the militia ordered flags to be
hoisted and draped with crape, under pain of a fine, before any reason
was given. Under the pretext of honouring the dead, the machine used the
grossest artifices of fetichist religions, modernised by the most
trivial advertisement. The press undertook to awaken a fictitious
mysticism, to elaborate special ceremonies for the ignorant masses whom
it was their mission to enlighten. Embalmed like that of a Pharaoh, the
body of the great materialist revolutionary provided interminable
spectacular ceremonies, was permanently exposed to the public curiosity,
awakened, stimulated and encouraged by all possible means, captured and
canalised in a quasi-perpetual file passing beside the corpse. A
sanctuary erected outside the wall of the Kremlin commemorated the
unconscious outrage of the Leninists on Lenin's memory. The crowd were
attracted to it, the workers marched past under orders, children were
brought there, until there began the endless procession of superstitious
peasants mixed with incredulous tourists.

The tomb of Karl Marx in Highgate Cemetery is marked by a simple slab of
stone. The ashes of Engels were scattered from an urn into the North
Sea. But in the twentieth century, in the only country whose Government
professed to be inspired by the _Communist Manifesto_, the corpse of an
illustrious man was to be exhibited in great pomp in a funeral monument
inspired by the mausoleum of Tamerlane. A contrast significant indeed,
and that not only in externals; for the embalming of Lenin's remains
found its counterpart in the Communist International in the
mummification of its founder's work, the petrifaction of his thought,
misunderstood by those who pretended to be its natural inheritors and
its qualified interpreters, though they were even incapable of
understanding the ancient saying that "Great men have the world for
their sepulchre."

It was not enough for Lenin to have been a hero, a superman, a genius;
the triumvirs of the troika made him a kind of deity, whose prophets
they aspired to be. In deifying him they were preparing their own future
beatification. If they were to be believed, Lenin had known, seen,
foreseen everything, had said and predicted everything. His portrait --
full or half-length, fullface and profile, was modelled in statuettes,
struck on medals, painted on signs, woven into handkerchiefs, printed,
engraved, embossed, embroidered, reproduced in millions of copies --
took the place of the icons, by way of rivalry between creeds. The same
effigy was repeated on walls, in stations, on grocers' shops, on plate,
ash-trays, cigarette-cases and ordinary household utensils. Pious,
unaesthetic pictures illustrated in black and white and in colours a raw
mass of pretentious literature in prose and verse. _Izvestia_ published
a requiem, between two ecstatic articles, above a drawing in bad taste.
Some photographed Lenin's armchair, others collected relies. On all
sides his name was given to towns, streets, institutions, factories,
clubs, sports-grounds, and to innumerable places and things. Petrograd
became Leningrad, and there were Lenino, Leninsk, Leninskaya, Leninakan,
Leninsk-Kuznietsky, Ulianovsk, Ulianovka. Feverish zeal inspired the
crassest commemorative plans. Under the thin varnish, already
disappearing, of imported Marxist theory, there reappeared the familiar
face of ancient, barbaric Russia.

In the midst of these noisy manifestations of collective delirium, in
which Pharisaism was mixed with natural enthusiasm, Stalin more than
anyone else struck the note. On the eve of the funeral, at the Second
Congress of the Soviets of the Union, he delivered a strange speech,
perhaps the most typical among all his writings, for he left nothing to
improvisation, and the text was carefully prepared in advance. Among
paragraphs consisting of elementary statements, of well-worn truisms, of
tiresome repetitions delivered with the note of absolute certainty which
betrays ignorance -- are intercalated litanies with Slavonic assonances,
in which the former pupil of the Tiflis Seminary addresses the deified
Lenin as "thou," and reveals his clerical mentality unabashed. At the
end he assembles a series of fervent invocations, detached from their
context, to make a sort of creed for the use of aspirants to the
Leninist religion. The result is worth quoting:

>In leaving us, Comrade Lenin commanded us to hold high and to keep pure
>the great name of Member of the Party. We swear to thee, Comrade Lenin,
>to honour thy command.
>
>In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordered us to conserve the unity of our
>Party as the, apple of our eye. We swear to thee, Comrade Lenin, to
>honour thy command.
>
>In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordered us to maintain and strengthen the
>dictatorship of the proletariat. We swear to thee, Comrade Lenin, to
>exert our full strength to honour thy command.
>
>In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordered us to strengthen with all our
>might the union of workers and peasants. We swear to thee, Comrade
>Lenin, to honour thy command.
>
>In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordered us to strengthen and enlarge the
>Union of the Republics. We swear to thee, Comrade Lenin, to honour thy
>command.
>
>In leaving us, Comrade Lenin enjoined on us fidelity to the Communist
>International. We swear to thee, Comrade Lenin, to devote our lives to
>the enlargement and strengthening of the union of the workers of the
>whole world, the Communist International.

A unique document, but only incomprehensible if one forgets one
essential truth, expressed by Lenin: "We took Marxist doctrine
ready-made from western Europe." With few exceptions, Bolsheviks in
general had not assimilated modern revolutionary thought, whose
terminology they had borrowed without being able to modify their inborn
mentality as "people of a country doubly backward from the point of view
of economy and of culture, people more tortured than any others by the
past," as Corky describes them. Thus, even before he was laid in his
monumental grave, Lenin had been denied in theological terms, and
through him Marxism, even down to the religious homage and solemn oaths
of the adepts of State Bolshevism, the ideology of revolutionary
decadence.

The six Commandments of the new church, formulated by Stalin in this
speech, are prefaced by an exordium--in which the orator exalts the
_esprit de corps_ of his comrades in arms. No other document displays so
completely what Lenin had denounced under the names of "com-lies" and
"com-boasting." We may quote as an example the following passage:

>We communists are people of a special type. We are carved out of
>special matter. We are those who form the army of the great
>revolutionary strategist, the army of Comrade Lenin. There is no higher
>honour than to belong to this army. There is no loftier title than
>member of the Party of which Comrade Lenin was the founder and
>director. It is not given to everyone to be a member of such a Party.
>It is not given to everyone to endure the misfortunes and the storms
>involved in belonging to such a party. The sons of the working classes,
>sons of poverty and struggle, sons of incredible privations and heroic
>efforts-they are the men to be members of such a party. That is why the
>Leninist Party, the Communist Party calls itself the party of the
>working classes.

The intellectual level of language of this kind makes it unnecessary to
report similar remarks of the same tenor by lesser personages. Under the
French Revolution, after the assassination of Marat, similar
extravagances are recorded. A petition was brought to the bar of the
Commune proposing "that the body of Marat should be embalmed and borne
through all the departments of France ... so that the whole world might
Raze on the remains of the great man"; an orator at the Cordeliers Club
recited a canticle, "Heart of Jesus, heart of Marat": some apologists
desired to call Montmartre Montmarat to commemorate the _Ami du Peuple_.
It was the naive expression of a spontaneous outburst of popular
emotion, not a cynical calculation of the leaders. Moreover the
Sansculottes had no pretensions to historical materialism and did not
quote _Das Kapital_. And at that time Robespierre was there to express
regret that men were busied with "excessive hyperbole, ridiculous and
vain Images, instead of thinking of the remedies required by the state
of the country," and to oppose the elevation to the Pantheon of Marat,
who had consistently protested beforehand against this "violent insult,"
and had taken the precaution to write: "I would rather a hundred times
never die than have to fear such a cruel outrage." There was a David to
declare to the Convention: "His burial should be of the simplicity
suitable to an incorruptible Republican who died in honourable poverty."
There was an Hébert to say at the Jacobin Club: "There are men who would
like us to believe that we should substitute one religion for another.
They arrange processions and funeral ceremonies for Marat as was done
for the saints. We have prevented that profanation; let us maintain our
active vigilance...."

In Soviet Russia, Krupskaya alone had enough conscience and enough true
fidelity to Lenin's mind to urge restraint on the sectarists of the
Leninist cult:

>Do not let your sorrow for Ilyich find expression in outward veneration
>of his personality. Do not raise monuments to him, or palaces to his
>name, do not organise pompous ceremonies in his memory.... In his
>lifetime, he took so little account of that kind of thing, which
>distressed him. Remember how much poverty and disorder there still is
>in our country. If you wish to honour the name of Vladimir Ilyich,
>create creches, children's playgrounds, houses, schools, libraries,
>ambulances, hospitals, houses of refuge, etc., and, above all, realise
>his teachings in your lives.

But her honest and timid voice found no hearers in the tumult of
official adoration. The Congress of Soviets decided to erect six
monuments as a beginning. Riazanov, once scornful of "those who would
like to transform the Red Square in Moscow into a cemetery, with funeral
monuments into the bargain," would not thenceforward venture on such an
allusion. The Society of Old Bolsheviks later on expressed its
disapproval of funeral ceremonies with a great orchestra and idolatrous
images, demanding for the dead the equality which society refuses to the
living, but -- with exceptions for such cases as Lenin's, thus admitting
opportunist derogations from the principle. Trotsky objected, he says in
his _My Life_, to the erection of the scandalous mausoleum, but not in
public, and no one knew anything about it.

Lenin had unconsciously foretold his own fate in writing of the great
revolutionaries persecuted during their lifetime:

>After their death, an attempt is made to convert them into inoffensive
>icons, to canonise them, so to speak, to surround their name with an
>aureole of glory for the consolation and the deception of the oppressed
>classes, while the real substance of their revolutionary teaching is
>emasculated, its incisiveness dulled, and the doctrine debased.

His inheritors very soon fulfilled this clear-sighted judgment. They had
good reason to seek a new name for the creed they substituted for the
now decadent traditional Bolshevism.

Leninism was now declared to be the legalised and exclusive theoretical
basis of the Soviet State. Formerly the term Leninists had been applied
to the partisans of Lenin, himself a strict Marxist in theory, who would
not have tolerated any other doctrine in his party. Henceforward
Leninism was to be the strict retrospective and formal observance of the
printed works of Lenin, irrespective of their relative value, their
obscurities and contradictions. Lenin's _Works_ became a new Bible, cut
up into verses as if they contained definitive answers to all the
problems of history.

According to the ideas of Stalin, communists throughout the whole world,
in the present and in the future, would only have to repeat immutable,
axiomatic phrases learned by heart (more or less correctly interpreted
by accredited commentators) to save themselves the trouble of thinking,
studying and understanding; they must also beware of any "deviation."
The most innocent remark, the smallest chance word uttered by the great
man became gospel for quotation outside the context. A special Institute
of Leninology received the task of deciphering the most insignificant
scraps of Lenin's writing, and, if any had been thrown in the fire, to
collect and scrutinise the tiniest fragments. Instinctively the
Leninites respected the letter the better to stifle the spirit.

How many times had not Lenin courageously declared "We have been
mistaken," and publicly acknowledged his mistakes, in order to
discourage "com-boastfulness" and to encourage healthy self-criticism,
at least within the Party ranks. At the last Communist Congress,
Ossinsky had been able to observe, without incurring the charge of
sacrilege, that even Lenin had at times been mistaken -- a reflection
indicating the usefulness of a reaction against sterile mimicry. "We do
not desire to exclude the possibility of error in Lenin," Zinoviev had
said in his report of the month before. Nevertheless the myth of Lenin's
infallibility was created, less out of reverence for Lenin than as an _a
priori_ justification of the dangerous policy of his successors. In a
quotation, rarely to the point, Stalin and the machine were always to
find an effective silencer. And as a decisive argument in reserve for
unbelievers, the G.P.U.

Between the old Bolshevism and the new Leninism there was properly
speaking no breach of continuity. Lenin's death hastened an evolution
already commenced, developing phenomena of which the beginnings were
evident during the Civil War. In the tactics and organisation of the
Party many Russian elements which had nothing to do with Marxism had for
a long time been tending to push into the background ideas acquired in
the school of western socialism. The Muscovite past developed into the
Soviet present, often under unexpected aspects, in ordinary life. Six
years of revolution had not inculcated in a convulsed society either
respect for the person, the sense of individual responsibility or
consciousness of the rights and duties of the citizen. On the contrary,
many Bolsheviks who had been in contact with European mentality before
October were to find themselves "Russified" after the Kronstadt mutiny,
impregnated with the special psychology of the country in which,
formerly, according to Gorky's summary, there flourished "absolute rule,
the enslavement of man, cynical falsehood and bestial cruelty." A
primitive and ill-digested sociology, gradually reduced to naive
schemata, offered no resistance to the inveterate habits of a society
more than a century behind the evolution of the civilised world, in
which rapid industrial advance here and there contrasted with mediaeval
conditions still surviving.

Even in Lenin's lifetime, the combination of imported Marxian and local
ideas had yielded strange results: for example, the kind of social
alchemy by which the Party expected to raise the general level by fixing
the proportions of workers, peasants, and intellectuals; the Leninist
prejudice of a new kind of original sin, imputing to individuals as a
crime their non-plebeian birth; the habit of leading out the workers in
street demonstrations without telling them the reason, of treating them
as flocks hemmed in by drivers with the threat of punishment in case of
evasion, and of dictating to them regularly, as slogans, stereotyped
formulas of approval or blame in the columns of a newspaper. These
examples show peasant ignorance beneath the heavy phraseology of
so-called determinism.

Bolshevism was a Russian simplification of Marxism, appropriate to the
conditions of a vast rural country with clearly divisible classes; it
met the necessities of the time and the place for the revolutionary
conquest of power. After the victory Lenin had gradually to purge it of
its initial programme, under pressure of circumstances, and to abandon
for the time being the democratic ideology borrowed from Marx. Excessive
schematising, due mainly to the limitations and Ignorance of his
followers, deformed it to the verge of caricature. Leninism was to
embody an even narrower version of impoverished post-revolutionary
Bolshevism, a fresh step away from authentic Marxism, of which it
retained the "straw of words" while losing the "grain of reality"; it
was in the end to develop into a complicated theology, with its dogma,
its mysticism, and its scholasticism.

Stalin constituted himself its first classical author with his pamphlet,
_Foundations of Leninism_, a collection of lectures delivered to the
"red students" of the Communist Sverdlov University at the beginning of
April 1924. This laborious compilation, in which plagiarisms alternate
with quotations, displays nothing of Lenin's critical faculty. All that
is living, apposite, conditional, and dialectical in the work drawn upon
becomes passive, absolute, affirmative, imperative and categorical in
this manual for use as a catechism, which, moreover, contains
misinterpretations. Signed by anyone else the dull little book would
have passed unnoticed among many others. But as the Secretary of the
Party, Stalin could make its perusal obligatory on candidates for
admission, who were subject to periodical weedings out and were
compelled to take elementary lessons in theory at which they learned by
heart abstract aphorisms. More than two hundred thousand workmen, most
of them politically uneducated, were admitted all at once, at the time
of national mourning, into the Communist Party to "improve its social
composition," and Stalin's lectures were to be used in their education.
"A combination of Russian revolutionary inspiration and the practical
spirit by the American," was, according to the professor of Leninism,
Lenin's "style of work," and should form the "perfect type" of Leninist.

In his final chapter, Stalin could not forego a hit at Trotsky, whom he
had already disparaged on the weak pretext of the "permanent
revolution." In derision of Trotsky's schemes of state-planning, he
said: "Who does not know that disease of 'revolutionary' construction,
whose cause is a blind faith in the power of schemes, in the decree that
is to create and arrange everything." Perhaps he had forgotten the
letter in which Lenin approved Trotsky's "sensible idea" of the State
Planning Commission, perhaps he pretended ignorance of it in the
interest of his campaign of insinuation. However that may be, vigilant
hostility towards Trotsky can be read between the lines, revealing the
implacability of the writer.

### 8.5

ON HIS return from the Caucasus, Trotsky had lost none of his prestige
outside the Party. On the contrary, the conflict among the leaders
rather brought him additional consideration dictated by very various
sentiments. The expectation of an indefinable lessening of pressure,
aspirations towards greater well-being, desire for change, need of
liberty -- all these were condensed in a vague hope of which he became
the incarnation in spite of himself. The applause with which he
everywhere received which could not be mistaken for the ovations
prescribed for officials, took on the significance of a spontaneous
plebiscite. Advanced youth, apparently impermeable to the intrigues of
power, hailed him simply as the best man, in spite of the artificial fog
created to deceive them.

But, in Party circles, the troika had taken the in his absence further
to undermine his position and to continue their disparagement of a
non-existent "Trotskyism." A new publication, the _Bolshevik_, produced
especially to fight Trotsky and his supporters, ostensibly for
scientific principles, in enormous solid articles, made it its task to
preserve "the purity of Leninist principles," evidently threatened by
any thinking brain, and proclaimed, in a first combative editorial: "We
were, are, and shall be, hard as a rock." Official instructions,
whispered from the highest to the lowest in the hierarchy of
secretaries, suggested ways of showing zeal at the expense of the
Opposition. Omission of Trotsky's name from a list of the honorary
presidents of a meeting, the removal of his portrait from an office,
denunciation on all occasions of his "errors" or "bourgeois heresies,"
might serve to strengthen a man's position or advance his career. To be
suspected of so-called "Trotskyism" was to run the risk of losing
livelihood, employment, lodging and daily bread, at a moment of
extensive unemployment and a housing crisis, in a State in which the
employee is, more than anywhere else, in every respect at the mercy of
authority.

After Lenin's death, the reactionary selection of officials undertaken
by Stalin after his advent to the Secretariat took a rougher turn. The
Forty-Six, reduced to silence by administrative measures, more or less
scattered and intimidated, had submitted or repented, thanks to the
working of the nominations system. The quite recent resolutions on
workers' democracy were so many "scraps of paper" to be buried in dusty
files. The promised "new course" was a dangerous chimera, soon to become
treason against Bolshevism. At the Revolutionary Military Council, on
which Unschlicht and Frunze had taken the places of Voroshilov,
Lashevich and others, Stalin in person made open preparations for the
eviction of Trotsky. The latter did not even attempt to defend himself
to safeguard a principle, he neither defended his colleagues nor
attempted to state clearly in public the principles at stake. His army
colleague, Skliansky, unexpectedly relieved of his post, was replaced by
Frunze. In the name of party discipline, Trotsky was silent, and
Pyatakov, the principal representative of the Opposition beside him, was
the docile instrument of Stalin's manoeuvres.

The Thirteenth Congress of the Party was to realise to the full the
ideal of the triumvirate, a hundred per cent unanimity, at least in
appearance, of an organisation seriously described as "monolithic."
Trotsky himself was not among the delegates. With some other
non-conformers, he only had consultative powers in his capacity of
member of a central organisation. Nevertheless that did not decide him
to stand apart from these machinations. At the opening session, the
Assembly transported itself to Lenin's mausoleum to gaze on the corpse,
after a march past of young pioneers (children belonging to communist
associations), ready to swear fidelity to "Lenin's will." The customary
addresses, congratulations, and the handing-over of flags and presents
by so-called workers' delegations, received exaggerated importance,
contributing not a little to deprive the Congress of any deliberate
character. Last of all a "non-party" worker, sent as if by chance from
the "Trotsky factory," urged protection for the Old Guard of Bolshevism.
Although not a single spectator was misled by these proceedings, Party
loyalty forbade making fun of the spectacle, and even the Opposition
treated with respect the new ritual, fully developed for the first time.
Four months earlier, it had been possible for Riazanov at the preceding
conference to refer to the "Old Bolsheviks, called by Lenin old
imbeciles"; such irreverence was henceforward out of the question. In
order to combat a ridiculous proposal for the transfer of the remains of
Karl Marx from London to Moscow, the old _frondeur_ prudently made some
flattering allusions to Stalin.

Interest was concentrated on Trotsky, whose silence was more disquieting
than words. To speak before a regimented audience of this kind would
have been not only to waste time, but to imply recognition of the sham
debate as real and to sanction a huge bureaucratic imposture. After long
hesitation, Trotsky was weak enough to yield to the entreaties of his
friends and to walk into the snare set for him.

"Received with a storm of applause," according to the official press, he
stood on the defensive and, with extreme caution, he cited the excellent
but derisory resolution of December 5th, with quotations from his
enemies to corroborate his own statements. Bukharin, especially, had
described the internal state of the Party in accurate terms, without
suspecting the importance of his statements: "In most cases, elections
have become pure formalities; not only are votes taken without
preliminary discussion, but on the single question of 'Who is against?'
And, as a vote against authority puts the delegate in an awkward
position, the matter is settled." Bukharin's whole statement
corroborated the current accusations of a dictatorship over the Party,
following the dictatorship over the proletariat. After quoting from it
at length, Trotsky then referred to Kamenev in support of his opinions
on state-planning: "We may make many mistakes if we do not set before us
the aim of co-ordinating a plan for the whole of our national economy."
By this rhetorical method, the triumvirate was refuted by one of its
members, especially Stalin by Kamenev, and Trotsky maintained his views
intact though with many formal precautions.

But to speak without incurring violent contradiction in the atmosphere
of distrust, assurances of loyalty must be given. Trotsky proposed to
provide these in two ways. First, by praise of the excellence of Soviet
democracy in the recent affiliation of 240,000 workers to the Party,
"Lenin's levy." This levy, he thought, brought the Party nearer towards
being an elected party. Had he not just shown, with Bukharin's words in
support, the inanity of elections within this privileged party, and
still more on its circumference? Could he fail to recognise the real
motives of this collective enthusiasm under the regime of which he was
beginning to know the disadvantages in his own person? The new adherents
joined the Party, not by elective affinity, but as a legitimate measure
of defence, on account of a natural anxiety to secure work, some
semblance of civic rights, and other moral and material advantages. They
were not free to choose or to take a different course. They were far
from representing the pick of the working class, and were, for the most
part, illiterate; their adhesion did not presage any regeneration of the
degenerate Party. Their recent conversion gave them no authority to
criticise, still less to oppose. These neo-Bolsheviks had been
instructed by the hierarchy of secretaries in catch-words of the worst
type of religious Leninism, and could have nothing in common with the
communism of Marx and Lenin. In any case, in Russia the word communist
does not mean an adept in communism, but a member of the Party, the
party in power and the only legal party. That is why the miraculous
"push" only took place after the decision to open the doors of this
exclusive party, and to close them again after the desired number of
recruits had been admitted. In his report on the organisation, Stalin
had stated to the Congress that in certain provinces seventy per cent of
members were politically illiterate, on a general average fifty-seven
per cent, and "Lenin's levy" were drawn from a still lower stratum.
(Some days after he admitted to sixty per cent of political illiterates
_before_ "Lenin's levy" and eighty per cent _afterwards_.) Nevertheless,
Trotsky entirely concurred in the aberration of the Party, going so far
as to put a false interpretation on the accession of members, and thus
subscribing in advance to the most reactionary decisions of the "elected
Party," the instrument of the dictatorship of the triumvirate.

He added a profession of faith completing his implicit retraction of any
critical conception of the Party:

>None of us desires or is able to dispute the will of the Party.
>Clearly, the Party is always right.... We can only be right with and by
>the Party, for history has provided no other way of being in the right.
>The English have a saying, "My country, right or wrong," whether it is
>in the right or in the wrong, it is my country. We have much better
>historical justification in saving whether it is right or wrong in
>certain individual concrete cases, it is my party.... And if the Party
>adopts a decision which one or other of us thinks unjust, he will say,
>lust or unjust, it is my party, and I shall support the consequences of
>the decision to the end.

This abstract reasoning amounted to giving a free hand to Stalin, master
of the Party through the machine, master of the State through the Party.

About a dozen suitably chosen speakers undertook to refute Trotsky. With
one accord they accused him of parliamentarism and diplomacy, reproached
him with lack of frankness and many other things. The 1,164 delegates
would perhaps have taken their turn at the tribune in repeating the same
lesson, if Krupskaya had not interrupted the tale. Without agreeing with
the Opposition, she expressed disapproval of the disloyal attacks of the
triumvirate, fearing the consequences for the revolution of a war to the
knife between communists. Immediately after Lenin's death, she had
written to Trotsky to assure him of "Vladimir Ilyich's" warm regard for
him and of her own affection. She spoke at the Congress on the side of
the majority, but in order to make it clear that the comedy had lasted
too long. With a bad grace, Stalin and Zinoviev decided to end it,
though they deplored the "Christian Socialism" of Lenin's widow.

In his concluding speech, Stalin reiterated all that had been said in
the course of the exhaustive discussion. He enumerated four points on
which the Opposition were in error, and three errors in principle of
Trotsky's. Incidentally, he gave a twist to Trotsky's thesis of the
final infallibility of the Party: "The Party, says Comrade Trotsky,
makes no mistakes. That is not true. The Party often makes mistakes.
Ilyich taught us to instruct the Party to learn from its own mistakes."
Stalin went on to say: "Our Party has become the elected organ of the
working classes. Show me any other party of this kind. You cannot, for
there is none in the world. But it is strange that even so powerful a
party does not please the Opposition. Where in this world will they find
a better? I fear that they will have to look for one in the planet
Mars." The rest of the speech is on the same argumentative level. One is
tempted not to quote from an author of this kind, whose works provide
the reverse of an "embarrassment of choice." Conscious that in his party
votes no longer depended on the views expressed, Stalin sought neither
to demonstrate nor to convince; he merely affirmed. And behind each
affirmation could be felt the threat.

In conformity with the careful arrangements made by the Secretariat, the
Congress declared what Zinoviev called a hundred per cent Bolshevist
unanimity. Stalin's bureaucratic system was nearing perfection. All that
remained to be done was to foresee and to prohibit misunderstandings
such as the inopportune storm of applause which had greeted Trotsky's
appearance, though this could have no possible effect on the course of
events. The new Central Committee had eighty-seven members, including
deputy-members, and the Control Commission more than 150\. But instead
of enlarging the governing oligarchy, as Lenin had mistakenly supposed,
this numerical increase reduced still more the importance of the two
committees, to the advantage of their small bureaux and, in the last
resort, of the General Secretary.

From this new test Stalin emerged with a great advantage. By a decision
of the former Central Committee, adopted at his instigation, he had
succeeded in avoiding the reading of Lenin's _Testament_ to the
Congress, in spite of Krupskaya's belated insistence. It was
communicated only to certain selected delegates, at a separate meeting,
with explanatory comments to diminish its importance. The "old man" was
sick, not _au courant_, and ill-informed by those around him.... At the
first session of the Central Committee Stalin proffered his resignation,
which was of course refused under the circumstances; most of the members
owed their posts to him, or were afraid to lose them by incurring his
hostility. Any opposition would have been useless at the time and would
have provoked reprisals; Trotsky dare no more disturb unanimity than
anyone else.

"Hundred per cent Bolshevist unanimity" had still to be affirmed by the
Communist International. The majority of the International Executive
would have taken the side of the Opposition, if the question had been
raised. That was clear from the individual opinions of the members. In
theory their decision outweighed any contrary opinion of a national
section or "fraction." In fact, the Third international, created by the
Bolshevik Party, remained subordinate to it. Intellectually it was
relatively, and morally, absolutely dependent, and its recent formation
on the sole initiative of Lenin made it impossible for it to withdraw
itself from the discipline of Moscow, until it attained maturity.
Zinoviev took care not to consult the Executive, which had no other
channel for expressing its opinion. The Fifth World Congress of
Communism was arranged for June 1924. The preliminary work was carried
out according to the rules and practices current in the Soviet Union, so
as to create a world organisation in the image of the mother section. It
was accomplished in less than six months under Zinoviev's direction,
simultaneously with operations of the same kind conducted by Stalin in
all the Russias in the name of "bolshevisation."

With rare exceptions, the Communist parties of Europe, America and Asia
stood in need of subsidies from the Executive, that is to say from the
Bolshevik Party. This irresistible pressure induced a kind of
solidarity. In the more independent sections, where some resistance was
attempted, there were plenty of opportunities of restoring order, if
necessary, by surgical operations. If there were neither good nor bad
pretexts, they could be invented. The International knew nothing about
the realities of the Soviet system, and Trotsky did not feel he had the
right or the strength to enlighten it. Nevertheless Zinoviev's
emissaries spread treacherous statements about the "new Danton," even
the "new Bonaparte." There was even talk of a plot amongst the Kursanti
of the Kremlin. A severe crisis in Germany, following on the abortive
revolutionary movement, and the general depression, fanned the plans of
the triumvirate. Long experience in manipulating internal quarrels and
sectional intrigue, in handling money contributed by the liberal
bourgeoisie or secured from profitable expropriations before they had
had a State Budget at their disposal, and the habit of treating their
own militants as mercenaries and of exploiting human credulity, had
enabled the inventors of Leninism to secure their own ends -- deceiving
the simple, neutralising waverers, inspiring mediocre minds with
fanaticism, corrupting politicians, and isolating the more honest and
thinking men.

The "Congress of Bolshevisation" endorsed the results they had
accomplished, enabling them to transfer Leninist methods to the
international arena, to generalise throughout the revolutionary movement
the topsy-turvy method of selection adopted by Stalin in the Soviet
Union. The Soviet method of ceremonies, parades, and endless functions
was adopted for the edification of the sceptical and for strengthening
the morale of the delegations. The day after the pompous opening at the
Grand Theatre, the Congress marched solemnly to music to hold a session
in the Red Square around the Lenin mausoleum, to hear and discuss in the
open air the report on the first motion in the proceedings, in the
presence of hundreds of thousands of workers, also provided with bands,
after the inevitable inspiring defile past the corpse. The whole thing
had a magic spontaneity, and took place during factory working-hours.
The usual "non-party" man and the other inevitable personages to be seen
at all the Moscow congresses of that time, appeared to recite their
congratulations and to distribute banners in the course of the session
to stimulate the fervour of those present. A wave of tense fanaticism
prevented any cool or reasoned statement on the Russian question.

On this occasion, Trotsky was wise enough not to be provoked into
controversy. He had understood at last. But, to complete the comedy, the
assembly which had just disavowed him invited him to draw up its
concluding manifesto. It proved to be the last of the great messages,
annual events since the foundation of the International, from Trotsky's
hand. A year earlier, Clara Zetkin had written of Lenin and Trotsky:
"The Congress paid its tribute of gratitude and admiration to the
personal, imperishable work of these two illustrious leaders of the
Russian Revolution and of the world proletariat." But now the idea of
such homage entered nobody's head, though the hurrahs of the crowd for
Trotsky are still noted at this date in the Communist Press.

Stalin, present but unobtrusive, took part for the first time in the
proceedings of the International. Whether because of ignorance of
foreign languages, or unpreparedness on foreign affairs, or for both
reasons, and from native caution, he did not ascend the tribune. He was
only heard in the Polish Committee, in which Russian was spoken by the
delegation directly concerned. Of his speech in committee we must note
the retrospective justification of the treacherous attacks on Trotsky
and the Opposition during the recent conflict. "First," he said,
"history knows no struggle without its victims. Secondly, opposition
cannot be defeated without shaking the authority of its leaders.
Thirdly, complete victory over opposition is the sole guarantee against
schism." He was more concerned with discrediting an opponent than with
refuting him. It is not ideas, but individuals, that count. Criticism is
a crime against the security of absolute power; it must be stifled, to
prevent any ultimate fissure in the dictatorship party.

### 8.6

THE heresy hunt was indeed resumed with greater zest after the
"Bolshevisation" Congress of 1924. Taking the utmost advantage of the
attitude of obedience and patience imposed on the Opposition parties in
all countries by Trotsky's tactics, the ruling section gradually but
thoroughly deprived the International of its elite. First in Paris and
Berlin, and then from New York to Shanghai, all communists who persisted
in distinguishing between discipline and servility, all men capable and
guilty of independent or original thinking were henceforth to be treated
as suspect, denounced as opportunists, classed with
counter-revolutionaries, and expelled, first singly and then in groups.
Thus a continuous series of expulsions and splits eliminated, in turn
and by differing methods, the initiators of the contemporary communist
movement in the two hemispheres. It soon became clear how right Rosa
Luxemburg had been in maintaining, in opposition to Lenin, that the
foundation of the new International was premature, that it could not
live by itself or survive its founder. The Communist parties were
transformed into ramifications of the Soviet State, under a common
autocracy, with identical structural faults and defects in detail. The
troika, determined to deprive Trotsky of all outside support, might have
chosen to sacrifice an organisation which was parasitic and had no
future; in fact they abandoned the principle, while maintaining the
instrument.

In the Soviet Union, to have abstained from denouncing Trotsky was
sufficient reason for disgrace, for removal from any political position,
and often for the deprivation of work and livelihood. But neither
annoyances nor persecution put a stop to the increasing popularity of
the hero of October and of the Civil War among the small active portion
of the urban population, and especially among revolutionary youth.
Special pamphlets, in which hired scribblers sought to revive former
controversies and to mystify the reader by overwhelming the living
Trotsky with dead quotations from Lenin, were scattered broadcast, but
to no effect, for no one took any notice of the spiteful attacks.
Neither the _History of a Deviation_ by S. Kanachikov, and its still
more insignificant imitations, nor the articles of the numerous writers
in the entourage of the troika carried weight against Trotsky's
important speeches and memoranda on the principal questions of the day:
the hegemony of the United States of America, the decadence of England,
the crisis of the German Revolution, the multiple problems of the Far
East. Party study-circles had no other new materials for study except
these great panoramic dissertations, intellectually far superior to the
combined production of all the brains of the "Leninist" Central
Committee. People queued up to hear them, and the verbatim reports in
the press were eagerly sought after.

All this exasperated the uneasy inheritors of Lenin's power, on the
watch for the slightest blunder on the part of their adversary. But
Trotsky took care to avoid occasion for fresh discords, avoiding thorny
questions and personal friction. He spoke of all sorts of things except
Soviet Russia. Nevertheless, his indomitable verve as a polemist did in
some of his writings find expression in allusions in which subtle scorn
and implicit irony, too recondite to be understood by his ill-informed
hearers, were intelligible enough to the parties concerned. His valuable
collection of biographical material, _Lenin_, conveyed the impression
that the peace re-established in the Party was nothing more than a
truce, an impression confirmed by the malevolent reviews. For the
initiated it was clear that the defeated Opposition did not admit defeat
and hoped to reverse it, though they had no very clear idea how; they
seemed to hope for a revival of the thought and conscience of the Party,
forgetting that the Party, bureaucratised as it was, and hampered now by
240,000 ill-informed neophytes, bore little resemblance to the ideal. In
spite of his notorious incompetence on the subject, Stalin in September
contributed to the "literary campaign" (sic) against Trotsky a long
article "On the International Situation" -- his first essay on this
theme. Refuting the thesis of Trotsky and Radek on the delay of world
revolution, he affirmed confidently that "the workers are moving towards
revolution and demand revolutionary leaders." The proof lay in the
"decisive victory of the revolutionary wing of the Communist parties in
Germany, in France and in Russia, and in the increasing activity of the
left wing of the English workers' movement..." The pacifism of the
democratic governments of Europe "may be expected to lead not to the
strengthening but to the weakening of the bourgeois power, not to the
adjournment of the revolution to an indefinite period, but to its
acceleration." Pacifists and democrats alike were seeking to "deceive
the masses by sonorous phrases about peace under cover of which they
were preparing for a new war." As for Social-Democracy, it was,
objectively considered, "the moderate wing of fascism." Similar
statements, more vigorously expressed, adorn Zinoviev's prose at this
period.

Thus, once more in 1924, Stalin continued to announce the Imminence of
revolution in Europe and to confound dawn with sunset, in spite of the
evidence and of the lessons to be learned from the many years of
persistent refutation by events of the over-hasty prophecies of
Bolshevism. His Leninism consisted in repeating in and out of season
what Lenin had said with more or less justification in other
circumstances when error was not without excuse. He was under no
necessity to reconsider his theses or to give them more profound study,
for, in fact if not in Soviet law, no one was permitted to question his
assertions, evidently agreed upon in the _semiorka_. Kamenev, Kalinin,
and others besides Zinoviev took them up in their own way, though they
were quite ready to say the opposite if the signal were given to do so.

But four months later (January 27, 1925), with the remarkable facility
for contradiction which the Bolsheviks regard as transcendental
politics, Stalin was to think better of the relative stability of
capitalism and the ebb of the revolutionary tide. And at the end of
March in the same year, he refuted himself, without ceasing to maintain
his own infallibility. "Capitalism has succeeded in recovering from the
post-War shock"; the international economic position evidenced the
success of capitalistic reconstruction, and, finally, "there is no doubt
that in Central Europe, in Germany, the period of the revolutionary tide
has closed." The chorus of Leninists followed him as one man in his
retractation, maintaining that they had never changed their minds.
Eventually the representatives of the so-called revolutionary wing of
which Stalin boasted, the "revolutionary leaders" of 1924 in Germany, in
France and elsewhere were almost all of them expelled from the
International as being unworthy, opportunist or traitors.

Meanwhile, many alarming signs of a new crisis appeared in the "Soviet
Fatherland." Absorbed in their pedantic and meaningless controversies,
the dictators had neglected the economic situation of the country and
the condition of the working classes. Superficial optimism and
propaganda, which failed to conceal a policy dictated from day to day,
were useless for the solution of the difficult problems confronting the
revolution.

The stagnation of industry at a level below the meagre pre-War standard
deprived the State of material resources, workmen of the necessaries of
life, and peasants of manufactured goods. The monetary reform of 1924,
which substituted the gold-chervonetz for the depreciated rouble, was
carried out at the cost of the proletariat. Semi-starvation wages were
often paid months behind-hand, sometimes in unsaleable goods, sometimes
in coupons on almost empty co-operative stores. The troika found no
other expedient except the restoration of the State monopoly of alcohol,
which had been carried through the Central Committee against the
opposition of Trotsky and Krupskaya, the latter invoking in vain Lenin's
opinion on the national poison. The only method of covering further
deficits was to put further pressure on the workers in town and country.

The wretched wages were reduced in various indirect ways: obligatory
deductions under pretext of "voluntary" subscriptions, the extension of
the piecework system, lowering of the rates of payment simultaneously
with increase of the standards of individual production under a
complicated system of coefficients and categories. Increasingly severe
police repression, together with the fear of unemployment, imposed
silence on the working classes, who had no organisation for
self-defence, since the trade unions were annexes of the bureaucratic
State. Stalin had confessed in 1923 that the number of trade unionists
had decreased from 6,000,000 to 4,800,000, "a smaller but more serious
number" which, however, had been "recently swollen by an almost nominal
membership." This admission was still relevant to the actual
circumstances, for the fictitious character of membership continued with
an external increase in membership due to compulsory registration. In
1924, Stalin rectified the statistics, bringing down the figure to
4,300,000, a figure less than the "more serious" one of the year before,
without more real significance. On paper the trade unions advanced from
5,000,000 "members" in 1924 to more than 10,000,000 in a few years, the
number of trade unionists exceeding at one time those qualified for
membership, for the trade unions, like the soviets, had ceased to be
realities. The workers looked neither for protection nor for help to the
wasteful administration in the hands of a machine of 27,000 officials,
strictly subordinate to the Party bureaux. They could hope for nothing
better from the privileged communist caste. The result was disaffection
directed against the regime.

Discontent was no less serious in the countryside, lacking industrial
products, robbed of the fruits of individual labour by low fixed prices
for grain, and loaded with taxation collected under inexorable pressure.
The official communist documents mention, among other causes of
distress, the consequences of the last famine, the insufficient harvest
of 1924, agricultural unemployment (Preobrazhensky calculated the
surplus agricultural labour at twenty million). To these causes were
added abuse of power and denial of justice on the part of the village
authorities, illegal action of all kinds by the local pseudo-soviets;
requisitions, confiscations, impositions, arbitrary arrests, all these
aggravated by mass deception and malversation to the prejudice of the
State. In his _History of the Communist Party_, compounded as it is of
the most barefaced falsifications, E. Yaroslavsky, one of Stalin's
officials, is compelled to admit the "abstention of the peasants from
the elections" in the autumn, and says that "the majority of the
population did not take part in them." In fact the minority ceased to
vote, for the whole system was reduced to a sham. The peasants, robbed
and ill-treated, lost patience and began to meet bureaucratic tyranny by
crimes against communists, the assassination of the "rural
correspondents" of the press, whom they hated as spies. The Party
condemned the action of the kulaks accordingly, but it was too easy to
confound under this term anybody and everybody. "We are too apt to call
any peasant who has enough to eat a _kulak_," confessed Zinoviev in
June 1924. There was a minor civil war, of which the most acute
manifestation was in Georgia (August to September 1924), a real armed
insurrection.

If there were any doubt in Moscow of the significance of the phenomenon,
Stalin dissipated hesitation by the one word: "Kronstadt." And, just as
in 1921, there was an inglorious episode in the history of Bolshevism.
Georgian Social-Democracy, profoundly divided in opinion on this
question, certainly had something to do with this unhappy attempt at
insurrection. But there are many indications that police provocation was
the decisive factor, that is to say, that the Tiflis Cheka, well
informed of the popular dissatisfaction, and employing secret agents in
local socialist circles, urged on the rising at a convenient moment in
order to stifle it successfully.

In a fortnight, prompt and brutal repression "liquidated" the bloody
insurrection, which had gone further than the police had intended and
revealed the full gravity of the situation in the provinces. Action
unprecedented even in the most tragic moments of the revolution was
taken. Five members of the Social-Democratic Central Committee, among
them N. Khomeriki and V. Djugeli (who had nothing to do with the
insurrection, for they were imprisoned before it took place), were
executed without trial, with some dozens of other persons neither more
nor less responsible.

Stalin, at the centre of things, and his accomplice Ordjonikidze on the
spot, had coldly designed and carried out the cruel manoeuvre, perhaps
taking advantage of the circumstances to avenge personal scores with
their former rivals in the Caucasus. Recalling Lenin's indignation
against the action of the "_Dierjimordes_" against their communist
comrades at Tiflis, it is easy to see who was responsible for the
bloodshed in this affair, without the assistance of the explanations of
the vanquished. Moreover, Stalin did not hesitate to make the admission
in his own way when he said: "What has happened in Georgia may happen
throughout Russia, unless we make a complete change in our attitude to
the peasantry." Molotov for his part declared: "Georgia provides a
startling example of the breach between the Party and the mass of the
peasantry in the country." On another occasion Stalin, in a speech in
which he declared the necessity of criticism in words borrowed from
Lenin, placed the onus of the errors committed on subordinate officials:

>Either non-party peasants and workers must be able to criticise us, or
>we shall be subjected to criticism in the form of insurrection. The
>Georgian insurrection was such a criticism. So was the Tambov affair.
>Kronstadt no less. Of two things one: either we give up our optimism
>and bureaucratic methods and allow the right of criticism to non-party
>workers and peasants who suffer front our mistakes, or discontent will
>accumulate, and we shall have criticism in the form of insurrection.

It is difficult to believe that the same man could use language like
this after having ruthlessly ordered directly contrary proceedings. But
the Kremlin talked in one way and acted quite otherwise. With a new
vocabulary and in spite of the different historical stages of
development, the degenerate Bolsheviks were unconsciously renewing the
Tsarist Russian tradition in matters of governmental action. "The
terrible Russian hypocrisy is no man's doing," wrote Michelet, to whom
"the insoluble problem of the Empire" seemed to consist in keeping under
a common rule peoples differing as widely as possible in degree of
civilisation. Apart from its meaningless verbalism, Stalin's whole
policy consisted in imitating absolutist predecessors in the maintenance
of power, by a combination of cunning and violence, with opportunist
alternations of severity and concession. Neither the privileged Party,
for the Opposition represented by Trotsky thought of complaining so long
as the blows were not directed against themselves. But when once the
dictatorial machine of the new oligarchy was set in motion and
perfected, it stopped at nothing, acted according to its own lights in a
society in which the habit of subservience had become second nature in
the course of centuries.

In the sinister light of the Georgian alarm, Stalin's methods became
clear enough; under his instruction the role of the police was
continuously extended. If the Cheka was nominally only maintained in the
Caucasus, where a war regime was permanent, the G.P.U. was just as
powerful in the rest of the Union. Already more numerous, active and
powerful than the _Okhrana_, it was the essential tool of the Political
Bureau for the settlement of all problems. It is no fortuitous
coincidence that the remodelling of the Supreme Economic Council in 1924
began with the nomination of Dzerzhinsky to its head, and went on to the
introduction of certain former "Chekists" as heads of departments. At
the Revolutionary Military Council, Unschlicht, another member of the
G.P.U. Council, supervised the military personnel suspected of
"Trotskyism," and prepared bitter draughts for the unorthodox. For
Stalin government meant penalties and terrorism. As for the presidency
of the Council of Commissars, it was all very well to appoint a mere
Rykov after Lenin's death, but only because little influence was
attached to the Ministry; the real power lay elsewhere.

In the Party, police interference became more and more oppressive,
creating a painful atmosphere of distrust, espionage and treachery.
Inspired by the Central Control Commission, directed by Kuibyshev and a
kind of specialised annex to the G.P.U., innumerable committees of local
control reinforced by still more numerous temporary disciplinary
committees, tracked "deviations" and hunted out all sorts of
recalcitrants. The friends, colleagues or supporters of Trotsky, or
those supposed to be such, were specially aimed at and gradually
eliminated from universities, political institutions and army
establishments. These measures facilitated the promotion in the
hierarchy of the zealous partisans of the Political Bureau. The ignorant
"Lenin recruits" were available to fill gaps at the bottom. Even
faithful tools of the caprices of the Secretariat no longer felt safe;
as in the Society of Jesus, obedience to the will of superiors was not
enough; their wishes had to be anticipated. One of the secretaries of
the Moscow Committee, an experienced bureaucrat, made responsible for an
ovation given to Trotsky, was dispatched to Turkestan, where he had
leisure to consider the art of distributing tickets for a suitably
packed audience.

In the course of this "first year without Lenin" the recoil of the
spirit of October was shown in disturbing symptoms for the suspect
Communist Left. Widespread apathy, weariness and fear everywhere
indicated an advanced stage in the process of turning "professional
revolutionaries" into regular bureaucrats. In the irremediable confusion
after Lenin's disappearance, self-interest caused substantial reductions
in the phalanx of dissenters from Leninism. The anxiety of the
individual to maintain the minimum of relative well-being reserved for
privileged workers generally carried the day over secret conviction.
There were exceptions. Some militants, incapable of compromising with
their consciences, were driven to misery, sometimes to despair. A series
of suicides marked the track of this unexampled moral depression. Among
these unfortunate persons, most of them obscure, are the names of
Eugenia Bosch, heroine of the Ukrainian Revolution; of Lutovinov, the
intractable leader of the Workers' Opposition, on his return from his
"mission" of exile in Berlin; of Glazman, Trotsky's secretary, expelled
from the Party. In high places the nervous state of the victims was
alleged in explanation, but, in order to stop the epidemic, it was
deemed expedient to invalidate a number of expulsions likely to cause
scandal. For in most of the cases the suicides were the results of
so-called party purges.

"In Russia, the final word of reproof is equivalent to-day to the papal
excommunication in the middle ages." This observation of Custine's in
his remarkable letters On Russia in 1839, is accurate nearly a century
later. No salvation outside the Party -- this tacit axiom of Leninist
dogma reveals a singular slowness of development of civilisation through
three revolutions in this country where, according to this discerning
author, "the great distances, isolation, marshes, forests and the severe
winters serve as conscience in the rulers and patience in the ruled."
The basic causes of despotism, still intact under the forms of
Sovietism, entail the same consequences as of yore under not very
different aspects.

On learning of the death of his close collaborator, Trotsky wrote an
obituary article for _Pravda_. Publication was refused. A member of the
Political Bureau and of the Council of Commissars, that is to say, of
the sham and of the real Government, could not honour the memory of a
dead comrade without giving offence to the machine. Stalin wove his plot
with perseverance, with a watchful eye on the movements and the
reactions of his opponent. The hostile ring was gradually drawn closer
around Trotsky. To all appearance, the troika was ready to enter the
arena on the earliest occasion to shake the popularity which they
feared. Trotsky was well enough informed of these manoeuvres and
preparatory discussions to be on his guard. Nevertheless, under
circumstances which his detractors could not have hoped for, he was
imprudent enough to give them the desired opportunity.

In October 1924, he published without consulting anyone two volumes
under the title 1917, a collection of his writings of the great year of
revolution, together with an essay on _The Lessons of October_ by way of
introduction. In it he established a parallel between the Bolshevist
victory of 1917 in Russia and the communist defeat of 1913 in Germany,
preceded by a revolutionary failure in Bulgaria, in order to draw from
these examples an historical explanation and strategical lessons. He
demonstrated especially the necessity of never letting slip any
propitious moment for revolt under penalty of a long period of waiting
for another favourable moment, and emphasised the useful lesson to be
drawn from Russian experience for the international communist movement.
After a sketch of his personal interpretation of the facts of October,
he ended by a disparaging summing up of the past of Zinoviev and
Kamenev, defining bolshevisation in terms of the education and selection
of leaders to preserve them from flinching at the decisive moment.
Stalin's name is not mentioned in the text, but the reference to the
"defensist" position of _Pravda_ in 1917 up to the time of Lenin's
arrival at Leningrad clearly aimed at the General Secretary.

All that Trotsky did was to synthetise ideas collected from here and
there from his earlier essays, articles and speeches. But at this
juncture and in this aggressive form, publication meant opening a
conflict, the issue of which lay entirely with the machine. It meant
also consolidating the union against himself of men who, under the
dictates of common sense, should have been left to be set at variance
among themselves. In June 1924, Stalin had given to Kamenev a lesson in
elementary Leninism in the course of a speech to the district
secretaries, and had taken the liberty of making some rude remarks about
Zinoviev -- very clear indications of a future conflict. Moreover
Trotsky was ill once more, a prey to fever, and unable to fight. Again
he exposed himself uselessly to blows which he could not return. The
troika, furious, had no scruples on this head; on the contrary, they
exploited Trotsky's physical weakness, and replied to _The Lessons of
October_ by a declaration of war on Trotskyism, as a pernicious doctrine
unknown in Lenin's day and suddenly revealed to the profane. An
extraordinary discussion was Opened by an anonymous feuilleton in
_Pravda_ entitled "How not to describe the October Revolution." It was a
unilateral discussion, in which anyone could take part except Trotsky,
who was perforce silent. Leninism was in danger. Meetings of officials,
of secretaries, and of militants were summoned to hear long "reports" on
the new misfortune threatening the revolution. Lenin's _Complete Works_,
cut up into fragments, were drawn upon to prove the case, and if
necessary the contrary. Trotsky "as put on trial before the tribunal of
a dumbfounded Soviet opinion. Russia and the Communist International
were haunted by a spectre -- the spectre of Trotskyism.

In reply to Trotsky's sixty pages, which, be it said, were not to be had
at the booksellers, as the edition had been cut down at the astute
direction of the Secretariat, the Party and the country were submerged
by a flood of diatribes. The note of indignation and the leading ideas
were provided by Stalin, Zinoviev and Kamenev, followed by other members
of the Political Bureau and of the Central Committee, then by lesser
personages. In this atmosphere of over-excitement Krupskaya herself felt
compelled to contribute to the argument -- with courtesy and moderation
it is true. Among the most eager assailants were those who had an old
grievance against the former head of the Red Army; Yaroslavsky,
Lunacharsky, Manuilsky, Raskolnikov, Gusev. All the professed Leninists
more or less capable of holding a pen hastened to catalogue Trotsky's
"errors" past and present, to refute his "semi-Menshevism," to denounce
his indiscipline and his pessimism. Thousands of resolutions demanding
severe measures were adopted "spontaneously" from the White Sea to the
Black Sea by people who had never read a word of the incriminated text,
for good reason, and demanded severe penalties, as in the days of
Custine "the immense extent of territory is no barrier to everything
being carried out with magical punctuality and co-ordination, from one
end of Russia to the other." The press reproduced columns of defamatory
harangues delivered from every platform; these were afterwards printed
in pamphlet form and distributed by the million. (Money was lacking for
schools, for orphanages, for hospitals, paper for school books, but:
neither money nor paper was spared in the enterprise.) The printing
presses were working night and day to combat Trotskyism.

The main object was to disguise the reasons for the discord, the real
stakes in the game. Hence the invention of an imaginary heresy to be
placed in antithesis to an unreal Leninism. Who in such circumstances
dare speak of rival clans or of individuals? The titles of the polemics:
Trotskyism or Leninism (Stalin), Leninism or Trotskyism (Kamenev),
Bolshevism or Trotskyism (Zinoviev) -- were chosen by the troika to
represent the eternal antimony between Good and Evil, and the theme was
amplified by every variation of their common stock of ideas and by every
imaginative device.

Lenin's successors were sufficiently skilled in petty politics to
attribute the origins of the conflict to Trotsky alone. Rykov declared
on their behalf that the Party was engaged in a new discussion. "Once
more it concerns Comrade Trotsky. This is the fourth time since
October." In fact the principal theme of the _Introduction_ was rarely
mentioned. The essential task of the ruling clique of the moment was to
maintain silence on what Trotsky had really written, to impute to him
statements he had never made, to recall pre-War dissensions, to revive
old forgotten tales, to dig up old quarrels in out-of-date letters.
Later on Zinoviev confessed as much. "It was a struggle for power," he
said, "the whole art of which consisted in linking old dissensions with
new problems."

The Party were somewhat stupefied to hear Trotsky accused of "deviation
towards the Right" in his theoretical exposition of the "permanent
revolution." Stalin and his auxiliaries maintained that this capital
error had as its implication a premature dictatorship of the
proletariat, and therefore an "under-estimate of the peasantry." This
lucky hit, repeated to satiety, became the main indictment. At a sign
from Stalin thousands of Philistines began to conjugate the verb to
"under-estimate." The accused was also taxed with individualism and
anti-Bolshevism, after being reproved for depreciating the Party by
implication. Trotsky neither knew nor understood, had never known nor
understood, the Bolshevik Party, according to the defenders of "the
machine." This was repeated with variations by the champions of the
"machine," among others by Yaroslavsky, who, only a year before, had
said that Trotsky "had made clear better than anyone else the role of
the Communist Party among the working class." Stalin, who, ever since
the Tsaritsyn affair, had harboured obstinate resentment, undertook in
collaboration with Gusev a reestimate of Trotsky's military ability.

To this flood of insinuation, reproach and insolence, there was no reply
from any quarter. The "discussion" was limited to the ruling clique,
amidst the mute consternation of the communist rank and file, the
unhealthy curiosity of a public greedy for scandal, and the satisfaction
of the counter-revolutionaries. The Opposition, caught unawares and
under violent provocation, could do nothing but sit still and allow the
storm to pass. Trotsky had been so inconsiderate as to place them in an
untenable position by his impolitic initiative. His less firm supporters
seized the opportunity to abandon a lost cause and abjure their errors.
For, as all the ambitious knew, there were rewards to be had for
apostasy and ingratitude.

"_The Lessons of October_ was only a pretext," admitted Zinoviev. But
Trotsky had gratuitously supplied a pretext, starting the quarrel with a
learned thesis on strategy, very provocative both to friends and rivals,
and of no interest to the unhappy people. By his own fault he incurred
the danger of ostracism and familiarised public opinion with the idea of
his own disfavour. Rumours of his arrest were already current, and were
believed even in Party circles. His book was believed to be confiscated
and forbidden, and the inculpated _Introduction_ was secretly copied.
Panic rumours had to be denied officially: "No member of the Central
Committee has raised or will raise the question of any sanctions against
Trotsky. Measures of suppression or expulsion would not aid a
settlement," said Kamenev at Moscow, and Zinoviev used similar language
at Petrograd. Stalin agreed: "I am a declared enemy of sanctions. We do
not want sanctions, but a theoretical polemic against the revival of
Trotskyism."

But though apparently unfounded, the general suspicions were not without
foundation. Resounding accusations of "semi-Menshevism" sometimes, in
improvised speeches, of plain "Menshevism" could have no other logical
sequel than early expulsion from the Party, and then police measures
against the dissidents, whether they were socialists or communists. Two
of the three members of the troika did secretly propose the expulsion of
Trotsky from the Party, that is, his outlawry. Zinoviev and Kamenev
indeed did not shrink from the idea of immediate imprisonment for their
adversary. They would probably have attained their object but for
Stalin's veto. Now that Trotsky was defeated and reduced to silence, his
enemies lost the principal reason for their alliance -- the fear of
being deprived of the Lenin inheritance.

The artificial and superficial excitement of 1924 ended in January 1925
with the joint session of the Central Committee and the Control
Commission. As usual every question was settled in advance. Deprived of
his functions at the Revolutionary Military Council, under the form of
resignation, Trotsky remained a member of the Political Bureau, in spite
of a "categorical admonition" calculated to diminish his prestige. "I
yielded up the military post without a fight, with even a sense of
relief," he wrote. The decision taken in his case ended in a way that
sheds light on a certain aspect of Leninism, both in essence and in form
-- a crude Russo-Asiatic duplicity expressed in a self-styled Marxian
terminology.

>4 Consider the discussion as ended.
>
>5 Continue and develop the work of the Party so as to explain from begin from 1903 down to _The Lessons of October_, and charge the Political Bureau to furnish all the propaganda organisations (Party schools and others) with the necessary explanations on the subjects; insert in the curricula of political instruction explanations of the petty-bourgeois nature of Trotskyism, etc.
>
>6 In addition to explanatory propaganda in the Party, the Young Communists, etc., a broad popular explanation of the deviations of Trotskyism is indispensable for the worker and the peasant masses.

Disparagement of Trotsky thus took a permanent place at the moment when
the rulers were pretending to suspend it. Any objection or
contradiction, which might be ascribed to Trotskyism by those who
monopolised the power of public expression, incurred henceforth the most
rigorous Party measures. Like the Russia observed by Custine, the Soviet
Union became "a country in which the Government says what it likes,
because it alone has the right of speech." In offices, clubs and shops,
everywhere, indeed, portraits of Trotsky were hunted out by the machine.
Ambitious officials, or the best informed of them, showed their zeal by
displaying the portrait of Stalin. Reduced to clandestine communication,
the Opposition could only distribute in secret and in small numbers
copies of the proscribed writings of Lenin: letters on the desertion of
Zinoviev and Kamenev in October, notes on the question of nationalities,
and finally the unpublished _Testament_. The diffusion of this
subversive literature, hindered and repressed by the G.P.U., cost those
who were found taking part in it exclusion from the Party, that is, the
loss of wages and house-room. Denunciations and abjurations decimated
the ranks of the demoralised Left. Although the younger supporters gave
evidence sometimes of cowardice, sometimes of ambition, Trotsky had
founded his hopes on them.

"The Party was condemned to silence. A regime of pure dictatorship was
established in the Party machine. In other words, the Party ceased to be
a Party." This retrospective remark of Trotsky's may be supplemented by
the statement that the ex-Communist Party, formerly the
Social-Democratic Party, emerged from the "discussion" profoundly
disunited, much weakened in morale, and politically discredited. No
further credence was accorded to the fallacious assertions of the
priests of the Leninist cult, whose vocabulary -- republic, democracy,
election, party, trade unions, Soviet, discussion -- corresponded to
nothing generally understood by those terms. Under a superficial
"monolithic unity," there was discernible irreducible antagonism and
actual schism. The year 1924, beginning with the death of Lenin and
ending with the fall of Trotsky, revealed irreparable dissension.
Already there were whispers in Moscow -- behind the scenes of the
Central Committee -- of a broken triumvirate, of Kamenev and Zinoviev in
conflict with Stalin.

### 8.7

THE conflict of the triumvirs, arising out of differences on the course
to be pursued against Trotsky, was soon transformed into a struggle for
precedence which became more envenomed in the course of 1925.

Stalin, as against the more rabid Leninists, evidently represented
average opinion in the ranks of the higher officials in opposing too
violent reprisals. In his own clumsy, rough way, and within the limits
of the upper ranks of the Party, he desired no doubt to imitate Lenin,
so skilful in conciliating opponents after having put them in the wrong.
Anxious to humble Trotsky, while at the same time facilitating the
necessary changes and reserving the possibility of future collaboration,
he prudently put considerations for and against in his speech in
November 1924 on _The Lessons of October_. "I am far from denying the
undoubtedly important role of Comrade Trotsky in the uprising. But I
must state that Comrade Trotsky did not and could not have played any
special role in the October uprising; that being the president of the
Petrograd Soviet, he only carried into effect the will of the respective
Party authorities which guided every step of Comrade Trotsky." And a
little later in the speech: "... Trotsky, who was a relative newcomer in
our Party in the period of October, did not and could not have played
any _special_ role either in the Party or in the October uprising. Like
all the responsible functionaries, he was only executing the will of the
Central Committee and its organs."

Nevertheless it was Stalin who had deliberately written in 1918: "The
whole work of the practical organisation of the insurrection was carried
out under Trotsky's immediate instructions.... It may be definitely
asserted that in the matter of the rapid passage over of the garrison to
the side of the Soviet and the skilful organisation of the work of the
Military Revolutionary Committee, the Party is primarily indebted to
Comrade Trotsky." But respect for the truth, like self-respect, were
"middle-class prejudices" in the eyes of the degenerate Leninists.
Examination of the documents would have been punished as treason against
the revolution; no one dare venture on it.

Stalin did justice in his own way to Trotsky's fighting qualities: "Yes,
that is true, Comrade Trotsky really fought well during October. But
Comrade Trotsky was not the only one who fought well during the period
of October; even such people as the Left Social Revolutionaries, who
then stood shoulder to shoulder with the Bolsheviks, did not fight
badly, etc." Finally, of the chief of the Red Army he said: "I am far
from denying the important role Comrade Trotsky played in the Civil War.
But I must declare with the utmost emphasis that the high honour of
organising our victories belongs not to any individual person but to the
great collective of front-rank workers of our country -- the Russian
Communist Party." He then cited a surprising version, according to which
Kolchak and Denikin had been put to flight "in spite of the plans of
Comrade Trotsky," and defied him to contest it, thanks to the privilege
which authorised him to say what he pleased under the shelter of the
G.P.U.

When all is said, Stalin had the advantage over his fellow Bolsheviks of
knowing in his heart his own shortcomings, a silent modesty which is not
incompatible with the self-confidence which he displayed in his actions
as dictator. He still attached a certain importance to the benefit to be
derived from the ideas, talents and activity of the man he disparaged.
Why should it be impossible for him to capture the force which Lenin had
been able to employ in the best interests of the Party? All the internal
dissensions emphasised Trotsky's incapacity to form a group capable of
supplanting the actual people in power. The General Secretary became the
more aware of his strong position at the centre of the machine, as it
revealed to him the impatience and the powerlessness of his adversaries.
This sense of security was confirmed in Stalin by his natural
empiricism, a propensity for living from day to day, leaving to their
own devices those whose services he might employ.

Zinoviev and Kamenev on the contrary had sufficient faculty for
superficial generalisation to fear the consequences of Their too easy
success. In declaring their hostility to the repressions, they sought to
dissimulate their own real intentions. Inferior to Stalin in many
respects in character and temperament, but fortified by a certain amount
of western culture and educated under the shadow of Lenin, they were too
wary to be satisfied with the result obtained without at any rate
seeking for some long-range policy.

Earlier than anyone else except Lenin, Zinoviev had seen the complexity
of the problem of the Secretariat as early as 1923, and had hoped to
solve it, whether by reducing the powers of the Secretary, or by
enlarging them in the hands of a bureau of three members -- Stalin,
Trotsky and Zinoviev or Kamenev. Having himself reason to complain of
Stalin's high-handed procedure, he thought the time was ripe to reform
the organisation of government. With a little patience and tact, Trotsky
would easily have disarmed his most redoubtable rival, and then assured
without any great effort his predominance among the others; it was his
lack of foresight, his impulsiveness and reticence that consolidated the
bloc of the Political Bureau against him. A new phase opened with the
disintegration of the so-called Leninist Old Guard, which Stalin had
once likened to a "compact wall" without a breach.

Trotsky, even as an object of universal scorn, seemed more dangerous
than ever to the "deserters of October," haunted apparently by the
Bonapartist danger they had conjured up in imagination, and in a hurry
to have done with the man who was irreconcilable in defeat, from whom
they feared a fresh offensive. After vainly demanding his expulsion from
the Party, and then, in default of this, from the Central Committee, or
at least from the Political Bureau, they manoeuvred under cover of
various committees to wear out Stalin's resistance, the only serious
obstacle to their scheme. The Leningrad "machine" under Zinoviev, part
of the Moscow officials under Kamenev, and some provincial militants
served them more or less consciously. Reduced to minor tactics, they
worked for the removal of Stalin from the Secretariat to the post of
Commissar of War and for his replacement by a person named Rudzutak.
This manoeuvre only served to unmask their secret intentions, without
preventing the nomination of Frunze, which had longs been prearranged by
Stalin.

Before the meeting of the Central Committee in January, at which the
resolution condemning Trotsky was debated, the governing clique had
concerted in private a unanimous line of action. Violent differences
emerged. Stalin, sure of his majority, stood firm. Zinoviev, despairing
of success, offered his resignation, knowing it could not be accepted.
In the end a sham compromise was reached, Stalin agreeing to stiffen the
resolution and Zinoviev renouncing the demand for Trotsky's expulsion.
But the coalition of the Old Bolsheviks was broken for ever; a merciless
struggle for Lenin's heritage had begun.

In fact Stalin had won once more. By his instructions the attacks on
Trotsky were sensibly attenuated. He himself set the example by suddenly
discovering that Trotskyism, denounced only yesterday as a form of
Menshevism, was in reality the "right wing of Communism." Master of the
situation at Moscow, he laid a restraining hand on the extreme
bolshevisation initiated by Zinoviev in the International and prevented
in advance the purging operations contemplated.

In an interview in February with the German Communist writer, Wilhelm
Herzog, implicitly repudiating the supposed "Left" demagogy of Zinoviev,
he was lavish in promises of prudence and caution, contrasting it with
practice within the Soviet Union, and he constituted himself the
protector of the Opposition of the "Right," threatened with exclusion in
Germany under the pretext of Trotskyism. This unforeseen interference in
Zinoviev's domain constituted a discreet warning to him. Three weeks
later, he wrote to the spokesman of the Communist Left in Berlin to
reassure him by extolling the "new types" of leader of whom he aspired
to be regarded as the model. In his confidential letter he referred to
the history of the Bolshevik Party: "With us in Russia, there has always
been this process of the waning of the old leaders, generally of the
literary type," and went on to mention Lunacharsky, Bogdanov, and
Krassin among the decrepit, though having others in mind. He condemned
on paper the policy "which creates within the Party a regime of
intimidation, of fear, a regime which develops neither self-criticism
nor initiative," as if he really had no use for such methods. He
formulated an opinion worth noting on these leaders: "It is a bad thing
for the leaders of the Party to be feared without being respected. The
leaders of a party cannot be real leaders if they and their judgment are
not respected as well as feared."

Simultaneously he toned down the prolonged polemic from the January
meeting onwards. One of the co-directors of the Bolshevik, Vardin, a
converted ex-Menshevik, was dismissed for extreme anti-Trotskyism and
then sent to the Caucasus. The blow was indirectly aimed at Zinoviev who
persisted secretly in his obstructive tactics. In _Pravda_, Raskolnikov
denounced in unusual terms the pamphlet of a certain Zalutsky on Trotsky
as "sickening." It had been inspired by Zinoviev. Through
Intermediaries, the Leningrad dictator was already accusing Stalin of
opportunism and of "semi-Trotskyism"; at his instigation the ruling
committees in the northern capital were demanding a more intransigent
policy in Moscow. He also made arrangements for a new publication, the
Leninist, as a rival to the Bolshevik, tainted with Trotskyism. The
Political Bureau forbade it. Thus gradually enmity within the omnipotent
bureaucracy itself was growing up in the name of the "monolithic" front.

With characteristic firmness, Stalin called the bluff. He kept a tight
hand on the instrument which his former friends now wished to wrest from
him -- the Secretariat, gradually transformed from the executive organ
into the effective organ of power. In Party circles in touch with the
"top," no more was said of the dictatorship of the troika but of the
dictatorship of the Secretariat; the dictatorship of the proletariat had
long fallen out of the reckoning. The Political Bureau became a
consultative committee dominated by a sort of camarilla constituted
around Stalin. In this way the formal presence of Trotsky was not in
absolute contradiction with the official policy. Of the seven members --
not counting deputy members and leaving aside Trotsky -- Bukharin, Rykov
and Tomsky gave Stalin an automatic majority of four votes against
Zinoviev and Kamenev. In the absence of Trotsky or anyone else, three
deputies were on his side, Kalinin, Molotov and Dzerzhinsky; there was
nothing to fear from the fourth, Sokolnikov, a friend of Kamenev's. This
balance of forces ensured the stability of the government until the next
Party Congress, when the machine, instructed beforehand, would easily
re-establish the "hundred per cent monolithism." But an unprecedented
thing happened. The annual Congress, punctually assembled in even the
worst days of the Civil War, was put off from March to September, then
to December, the necessity for consultation of the Party becoming less
and less felt, meanwhile, Stalin did not require much imagination to
counteract the manoeuvres of his new opponents. As he had acted with
their complicity when it was desired to isolate Trotsky, so now he
placed, displaced and replaced officials. Playing alone on a gigantic
chessboard, he could move the pieces as he wished without hindrance.
This time it was the supporters of Zinoviev and Kamenev who suffered --
Safarov, Zorin, Kharitonov, Kviring and many others, following Vardin.
Under the supreme Secretariat, the principal regional committees would
soon be provided with secretaries completely trustworthy -- Uglanov at
Moscow, Kaganovich in the Ukraine, other subalterns in the Urals and at
Ivanovo-Vosnessensk, The Caucasus Committee was entirely subservient
since the events which had moved Lenin's indignation. All the essential
strategical positions were thus occupied in due course by Stalin's
fraction except Leningrad, where Zinoviev was surrounded by his
bureaucratic tools, but was powerless against the machine as a whole.

In April 1925, a conference of the Party unanimously voted the various
resolutions dictated by the Political Bureau, i.e., in the last resort
by Stalin. It confirmed and accentuated the policy of conciliation
adopted towards the peasants since the Georgian insurrection, and
proclaimed in an order repeated a thousand times: "Look to the
countryside." Reduction and simplification of the land-tax, the
redistribution of land, reestablishment of the wages system, various
concessions to cultivators of all kinds, extension of rights of buying
and selling, measures "to encourage and guarantee the process of healthy
saving," in the rural economy, were calculated to assist a recovery of
agriculture. Once more "Bashi-Bazouk outrages," condemned six years
earlier by Lenin, were repudiated. A "new rural policy," declared Stalin
in his _Replies_ to the _Questions_ enunciated by the students of the
Sverdlov University. There appeared to be no divergence of view in the
Government. The fractions kept a wary eye on each other and waited
patiently. If secret, silent preparations were being made on one side or
the other, the Party could not suspect the fact.

In a long report made in May, Stalin strongly emphasised the principal
lines of this new policy towards the peasants, regardless of providing
arguments for his enemies: "Any party which hides the truth from the
people, which fears light and criticism, is not a party, but a clique of
imposters doomed to ruin.... We must," he said in a jargon more and more
confused, "follow the line of liquidating old administrative and
governmental methods, the line of giving life to the soviets, the line
of transformation of the soviets into real elective organs, the line of
implanting in the countryside bases of soviet democracy." It is
essential that "Communists in the rural districts should abandon
monstrous forms of administration." In fact the manifold errors of the
recent past must be abandoned, and more seriousness and competence must
be brought to the work. Platonic assurances for the future corresponded
to the revealing admissions on the recent past and the immediate
present.

According to Bukharin, the accredited theorist of the fraction of which
Stalin styled himself the executant, the intention was really to extend
the New Economic Policy to the country districts where it had not yet
been possible to apply it. "We must tell the peasants, all the peasants,
to enrich themselves, to develop their business and not to fear
spoliation," cried the former leader of Left Communism, anxious to
stimulate "increase of farms belonging to the more prosperous peasants
and kulaks." This was only an emphatic statement of unanimous opinion
general in the Central Committee.

In 1924 Chicherin, not without instructions from above, had declared in
an interview with foreign concessionaires: "_Enrich yourselves_! let us
say in the words of Guizot. _Enrich yourselves!_ -- for in this way we
enrich ourselves." Beginning from 1925, there was no more talk of the
class struggle in the villages, except to forbid any stimulation of it;
as for the iniquitous kulaks, they received the less disparaging name of
"the more prosperous peasants," in current speech. Zinoviev and Kamenev
did not dissent from Stalin and Bukharin, from Molotov and Kalinin on
this subject. Far from under-estimating the peasantry, Trotsky himself
had two years before anticipated his colleagues in saying of the peasant
in general: "_We must so act that be will be richer next year than he is
this_," and, advising against any increase of taxation, "_so that
peasant prosperity may increase and the peasant grow richer in the
future_." As early as September 1925, Trotsky proposed to enlarge "the
scope of capitalist traders in rural districts," and to reinforce
capitalist farming so as to encourage progress in production even with
the help of capitalist methods. At the end of November, at Kislovodsk,
he was heard to declare: "There is no direct danger in the economic
system in the country districts," and to deprecate the "dekulakisation
of the _kulak_." Guizot's famous phrase, transformed by Bukharin,
reflected with some exaggeration a collective evolution in the direction
of a return to the October programme, which had been changed by War
Communism.

Stalin goes still further. Being ready "to change from top to bottom our
attitude towards the peasants," he envisages as unavoidable the
restoration of the small proprietor, and in consequence the
denationalisation of the soil. To prepare public opinion he summons the
Soviet journalists and gets this question put to him: "Would it not be
necessary in the interests of agriculture, to guarantee to the peasant
for ten years the land which he cultivates?" To this Stalin replies:
"_Even for forty years_." At his suggestion the Commissar for
Agriculture in Georgia drew up the basis of an ordinance along these
lines. The peasant insurrection of the preceding year had therefore not
been in vain. But Zinoviev and his supporters, determined to take up a
Left position against the Right tendency of the Stalin fraction, guilty
of "semi-Trotskyism," found an excellent pretext in a flagrant doctrinal
flaw. The "kulakophile" tendency was undeniable, and that was more than
enough to afford a decent excuse for personal rivalries. Moreover,
Bukharin had some rather extremist disciples, young "Red" professors who
in their writings paraphrased the master and compromised him more
deeply. Excellent opportunity for denouncing heresy. The fire, latent
beneath the cinders of official optimism, was revived in a controversy
behind the scenes, Zinoviev having incited Krupskaya to write an article
against Bukharin aimed at Stalin through his adviser. Would they dare to
impose silence on Lenin's widow? Warned in time, Bukharin refuted the
refutation, and this was sufficient to permit of the refusal of the
imprimatur to both texts with pretended impartiality. Stalin met the
attack skilfully. Foreseeing an incident at the approaching Congress, he
anticipated matters and suggested the retraction of the inopportune
formula. Bukharin acted accordingly, and admitted his mistake, reserving
freedom to justify himself later.

Of this passage of arms the public knew nothing. The little which had
been publicly expressed was lost in insipid and unintelligible documents
which few had the courage to read, and the underlying meaning of which
was impenetrable to ordinary mortals. No more enlightening was the long,
mysterious article by Zinoviev in September entitled _Philosophy of the
Time_, with its ambitious and misleading title and its veiled
insinuations. Only three months later and thanks to a violent open
conflict, the Party learned that Stalin had only consented to the
insertion of this article after substantial modifications. All this was
made more obscure by the fact that the various writers cited Lenin
interminably, were for ever boasting of their Leninism, and, from sheer
force of habit, repeated from time to time the same allusions to the
shade of Trotskyism.

Stalin, however, no longer limited his activities to the modest role of
an executant. His victory over Trotsky and the mathematical certainty of
check-mating Zinoviev opened up to him new horizons. He now aspired to
be Lenin's spiritual successor, as he was his temporal successor. Even
in its degenerate state, the Bolshevist tradition demanded a leader
capable of theorising practice, if not of giving effect to theory.
Beyond criticism as General Secretary, whose actions were assured of
automatic sanction by the Political Bureau, his weak point was exposed
when he began to argue doctrinal points. Here Zinoviev thought him
vulnerable, and here he sought to get in his blow.

In his polemic against Trotsky and against the theory of "permanent
revolution," Stalin could no longer restrain his natural inclination for
a national form of socialism, repressed during Lenin's lifetime, but
apparent as early as 1917 in his reply to Preobrazhensky: "The
possibility is not excluded that Russia may be the country destined to
prepare the way for socialism." In his 1924 essay on _October and the
Theory of the Permanent Revolution_ Stalin wrote: "The victory of
socialism is possible even in a country relatively undeveloped from the
capitalist point of view," and he championed "the Leninist theory of
revolution and of the victory of socialism in a single country." After
the conference of 1925 he said in his report: "Can we construct
socialism unaided...? Leninism answers this question in the
affirmative." In reality, this meant for communists of this particular
brand a breach with Lenin's fundamental internationalism; and the
renunciation of Marxism.

Without going back to Marx and Engels, whose thesis, whether valid or
not, requires no interpretation as to the international character of the
socialist revolution, it is sufficient to refer to the principal
writings and speeches of Lenin to establish an insoluble antithesis with
the Leninism of Stalin.

As far back as 1906 Lenin looked forward to "the socialist revolution in
the west as the sole guarantee against a restoration," laying it down
that "the Russian Revolution can conquer by its own strength, but can in
no case maintain and consolidate its conquests unaided." Afterwards he
consistently affirmed as "an elementary truth of Marxism" the
impossibility of establishing "socialism in a single country," down to
his last article _Better Less, but Better_, in which (1923) he
recognised that "_we are not civilised enough to pass directly to
socialism, although we have the political premises for it_." His
strategy and tactics were invariably supported by considerations
connected with the world revolution at every decisive step he had to
take. The intellectual and economic backwardness of the Soviet Republic
is not the only argument. In 1918 Lenin declared that socialism was
inconceivable in a single country, "even in one much less backward than
Russia," and, always counting on outside help, he calculated in prudent
terms the necessary delays: "It is very doubtful whether the next
generation ... can realise socialism in every department." Next year he
said: "... We know that we cannot establish a socialist system now --
God grant that it may be established in our children's time or perhaps
in our grandchildren's time." His opinion in this matter was consistent
and incontestable.

But by ransacking his _Complete Works_ some phrases, more or less
explicit, susceptible, when torn from their context, of a different
interpretation, may be found. Sometimes he improvised summary formulas,
useful at the moment for the point he had to prove, though there was no
pretence of incorporating in them the whole of his doctrine. For
example, definitions in which words are given a restricted or relative
meaning, according to the question under discussion, sometimes
expressions intended to cheer up his audience. Just as Napoleon
attributed military success, now to artillery, now to the bayonet, now
to the commissariat, to morale, to good administration, to the mobility
of the army, to the commander-in-chief, to the health of the troops, to
discipline -- so Lenin emphasised what was important for his argument at
the moment. To attribute to his expressions for a particular occasion an
absolute interpretation would be to mutilate or to minimise his ideas,
often to misunderstand them. But this is what Stalin did with regard to
"Socialism in a single country," a statement of the problem as
inadequate as the answer to it.

Before the revolution, in 1915, Lenin enunciated in a few lines the mere
hypothesis of a socialist victory "first in a few capitalist countries,
or even in one alone," but in a very restricted sense and without
reference to Russia. Stalin took this hypothesis literally, and
transformed it into a dogma. He quotes it again and again, eked out with
fragments derived from the imposing text of the _Complete Works_, which
Zinoviev was also to invoke to prove the contrary proposition. In an
article on co-operation, appearing after _Better Less, but Better_,
during his illness, Lenin enumerated "the conditions necessary to build
up the integral fabric of the socialist society -- by means of
cooperation and co-operation alone." Stalin confused the abstract with
the concrete, and deduced from it a confirmation of his own view. He
forgot that at the Thirteenth Congress, in announcing the number of
seven million co-operators, he had himself to correct it by saying in
euphemistic terms: "I do not believe in these figures, because adhesion
to the Consumers' Co-operative Societies is not yet entirely voluntary,
and it is certain that it includes 'dead souls.'" In fact the
co-operatives, like the trade unions and the soviets, tended to
disappear with the principle that co-operative trading became state
trading. Lenin was speaking of free and conscious co-operation, not of
the deceptive label. In Stalin's language, "not yet completely
voluntary" meant obligatory and consequently, in accordance with the
authority which he had arrogated, resulting in an imitation completely
sterile.

But Lenin also said: "The success of socialism in Russia demands a
certain lapse of time, at least several months," and no one thought of
repeating that. Again he said: "Socialism is a matter of accounting,"
which did not prevent Stalin from rightly recognising at the previous
Congress: "Our statistics are one-legged." Lenin said further:
"Communism means the power of the soviets, plus electrification" ....
which neither proves the existence of real soviets, nor of the economic
and technical level corresponding to the general use of electricity. He
set down the equation: "Soviets + proletarian democracy = dictatorship
of the proletariat" -- the elements of which were still to be created in
Soviet life. He even enunciated the aphorism: "Every cook ought to learn
to govern the State"; an aphorism easy enough to push to absurdity, but
one which was not to prevent him from one day proposing to remove the
"head cook," for whose "peppery dishes" he had no taste. Examples might
be multiplied.

Suppose for a moment chat Stalin was right to interpret strictly and
literally hasty phrases of this kind, closing his eyes to anything which
explained, modified, or decreased the importance of their tenor, this
would merely have increased the list of the contradictory statements to
be found in Lenin's writings. If that was what the pundits of Leninism
wanted, that was the way to do it. This, indeed, is the impression left
by the laborious compilations of Stalin and Zinoviev, rivals in
orthodoxy. The latter, in his book on _Leninism_, revised by Krupskaya,
sets out half a hundred quotations drawn from the _Complete Works_ to
embarrass his ex-colleague, who replied with half a dozen extracts. But
for those who are able to discern what I. Babel calls the "mysterious
curve of Lenin's straight line," Stalin's aberration in time seems
obvious; it is due to a reversion to the utopian conceptions of the
first half of the nineteenth century, to a method of reasoning outside
time and space, the negation of the dialectic only too much insisted on
by the Leninists of the decadence. To approve it, in the interests of a
fraction, Bukharin would have had to retract his _A.B.C. of Communism_.

Stalin was not personally able to defend the reactionary idea of
"Socialism in a single country" except by retracting his own assertions,
copied from Lenin less than a year before. In fact, in _The Foundations
of Leninism_ he wrote: "Can we succeed and secure the definitive victory
of socialism in one country without the combined efforts of the
proletarians of several advanced countries? Most certainly not ... For
the definitive triumph of socialism, the organisation of socialist
production, the efforts of one country alone are not enough,
particularly of an essentially rural country like Russia; the efforts of
the proletarians of several advanced countries are needed." Under any
government with a minimum of democracy, Stalin would have been compelled
to have respect for the theory he had recently advanced or to retract
plainly. The dictatorship of the Secretariat permitted him to modify the
awkward passage of his pamphlet, cut out in new editions, and to get out
of the dilemma by an explanation imposed by the G.P.U.: "Socialism
realisable in a single country, except in case of aggressive capitalist
intervention."

Of the hundred and forty millions of Soviet subjects bowed beneath
Stalin's yoke, still anonymous in 1925, there were indeed some who
understood the need and the urgency, before proclaiming socialism in
words, of accomplishing in fact the first steps in the way of material
and moral progress, of giving bread to the legions of abandoned
children, work to the millions of unemployed, healthy habitations to the
innumerable working class families crowded in hovels, a human level of
existence to the mass of wage-earners, and elementary instruction to the
illiterate population. Rightly or wrongly, Marxists thought that there
were no "Utopias to be introduced ready-made for the workers," and that
what was required was not "to realise an ideal but to release the
elements of the new society existent in the old bourgeois society
itself." Each generation had its own task, determined in the last resort
by economic conditions and limited by historical circumstances, on the
world scale. Advance in the direction of socialism meant more than
indefinite promises of the integral communist programme to the people
plunged in ignorance and poverty, subject to inequality and injustice,
deprived of rights and liberty, and under a regime which engendered and
perpetuated privilege. But in substituting Leninism for Marxism,
Stalin's fraction tried more or less consciously to suppress every
vestige of imported theory. Only to the members of the Political Bureau
was some right of criticism and liberty of opinion permitted, and of
that Trotsky prudently did not avail himself, and Zinoviev and Kamenev
were not to exercise it for long.

### 8.8

THE Fourteenth Congress of the Party met in December 1925, after being
twice deferred. No preparatory discussion preceded it. The traditional
"free tribune" of _Pravda_ was not open. Everywhere the plethoric
"theses" of the Political Bureau were voted unanimously, under the
constant threat of administrative and police repression. Trotsky's fate
sufficiently indicated what less highly-placed opponents would have to
face. With ordinary men the Government showed little ceremony, having
both the power to condemn without appeal to civil death by expulsion
from the Party, the means of depriving the "undisciplined" and their
families of the means of livelihood by deprivation of work, and finally
the resource of turning them out of their homes at any moment by their
all-powerful caprice.

There were worse fates. In addition to the communist workers imprisoned
and deported by secret procedure for wrong opinions, many modest
militants of the minority were incarcerated, accused, condemned without
proof, without witnesses, without defence. Every individual guilty of
any independence of mind, even if he were a convinced communist, thus
risked ruin under an unverifiable pretext, sometimes expiating
ostensibly a youthful peccadillo or the venal fault of a distant
relative. "In Russia to talk was equivalent to conspiracy, thinking was
revolt; alas! thought is not only a crime, it is a calamity," noted
Custine under the Iron Tsar -- a saying true to-day. As in former days,
Siberia was peopled by exiles of all shades of politics. It is
unnecessary to modify the words of F. Lacroix, another contemporary of
Nicholas I, who was distressed to observe that "the most innocent might,
on the slanderous denunciation of some wretch, be arrested and
dispatched, without trial, to that terrible country for the rest of his
life." ...With such means of pressure and intimidation, there was no
difficulty in securing "hundred per cent unanimity."

Accordingly, great was the surprise at the explosion of a new discord.
The Party had had no reason to suspect it. At Leningrad as elsewhere
there was complete unanimity on the Government propositions. It was the
same everywhere, without knowledge of the case or any liberty of
judgment; the proof was to be found in the insuperable antagonism of the
fractions which had "voted" the same resolutions. The struggle begun in
the high regions at the "summit" was not visible from the plain. After
the death of Frunze, the nomination of a Commissar for War gave rise to
competition between Voroshilov, Stalin's candidate, and Lashevich, a
supporter of Zinoviev. The Central Committee elected them both, the
first as chief, the second as deputy. Stalin did not care to force a
decision. The public was unaware of the significance of the double
choice and of the circumstances of Frunze's death. In the Moscow
literary review, Krasnaya Nov, under the mysterious title: _History of
the Unextinguished Moon_, and the more explicit sub-title: _The
Assassination of the Commandant_ -- the Soviet writer, B. Pilnyak,
published an equivocal tale where the allusions to Stalin are precise
enough. In it there are two chief characters, a military leader of high
rank suffering from an ulcer, which is well on the way to being cured,
and an all-powerful politician member of a troika which governs the
country; the second has secretly decided on a surgical operation for
which the first has no need and which is thought necessary by none of
the great doctors called into consultation. The soldier has gloomy
forebodings but does not dare to resist the orders of his political
superior and dies under chloroform. Stalin had the number of the review
confiscated and took sanctions against the editor and the author. But
the question remained where it was.

People knew nothing of what underlay certain controversies academic in
appearance. "Socialism in a single country" was not the only subject in
dispute. Without naming one another, Stalin and Zinoviev were at
loggerheads on the question of whether the dictatorship was to be that
of their Party or of the proletariat, each of them citing Lenin
profusely. But both under different formulas had the same unavowed
intention -- the dictatorship of a coterie. For his part, without
mentioning names, Kamenev began to explain the difficulties in the way
of the advance of the Soviet Republic. These were the formation of a
rural bourgeoisie disposing of a third of the crops and of two-thirds of
the surplus for sale; the poverty of the mujiks lacking horses and
implements; active speculation in goods, and the rapid accumulation of
private capital. According to the Central Bureau of Statistics, State
property was valued at 11 1/2 milliard roubles, private property at 7
1/2 milliards, not including houses. Thus, said Kamenev, co-operation
representing only half a milliard "supports especially the most settled
classes"; capitalism is developing under the impulse of the majority of
the peasants, State production is not yet socialist, since it provides
goods partly for the processes of purchase and sale. Confronted with the
capitalist danger, concluded the Vice-President of the Council of
Commissars, the new regime could only reckon on a working class whose
wages were still below the pre-War level and were retarding the progress
of industry; a remedy had to be found for this disturbing situation,
perhaps by establishing for the workers a sort of collective
participation in the returns. This thesis was directed fundamentally
against the "kulakophile" tendency of Bukharin, Kalinin and others,
including Stalin.

In the course of this year, the latter had several times proposed a "new
course in the rural districts," denouncing the "absence of control, the
arbitrary procedure of the leaders" in his replies to students and
letters to young communists. "A succession of presidents, of district
executive committees and members of cells have gone to prison for this
reason," wrote Stalin, with regard to administrative abuses. As for
concessions to be made to the peasants, they "will certainly be
increased as our economic position improves." Later on, "the
Constitution will be enlarged to include the whole population, including
the bourgeoisie," he affirmed, quoting Lenin _(Questions and Answers)_.
The dictatorship of the proletariat is "violence within legal limits
towards capitalists and owners of land," not towards the working people.
And as if to confirm the veracity of the protests raised in all
quarters, he recommended "more attention to the aspirations and needs of
the working class.... more sensibility and respect for the dignity of
the working class." But formal assurances lavished on the disillusioned
proletariat had not the same interest as the new promises with regard to
the better-off peasants and the bourgeoisie.

The reaction of Zinoviev's fraction to this remarkable development was
shown in the theses of the Political Bureau drawn up by Kamenev and
passed unanimously, stating the theoretical consequences, three weeks
before the Fourteenth Congress. The general trend of this document is to
rectify the "Right" orientation with which Stalin was reproached,
prescribing the support of "the poor and middle classes of the
peasantry," emphasising the importance of the trade unions in
production, and of co-operation in socialist competition with the
Kulaks, insisting, in agreement with Trotsky, on the necessity of
developing industry according to a fixed plan. Stalin had no hesitation
in countersigning it, well knowing-that the future did not depend on
platonic statements of this kind. A few theses more or less cost him
little, provided that his machine was not affected. Every useful
precaution had been taken against this. That was clear at the regional
congresses preceding the Moscow Congress -- at Kharkov, at Leningrad,
where the new Opposition was subjected to the first shots of the
bureaucratic offensive.

Stalin at first abstained from overt intervention. The signal was given
to say nothing about Kamenev and Zinoviev, but to attack their
supporters, so as to reserve the chance of an opportune compromise
between the principal figures. In the same way, when there was conflict
among the great _boyars_, the "small men" had to bear the brunt of the
battle, sacrificed to the authority of the supreme oligarchy. But
Stalin's new opponents were not yet aware of the transformation of the
Party into a social class interested in the preservation of the status
quo and passively solid for the leaders, nor of the degeneration of the
regime into the dictatorship of the Bolshevik caste over the working
classes. They thought they could amend official policy without attacking
the principle of power, by securing internal reforms at the top. In this
illusion, shared by the whole Opposition, they advanced to throw
themselves against the "steel wall of Leninism," an expression used
without irony by the "wall" itself, just as if they had learnt nothing
from the experience of the Left Opposition. Incited in the Political
Bureau by Bukharin's theses "on the work of Communist Youth," studded
with transparent allusions to their critical attitude, Zinoviev and
Kamenev voted against them and placed themselves in the position of an
intransigent minority. This led to a public discussion, the issue of
which was not in doubt.

In a speech aimed at the new Opposition, Bukharin accused his opponents
of pessimism, of defeatism, of anti-Leninism for having described State
Soviet industry as a form of State capitalism, that is as a system of
exploitation of the workers, and accused them of "bringing grist to the
Menshevik mill." Kamenev defended himself by extracts from Lenin in
exact agreement with his views, and quoted Bukharin, who had admitted in
1925 his consistent disagreement with Lenin on the two questions of
"proletarian culture and State capitalism." Molotov riposted with other
quotations from the _Complete Works_, enabling him to condemn without
rhyme or reason "every kind of incredulity, and defeatism." On the same
note, an address from the Kharkov assembly censured "the panic mentality
of certain comrades." Having attributed to the Central Committee
"underestimation of the _kulak_," the Opposition in their turn were
confronted with the accusation of "underestimating" the middle
peasant.... Moreover, as President of the Council of Labour and Defence,
Kamenev saw himself made responsible for all the economic
miscalculations of the moment: a wrong estimate of the harvest, the rise
in the price of cereals, the fall in the chervonetz. In vain he defended
himself by sheltering behind the approval secured from the Political
Bureau -- the procedure once used against Trotskyism was applied to his
Leninism. In addition he laid himself open to easy refutation by
proposing the participation of the workers in the returns in a country
in which industry was working at a loss. He was accused of demagogy, not
without foundation, and not only under this head, for "certain Leningrad
comrades" had suggested the augmentation of the membership of the Party
by several million units in one year, to bring the number up to go per
cent of the proletariat. The most differing themes were therefore mixed
in an inextricable confusion, well fitted to mislead opinion for the
benefit of the dominant fraction and to facilitate the specific task of
the machine.

As was expected, and just as in Trotsky's case in 1924, Kamenev found
himself isolated at Moscow, although he was a member of the Political
Bureau, President of the Council of Labour and Defence and
Vice-President of the Council of Commissars, President of the Moscow
Soviet and Director of the Lenin Institute -- to mention only his
principal titles. Krupskaya was the only one to take his part, without
the least chance of influencing a vote. Too late a comer to the
Opposition, she had lost the moment for any useful intervention. Stalin
did not hesitate to disparage her secretly, having no fear of
disagreeable revelations. The zealous hierarchy of secretaries would do
the rest, expert in the isolation of awkward personalities.

Among the notorious illusions prevalent in the polemic of that time, one
is particularly worth notice, as throwing light on ulterior events.
Kamenev based his argument about the "_kulak_ danger" on the figures
provided by the Central Statistical Bureau, an institution politically
neutral and objective in its methods, if not in its results. Stalin had
no difficulty in cutting the knot; under his instructions the Control
Commission, an organ of repression whose praesidium, together with the
College of the G.P.U., constituted a sort of Star Chamber, annulled the
relatively scientific information, and substituted its own statistics
faked to suit governmental considerations. The result was a substantial
diminution on paper of social antagonisms in the countryside, and
harvest returns more favourable to the poor peasants and less abundant
for the kulaks. "Access to figures is a privilege of the Russian
police," as Custine had already observed under the Iron Tsar.

The paradox was more apparent than real. The Communist organisation of
Leningrad had unanimously approved its leaders, exactly as the Party as
a whole had done, and thanks to methods very similar, thinking it was
sharing the general unanimity and without suspecting any discordant
note. Its delegates formed the only opposition at the Congress in which
majority and minority were rivals in Leninomania and "monolithism."
Suddenly Stalin opened fire, and Zinoviev, at last mentioned by name,
was seen to be in a desperate position. President of the Communist
International, member of the Central Committee and of the Political
Bureau, President of the Leningrad Soviet, he was accused in his turn of
all imaginable offences against Leninism in the special jargon of the
hour: revisionism, sectionalism, schism, pessimism, defeatism,
Menshevism, liquidationism, and panic and hysteria. He had lost all
right of reply, all means of defence, except the Leningrad _Pravda_
which he was accused of abusing. At the beginning of the Congress his
fate was irretrievably fixed.

After the report of the Central Committee, which Stalin, now in the
forefront, presented, Zinoviev was so imprudent as to ask to speak as
joint _rapporteur_, in order to justify himself, to explain his position
-- an unheard-of "scandal" as the exasperated majority declared. A
hundred and fifty speakers put down their names in a feverish
atmosphere. Only half of them could be heard, alternating with the
handful of those "in error," Kamenev, Sokolnikov, Krupskaya, Lashevich,
Yevdokimov and some others. Thousands of quotations from Lenin were
exchanged without any conclusion being reached. The Congress addressed
an appeal in grandiloquent terms to the communist workers of Leningrad,
over the head of their delegation, to stigmatise the crime of an
opponent who had suspected the Central Committee of "degeneration and
Thermidorism"; to beware of the error of Zinoviev and Kamenev. "The
pronouncements of Zalutsky on the degeneration of the Central Committee
and on our Thermidorism reveal, on examination, the whole gamut of the
ideology of liquidation." Both sides accused one another, with justice,
of stifling working-class opinion and violating democracy; with equal
bad faith, they blamed the other party for over-estimating this or
under-estimating that, for "Right" heresies or "Left" errors. Zinoviev's
_Leninism_ and his _History of the Party_, works circulated by authority
in millions of copies, and only recently obligatory for students, were
now denounced as contrary to authentic Bolshevism and held up to
ridicule and were declared no longer worthy of the official
_imprimatur_. An ironic comment on "monolithism" was provided by the
spectacle of Lashevich and Voroshilov, the two principal army
commanders, speaking from the tribune as declared enemies. Zalutsky had
already "acknowledged his error" on Thermidor; all the leaders of the
new Opposition were summoned to follow his example, under threat of
reprisals.

With a speech from Kamenev, the controversy took an extraordinarily
virulent turn; for the first time the question of which everyone was
thinking but of which no one spoke was plainly stated, the question of
Stalin's position. This was the culminating point of the Congress. In a
hostile and excited audience, before which the Leningrad fraction put up
a hopeless fight, Kamenev explained his grievances in the tumult. The
stenographic report is attenuated but revealing:

>_Kamenev_....We object to the creation of a headship theory; to the
>setting up of a "head." We object to the Secretariat, uniting policy
>and organisation in itself, being placed above the political organism.
>We stand for an internal organisation of the supreme power so as to
>assure full power to the Political Bureau, which contains all the
>political brains of our Party, and subordinate the Secretariat to it as
>the technical executant of its decisions.... (Uproar.) We cannot
>consider normal, and think harmful to the Party, the prolongation of a
>situation in which the Secretariat unites policy and organisation, and,
>in fact, predetermines policy. (Uproar.) .... I have become convinced
>that Comrade Stalin cannot play the part of co-ordinator of the
>Bolshevik general staff _(Various speakers:_ "A lie! Humbug! That's it,
>is it? The cards are on the table!" Clamour and cheers from the
>Leningrad deputation. "We won't give you the commanding positions!
>Stalin! Stalin!" The delegates rise and cheer Comrade Stalin. Thunders
>of applause. "That is how to unite the Party! The Bolshevik general
>staff should be unified!")

>_Yevdokimov, from his place:_ -- long live the Russian Communist Party!
>Hurrah! Hurrah! (Delegates rise and shout Hurrah. Clamour. Long and
>loud applause.) Long live the Central Committee of our Party! Hurrah!
>(Delegates shout Hurrah.) The Party above all! Yes, indeed! (Applause
>and hurrahs.)
>
>Various voices. Long live Comrade Stalin! (Loud and prolonged cheers.
>Cries of hurrah. Clamour.)

The situation was thus made clear, but too late to influence the course
of events. The force of inertia exerted its irresistible pressure to the
advantage of the existing system. Except in the Leningrad fraction,
members had been chosen and instructed by the apparatus devoted to
Stalin. Special measures were to be taken to bring the new Opposition to
their knees; protesting delegates hurried "spontaneously" from Leningrad
to the Kremlin, and disavowed the official delegation. Floods of
telegrams dictated by Moscow came in as "spontaneously" from the most
distant provinces censuring the dissenters and demanding their
submission. It was wasted effort for Zinoviev to address the "steel
wall" of fanatical Leninists, to demand "internal democracy" in the
Party, "real liberty of discussion," collaboration of "all the former
groups" (that is of earlier defeated oppositions) in the administration,
"election of all committees," and, finally, "limitation of powers" of
the bureaux of the Central Committee and especially of the Secretariat.
He was reminded of his conduct during the October Revolution. Krupskaya
protested in vain against the remarks addressed to a member of the
Political Bureau availing himself of his right to speak, an intolerance
in contrast to the licence accorded to the "Bukharin school." Other
members of the new Opposition succeeded no better, with good reason;
when Stalin replied to his critics it was to give the final blow to the
vanquished.

He began by revealing Zinoviev's subterranean manoeuvres in the last few
months, and complained of the "calumnies" of the minority. Had they not
unjustly attributed to him "sympathy with the idea of re-establishing
private property in land"? He made a brusque attack on the impotent
opposition, described the view of Sokolnikov and Krupskaya on State
capitalism as "nonsense," and demonstrated Zinoviev's ignorance of
Leninism and of Bolshevisation. As for Kamenev, he was not a Leninist at
all but a liberal. Point by point, with the help of quotations from
Lenin's _Complete Works_, he distorted his opponents' theories, before
coming to his real subject. "Yes, comrades, I am a frank, rough man.
That is true; I don't deny it." He related the efforts of the new
Opposition to exclude Trotsky. "We did not agree with Zinoviev and
Kamenev, being fully aware that an amputation policy is full of dangers
to the Party, that the amputation method, the method of bleeding -- they
demanded blood -- is dangerous and infections; to-day, one is amputated,
another to-morrow, a third the day after. What will be left of the Party
in the end.'" Then, a series of differences, ending with the incidents
of which Bukharin was the hero. "Now, what do they want to do with
Bukharin? They want his blood. That is what Zinoviev demands, in his
embittered concluding speech. You demand Bukharin's blood? We will not
let you have it; be sure of that." He admitted a difference of views in
the Opposition, except on the very problem to he solved:

>...Despite this diversity of opinion, they are all united on one point.
>What is it on which they are all united? What is their platform? Their
>platform is that there ought to be a reform of the Secretariat of the
>Central Committee. That is the only point upon which they are fully
>united. The statement may seem strange, even ludicrous, but it is a
>fact.
>
>There is a history behind all this. In the year 1923 after the Twelfth
>Party Congress, these people, assembling in a "cellar" (laughter),
>elaborated a platform in accordance with which the Political Bureau was
>to be abolished and the Secretariat was to become the leading political
>and organisational body. It was to consist of Zinoviev, Trotsky and
>Stalin. What was the meaning of this platform? It meant that the party
>was to be led without Rykov, without Kalinin, without Tomsky, without
>Molotov, without Bukharin. The platform came to nothing, not only
>because it did not represent any principles, but also because the Party
>cannot be led without the aid of those comrades I have just named. When
>a written question was addressed to me from the depths at Kislovodsk, I
>refused to have anything to do with the scheme and said that if the
>comrades wished it, I was ready to give up my own position quite
>quietly without either open or hidden discussion and without
>formulating demands for the protection of the rights of minorities.
>(Laughter.) Now it seems a new stage is beginning, opposed to the
>first. Now they are demanding not the politicalisation of the
>Secretariat, but its technicalisation, not the suppression of the
>Politbureau, but its omnipotence.... My only fear is that the Party
>will not agree. (_A voice:_ Excellent!)

Stalin's game in all its simple astuteness is exposed in this speech.
Master of the mechanism of government by the hold of the Party over the
State and the absolute prerogative at each stage of each Communist organ
over the one below it -- the supremacy of the Secretariat crowning the
edifice -- the General Secretary affected to share power with his
colleagues on the Political Bureau and the Central Committee, whom he
was always able to confront with the fait accompli and, in case of
resistance, to eject. He flattered the vanity of secondary personages by
affirming the impossibility of directing the Party without them -- the
same Party which it was possible to conduct without Lenin -- and he
granted them nominal authority in consideration of his own omnipotence.
In other matters he sought a provisional middle course between opposed
radical solutions both in the political and practical, economic domains
-- a policy dictated by innate prudence, by his desire for stability,
and by way of precaution against any eventuality. The only difficulty in
sight was that of paralysing any future attempt at opposition before it
obtained a footing in the Central Committee or the Political Bureau. In
this Stalin succeeded easily as far as Trotsky was concerned, and now
carried out the same operation against Zinoviev, with the assurance that
he could repeat the measures if necessary.

He concluded his final speech by promises expressed in his monotonous,
trivial style. "We are opposed to amputation. That does not mean that
leaders may strut about lording it over their comrades. No, not that. We
are not going to bow down before our leaders. (Shouts of 'Good!'
Cheers.) We stand for unity, we are against amputation. The policy of
amputation is hateful to us. The Party desires unity and will accomplish
it, with Kamenev and Zinoviev if they so desire, without them if they
refuse. (Shouts of 'Good!' Applause.)"

Thereupon the Congress was practically over by its eleventh session,
though it went on sitting, without even discussing economic questions --
the most important of all -- for the sole purpose of suppressing
Kamenev's statement in the Order Paper. The real work was done behind
the scenes, where the Opposition wasted their efforts in vain palavers
to obtain a last-moment compromise and save their faces. Meanwhile the
emissaries of the majority, dispatched to Leningrad, took possession of
the local press, and, in one workshop and one quarter after the other,
diverted the unanimity of the flock to a course diametrically opposed to
what they had voted for before. "Thoroughly perverted by political
servility," as Lenin had once said, the rank and file were unaware of
the direction in which they were being led. On December 30th, the
Leningrad _Pravda_ proclaimed the exact opposite of its recent emphatic
statements, under identical headlines evoking "iron unity," the
"Leninist line" and other sacramental rubrics. "Hundred per cent
monolithism" would soon be restored, at the price of displacing some
three thousand communist officials suspected of "deviation."
Ordjonikidze was on the spot, intent on reestablishing discipline.

Thus Stalin, having repudiated a "policy of amputation," proceeded from
words to action; by a characteristic mental reservation, he preferred to
inflict unemployment and hunger on his opponents, an almost infallible
procedure, under Soviet conditions, for demoralising the refractory and
bringing them back to the paths of wisdom. Even at the Congress he had
allowed himself a joke, with a threat behind it, at Riazanov's expense
-- "Riazanov is homesick for Turkestan" -- because of an irreverent
remark of the learned director of the Marx-Engels Institute. A phrase of
Glebov-Avilov's, frequently cited in the controversy, threw light on the
meaning of the hint: "No one will care to vote against the motion and
for that reason find himself sent to Murmansk or Turkestan." The ice of
the Arctic Ocean and the burning sands of Central Asia, the scurvy and
malaria awaiting dissidents were considerable factors in the
calculations of both sides. The hardiest hesitated to expose their
relatives and their children to the persecutions of the G.P.U. by
persisting in opposition to the point of heroism. "It was current
practice in Moscow," wrote the historian, S. Platonov, "in cases of
political offences, to prosecute not only the offender, but his whole
family." Ivan the Terrible, Boris Godunov and their successors governed
by these means, and Stalin inclined to the same methods.

Stalin's preponderance was more and more obvious from the date of this
Congress onwards. Reports in the press laid stress on the violent
incidents in which he took part, passing over in silence dangerous
revelations. The Party was only just beginning to learn the name already
feared in the higher stages of the machine, and the masses, knowing
nothing of these Byzantine disputes, were still in ignorance in spite of
the multiplication of portraits issued from the State printing-press.
But the very fact of his having delivered the political report of the
Central Committee brought Stalin notoriety, enhanced by the unexpected
disgrace of Zinoviev and Kamenev.

Stalin's clear-sightedness is not revealed in a first reading of this
interminable speech, the triviality of which is ill-concealed by its
pompous form. He supplements the poverty of its substance by verbiage.
It is a succession of analytical resumes of the documents supplied by
the Bureaux and Commissariats concerned, with the addition of comments
representing average opinion in the ruling clique on current affairs. In
foreign policy Stalin predicts definitely that "if the Dawes Plan is
pregnant with revolution for Germany, the Locarno Pact is pregnant with
a great European war." On internal policy he expresses an optimism
reflecting the security of the bureaucratic regime delivered free of all
the known oppositions, and now armed to discover and crush any new ones.
The only passage in the report which had particular interest at the time
referred to the dangers of over-rapid industrialisation in the Soviet
State, which might result in irreparable economic disturbance and
"certain famine artificially brought about," but observations of this
kind were regarded as commonplaces and received hardly any notice.

Sokolnikov had said at the Congress: "Lenin was neither president of the
Political Bureau, nor General Secretary, but, nevertheless, he had the
last word in politics.... If Stalin wants to win the same confidence,
let him win it." Stalin secured supremacy by other means, of which none
as yet knew the secret. All that was known was that he had been able to
secure for himself a majority of five against Trotsky in the Political
Bureau, then three against the Zinoviev-Kamenev combination, and thus to
control the enormous "machine." This gave him control over millions of
persons subordinate in different ways to his dictatorship. By a singular
inversion, he controlled the composition of the assemblies whose
mandatory he was supposed to be. They all, in the last resort, were
dependent on him, and did their best to serve him to ensure their own
security or for advancement. The numerous malcontents abstained from
protest, because the construction of the Party made it possible to
intercept communications from top to bottom, to preclude communication
between groups, and to suppress it, if desired, right and left.

"From the ordinary bourgeois point of view," wrote Lenin before and
during the revolution, "the notions of democracy and dictatorship are
mutually exclusive." Stalin thought them incompatible. The tendency
under his rule was to efface the remnant of democracy remaining in
decadent Bolshevism. It may be said of the Leninists, as their master
wrote of the Social-Democrats, that they had denied their own
principles, Christians, when once theirs had become a State religion,
forgot the simplicities of primitive Christianity and its revolutionary
democratic spirit." Under cover of an obsolete vocabulary, the
protection of a series of bureaucratic screens, and the aegis of a
numerous and varied police, Stalin seized regal prerogatives one by one.
In the stern severity of the stage during the terrible years of danger,
the General Secretary appeared simply to be the first among the
Bolsheviks. But the hour was coming which Plekhanov with his acute
vision had foreseen: "In the long run, the whole will revolve around one
man who, ex providentia, will hold in his hands all the threads of
power."

Under pretext of a considerable numerical increase in the Party, from
735,000 members and probationers to 1,088,000 in the interval between
two Congresses, the new Central Committee was to have 106 members, the
Control Commission 163, actual members and deputy-members. Most of the
Opposition had been expelled, the rest counted for nothing. Chronic
hypertrophy of all the higher organisations, at sessions becoming
steadily less frequent, reduced their statutory authority to nil as
against the permanent executive organs, which could not be prevented
from legislating by decree and ruling the country by despotism.
Membership of the Political Bureau was increased to nine. Trotsky and
Zinoviev remained, as hostages or figureheads. Stalin strengthened his
section by adding Kalinin, Molotov and Voroshilov to Bukharin, Rykov and
Tomsky, whose automatic acquiescence was not guaranteed for ever.
Kamenev returned to the rank of deputy-members, from which Sokolnikov
disappeared; Dzerzhinsky, Uglanov, Petrovsky and Rudzutak were to
constitute the reserve. Thus members, afraid of moving a step down, and
deputies hoping for a step up, offered many possibilities of intrigue
and manoeuvre to a supple and consummate intriguer. The General
Secretary would henceforward have a majority of seven members stable
enough to give him time to envisage a coming crisis and make his
arrangements accordingly. Except in the event of an unlikely
simultaneous attack from five hostile colleagues, Stalin held the
equivalent of consulship for life, the permanent Secretaryship. In five
years Stalin realised by inches his _coup d'état_. He, the cleverest if
not the best of all the aspirants, held Lenin's inheritance.

## Chapter 09: The Inheritor

### 9.1

WHO is Stalin?" After the 1925 Congress everyone was asking himself this
question which Skliansky had put to Trotsky earlier in the year. "The
most eminent mediocrity in our party," Trotsky replied, although in
earlier days he had described Stalin to Max Eastman as "a brave man and
a sincere revolutionary." These descriptions are not entirely
contradictory, since revolutionary sincerity, physical courage and
intellectual mediocrity may all go together. In fact the description
adequately fits the average Bolshevik under Lenin, but the change in
Trotsky's tone, after an interval of less than a year, was unmistakable.

Trotsky, therefore, took a long time to form the more unfavourable
opinion which later he was to express in so many ways in his writings.
No one knew what the General Secretary was capable of; and Stalin
himself, before he had so easily got the better of his clumsy and
impatient rivals, probably had no idea of the prospects that would one
day be open to him. As usually happens in such cases, his horizon
broadened as his responsibilities increased. The heads of the Party
looked on him above all as an "organiser," a vague expression which
later became more precise as the astonishing results of his particular
talents made themselves felt. Those who were close to him knew that his
chief superiority over his over-eloquent colleagues was his precious
gift of dumbness, a natural tendency not to waste words, in addition to
the gifts of order, punctuality, devotion to the Party and capacity for
hard work, which Lenin had admired. But these gifts do not explain his
final domination. Although, in his fraction, Dzerzhinsky was morally and
Bukharin culturally his superior, no one was his equal in shrewdness,
manoeuvring, administrative ability or in the continuity of his drive
towards power. Yet at that time no one saw him as a future figure in
history nor as the typical representative of a growing social class.

Trotsky explains his unfavourable opinion by saying: "The victorious
counter-revolution may have its great men. But its first stage,
Thermidor, has need of mediocrities who cannot see beyond the end of
their noses." According to this view, expressed after long reflection, a
Thermidorian reaction had already begun in Russia, of which Stalin was
the unconscious instrument. "For the first time I attacked squarely, one
might almost say, with physical conviction, the problem of Thermidor,"
Trotsky goes on, forgetting his own thesis of 1921 on the N.E.P. as a
Thermidor accomplished in good time, and within the necessary limits, by
the Jacobins of the proletariat. The incident of Zalutsky shows that he
was not alone in reasoning thus. Although this shabby accuser rapidly
retracted, the accusation of "Thermidorianism" gained ground. Thus, on
this point, Trotsky and his worst enemies thought alike; and soon the
latter in their turn were borrowing his arguments in favour of planned
production, industrialisation, and the democracy of the Party.

Nevertheless, Trotsky still hesitated to declare himself between the two
fractions at odds with one another. In 1925 he was made President of the
Committee of Concessions and director of technico-scientific services.
After a diplomatic holiday in the Caucasus, he took up his new duties
with "that praiseworthy ambition which urges a man to excel at whatever
he puts his hand to," as Washington said, and abstained from becoming
involved in the quarrels of the triumvirate. Both in speeches and
writings he urged the necessity of improving the quality of industrial
products, and also studied projects for electrification, preparing notes
on the great Dnieprostroy scheme. Feeling that it was politic to make a
show of official optimism, he published a series of articles: "Towards
Socialism or Capitalism?" in which he refuted those socialist
theoreticians who saw in the economic restoration of Russia a retreat
from the revolution. In these he quoted, with child-like confidence, the
doubtful statistics of the Gosplan, from which was to come "the
magnificent music of developing socialism." Collective economy was
gaining the ascendency over private initiative, according to the
"statistics," and he endeavoured to show that the rate of progress
forecast must lead to its success. He took no account of the uneconomic
means of coercion used by the State to repress capitalist tendencies and
to secure an artificial control. As regards external events, he
considered the social revolution in Europe in the near future as the
most likely hypothesis.

But Stalin was in no way grateful to him for this attitude. He put
increasing difficulties in his way, rendered his work impossible and
persecuted his collaborators. Trotsky gave further proof of submission
by disavowing those rare foreign communists who defended him. He even
went so far as to condemn Max Eastman, whose book, _Since Lenin Died_,
exposed all the facts of the crisis in the Bolshevik Party as far as was
possible with the documents and information then available. He even
denied the existence and the suppression of Lenin's _Testament_, by
quibbling with words. Krupskaya followed his example. For the sake of
the good of the Party, which perhaps they misunderstood, and which they
certainly interpreted very narrowly, and confused with reasons of state,
Bolsheviks of all colours put their solidarity as a caste above the
truth and laughed at all honesty as a limited prejudice. Trotsky himself
hoped to buy a political truce by sacrificing the comrades who had been
his allies in ideas and in the struggle. Vainly, for by so doing he
encouraged Stalin and discouraged the Opposition. At this point the
conflicts of the integral Leninists provided the respite he needed;
Trotskyism was no longer a burning question, but was discussed only in
an academic manner. Stalin and Zinoviev, in their controversy over
socialism in one country, quoted their old adversary without passion.
Kamenev charged him with excessive optimism, which was almost equivalent
to a compliment, and took on himself the reproaches of pessimism which
were once reserved for the metaphysician of the "permanent revolution."

At the Fourteenth Congress Trotsky remained silent. He hesitated to take
sides, although tempted to give the demagogues of the new Opposition who
dared to talk of democracy a piece of his mind. His ex-lieutenant,
Antonov-Ovseenko wrote to him, "I know that you were ready to intervene
at the Congress against Zinoviev-Kamenev. I bitterly regret and deplore
that the impatience and blindness of the comrades in our fraction should
have caused you, against your own judgment, to abandon this intervention
which was already decided upon." The rank and file militants in the two
opposition groups, all equally ill-used, tended to fraternise and wished
to bring their leaders together. After the Congress, Trotsky was
obliged, at the Central Committee, to disapprove on principle of any
repression against those who were defeated. Both sides then made
advances to him and a more hopeful prospect began to open out for him.

Despite their common lot and the desire of their partisans to come
together, an alliance between the old Opposition and the new appeared,
in 1926, to be impossible. Trotsky was supposed to represent the Left of
the Party, while Zinoviev, Kamenev, Sokolnikov and others were the Right
incarnate. According to his own theory, the two currents reflected
irreconcilable class antagonism, proletarian and bourgeois. At a pinch,
the Left: might support a centre bloc, of which Stalin was the typical
expression, against the danger from the Right, but a coalition of the
two wings would mean that both were compromised. It was no accident that
Zinoviev and Kamenev should have "flinched" in October, and quite
recently demanded Trotsky's exclusion, or that Sokolnikov should be the
most hostile to the economic and industrial plans of the Left. If the
new Opposition rallied itself around the limited democratic programme of
the old, it was by an egotistic instinct of self-preservation. But
Zinoviev could not do otherwise than confirm Trotsky's point of view on
the utopianism of establishing socialism in Russia alone. Next Kamenev
was found defending the ideas of the Left on planning and industry; his
views on the disquieting progress made by peasant capitalism agreed with
those of economists of similar tendencies. Ideas also coincided on
Thermidor, but this was as yet unadmitted. All this caused great
distress of mind among the leaders of the minorities and in the ranks,
in which there was a strong conviction of the necessity for unity of all
the oppositions without distinction of origin.

While the adversaries of the dominant fraction were getting together,
Stalin was not losing any time. Control Commissions and "packed" local
Committees executed his orders with precision. The cadres of the Party,
the trade unions and the State were purged by police measures. In
Leningrad and elsewhere, thousands of Oppositionists were dismissed from
their places and rendered destitute. In the Communist International and
its sections a similar fate overtook the misguided followers of the
ex-President. Everywhere places were open for those who were willing to
stake their fortune on the new master. This gave food for thought to any
who might have been recalcitrant. Zinoviev and Kamenev were faced with
the loss of all their posts of influence, being left only with titles
which the stranglehold of the machine rendered valueless. The rest of
the old guard were to be still more roughly handled. Stalin's creatures
and minions waited for the spoils, taking possession of all offices and
prospects of advancement. The bureaucratic rampart grew and strengthened
around the Secretary of the secretaries.

Stalin managed with caution the changes necessary for his slow and
prudent advance towards absolute power. He disarmed his critics in the
Party, but made use of some of the more capable of them in subordinate
positions where they were allowed to find refuge. By this means he
disguised to some extent the inadequacy of those who had recently been
promoted and also gave prominent members of the minority a chance to
amend their attitude at leisure, to make their choice between their
costly convictions and their immediate personal interest. The embassies
and commercial missions swarmed with Oppositionists, rendered impotent
by their isolation from one another and the necessity of making a show
of orthodoxy before foreigners. Many were also to be found in the
Departments of Economics and of scientific research, where ex-Mensheviks
were also employed, and among specialists of all categories. Most hard
hit were the rank and file working-class supporters, who had great
difficulty in finding work. Together with the dismissed functionaries,
these unemployed maintained an undertone of discontent, which those
leaders who were not reconciled to retreat and were looking for a way
out were glad to claim as the first symptoms of a "turn." The new
Opposition, less adept at the theoretical researches beloved of the old,
built up a clandestine organisation according to the standard pattern
and lulled itself with hopes of working for revenge. In other
directions, the good offices of mutual friends and of reconciled enemies
gradually softened the more marked discordances between the various
dissatisfied groups. At a session of the Central Committee in April
1926, the only two minorities represented both submitted similar
amendments and made parallel reservations, and on the following day a
pact was concluded: the impossible was achieved under the banner of "the
Opposition bloc." Zinoviev and his partners rendered homage to the
clairvoyance of the Left whose political and economic programme they
adopted. Trotsky retracted his severe condemnation of the October
defaulters. "A reciprocal amnesty," commented Stalin.

Into this "unprincipled bloc," as the reigning oligarchy at once named
it, Zinoviev by ingenious arguments succeeded in luring the remnants of
the Workers' Opposition which had been hostile to Trotsky. The Georgian
communists, whom Stalin had turned out, also joined. The classic plank
of democratic centralism was already part of the programme of the
section of the Left known as Trotskyist, and all the other already
defeated sections now came to add their weakness to the common fund.
Since the leaders were now agreed, most of their partisans followed,
although disliking the idea of victory under the banner of Trotsky. The
divergent opinions which still existed were felt to be of less
importance than the essential points of the common programme:
industrialisation of the country and democratisation of the Party. In
reality, the main object was to attack the monopoly of power, not in
order to abolish it, but in order to turn out those who held it and
divide it among themselves.

Already Trotsky had more or less handed Stalin the dictatorship by his
lack of foresight, his tactic of patient waiting broken by sudden and
inconsequent reactions, and his mistaken calculations, yet up to that
time all was not entirely lost, the last word had not been said. But
with the formation of the "bloc," Trotsky achieved his final ruin as a
political leader, by this association with men devoid of character or
credit who had nothing concrete to offer to offset the disrepute they
brought with them. Whatever he may say after the event, he did not
understand the nature of the evolution of Bolshevism nor the root of the
problem which had to be solved. His most brilliant gifts were a handicap
in a struggle in which Stalin's minor talents were lust what was needed.
He imagined that he had gained the adherence of the "Leningrad workers"
whom Zinoviev had deceived and could not now undeceive. In reality he
introduced the germs of panic and decomposition into the "bloc." He had
the illusion of gaining, if not a majority of the Party, at least a
sufficient section to make Stalin pause, but he had forgotten that the
genuine Party no longer existed. (He had himself written many times,
"The Party will cease to be a party.") He hoped to dispose of the legend
of Trotskyism by allying himself with the originators of this falsehood;
but what he did in reality was to range himself with the Leninism of the
epigones, whose degeneracy he himself had pointed out. By contradictions
and complications which the masses could not follow, he threw away all
chance of getting a genuine following, or of dissociating himself from
the opposing fraction. The working class, whose highest hopes he bragged
of representing, was by now so profoundly disappointed by the course of
the revolution that it had no longer any faith in any section of a Party
whose promises had proved to be such lies. For years had gone by,
already the tenth anniversary of October was drawing near, yet the
conditions of the masses were getting steadily worse.

### 9.2

THE Standard of life in the industrial centres in 1926, taking all
salaries into consideration, was definitely lower than under the old
regime. The averages, which the statistics recorded with fussy
precision, were arrived at by totally unscientific-subterfuges, but odd
fragments of information demonstrated the fallaciousness of the official
figures. All those with inside knowledge are aware how much store Stalin
sets by statistics and how he causes them to be falsified at need. In
any case, only a very small portion of the proletariat received as much
as or more than the "average" wage, and a comparison with 1914 indicates
a state of misery. As Riazanov truly said on this point, "There are
certain categories of workers who have a wage 110 per cent higher than
before the War, but in fact they live 100 per cent below the level of a
human existence."

That was not all: various illegal reductions in wages under the form of
deductions for obligatory contributions and forced subscriptions, long
delays in payment, sometimes even of several months, which meant a
corresponding depreciation in value, the shameful and crying inequality
at the factory between specialised and unskilled workers and between men
and women doing the same work, an inequality greater than in any
capitalist country, the disregard of the laws and decrees in relation to
protection, safety and assistance of the workers, the shameful
exploitation of women and children, general disregard of the eight-hour
day and the constant violation of the collective contracts by the State
as employer, these were the real facts of the situation as stated in the
documents of the Soviet, side by side with hollow propaganda phrases.
The Central Committee recognised that the housing shortage was a
"catastrophic state of affairs"; the average space occupied per worker
in Moscow was less than three square metres. The press described in
horrible detail the worm-eaten and insanitary barracks where each
inhabitant occupied "the dimensions of a coffin."

And these were the privileged wage-earners. The lot of the disinherited
was even worse. From a mass of incoherent figures given by various
organisations, which admitted to more than a million unemployed, for the
most part without any relief, it is possible to arrive at the truth by
multiplying four or five times the number disclosed. Kalinin calculated
that the unemployed agricultural labourers amounted to 15 million; the
Assistant-Commissar of Works later admitted to 25 million. The
population was increasing by 3 million a year and unemployment and
misery were in proportion.

Homeless children were another directly connected phenomenon, which the
People's Commissars described as "our greatest evil" and Semashko as "a
living reproach to our conscience." Official figures admitted to 7, 8
and 9 millions of abandoned children, living by begging, stealing,
prostitution and crime. "The roots of this evil are not only in the past
but in the present" noted Krupskaya, distressed to find that the trouble
was "three-quarters due, not to the misery and carelessness of the old
days, but to conditions to-day, to unemployment and to the extreme
poverty of the peasants." Anyone outside the Bolshevik aristocracy who
had used similar language would soon have lost the last remnants of his
liberty.

Dzerzhinsky, one of the few people in responsible positions who
preferred plain speaking to the satisfaction of commanding a lot of
terrified functionaries, explained the under-consumption to which the
Soviet population was condemned by the shortage of manufactured goods
and the consequent increase in agricultural prices: all the basic
industries (coal, steel, etc.) had decreased since 1914, productivity of
labour was less in spite of payment by piece work, costs of manufacture
were up and imports were stopped. Consumption had fallen on an average
by more than half, per head of the population, by two-thirds for certain
basic necessities. Nevertheless, the Government announced that in the
tenth year of the revolution, production was equal to before the War.
"In Russia, the classic country of lies and charlatanism, figures have a
purely relative value and lend themselves with remarkable elasticity to
all sorts of metamorphoses," says F. Lacroix in his book _Mysteries of
Russia_ from which we have already quoted.

The unified Opposition could not shut its eyes to the uncomfortable
picture of the "total costs" of the revolution. Stimulated by those
elements which were closest to the working class, companions of Sapronov
or Shliapnikov, and filled with a natural desire for popularity, they
put the elementary demands of the workers in the forefront of their
programme. But they put forward nothing which the majority could not
accept and the solution was no nearer since they had no means of
realising it. Fearful of incurring the reproach of Menshevism or
pessimism, they dared not broach the question of bringing the N.E.P. to
an end, which Lenin had hinted at, nor face up squarely to the need for
reform of the system of government. Their economic policy, which was
still vague, did nothing to alter the "general line." It did not lay
down any practicable and rapid scheme for overcoming the deficit on
industry and transport, replacing outworn equipment, reducing the net
costs, stopping speculation by middlemen and stabilising the collapsing
chervonetz. Owing to this, all their plans for raising real wages and
their respect for the eight-hour day were no more than the abstract
solicitude of Bolsheviks for the proletariat, since all these identical
plans had existed on paper for ten years. Their abuse of the bureaucracy
was no more forceful than that of some of the actual leaders.
Dzerzhinsky at the Central Committee declared: "When I look at our
apparatus, at our system of organisation, our incredible bureaucracy and
our utter disorder combined with every conceivable sort of red-tape, I
am literally horrified." Bukharin, speaking at a Communist Youth
Congress, recognised the danger of a "hardening of caste distinctions"
and admitted the "incontestable degeneration" due to the "complete
immunity" of Communist Party members. The Opposition did not, therefore,
have a monopoly of platonic reformist criticism nor of ineffective
goodwill. On the question of democracy, Sokolnikov caused a scandal by
suggesting that other parties should be allowed. Ossinsky alone agreed
with this, thinking that if the Mensheviks and Social Revolutionaries
were legalised, then all communists would be obliged to unite against
the common enemy.

The two fractions were more completely divided on the question of
planned economy. The traditional Left attributed all misfortunes to the
fact that industry lagged behind agriculture, and offered as a cure the
speeding up of industry as part of the complete economic plan, in order
to weld together the town and country and to equalise the supply and
demand of goods. In opposition to this "industrial deviation" the
majority alleged the lack of funds which the State had at its disposal.
Stalin had predicted at a recent Congress: "_Since, however, there is a
great lack of capital in this country, we have good reason to expect
that in the future the growth of our industry will not proceed so
rapidly as it has in the past_." The passage in his report in which he
makes this remarkable prediction also replies to the proposals of the
Left which he purposely exaggerated:

>We might devote double the present sum to the development of industry.
>_But this would bring about an unduly rapid tempo in the development of
>industry, so that, owing to the lack of a sufficiency of free capital,
>we should not be able to keep step with that development, and there
>would certainly be a fiasco_ -- to say nothing of the fact that if we
>were to spend so much upon industry, there would be nothing left over
>for agricultural credits.
>
>We might increase our imports twofold, especially the import of
>machinery, in order to hasten the growth of industry; but this, by
>making our imports greatly exceed our exports, would lead to an
>unfavourable balance of trade, and would disturb our exchange. This
>would mean an undermining of the foundation _on which alone a carefully
>planned guidance and development of manufacturing industry is
>possible_.
>
>We might greatly increase exports, without paying heed to any other of
>the main constituents of our economic life. We might do this regardless
>of the condition of the home market. _The consequences of such a policy
>would inevitably be to produce great complications in the towns, owing
>to an enormous increase in the price of agricultural produce, this
>meaning a decline in real wages and a sort of artificially organised
>famine_ with all its disastrous consequences.

The "industrialists" considered it unnecessary to set aside further
credits for agriculture; in fact, they hoped to get from the countryside
funds to subsidise industry. In his studies for the Communist Academy
and in his much-discussed work _The New Economy_, Preobrazhensky
attempted to demonstrate this theoretically. According to his thesis,
the stage of primitive capitalist accumulation such as Marx analyses in
_Capital_, must inevitably be gone through by all socialist societies
without colonies, in order to set up an "accumulated fund" at the
expense of the peasant producer. In 1925, Kamenev's unexpected views on
the prosperity of the kulaks gave unforeseen confirmation to the
economic algebra of the Left, since, failing any financial co-operation
from abroad, it disclosed a valuable source of revenues and subsidies in
the interior. The "bloc" wavered between different methods of laying
hands on the capital of the peasants and merchants: forced loans,
re-assessment of taxation, readjustment of prices. Thus were the _kulak_
and the N.E.P. man to become sleeping partners in State industry in
spite of themselves.

In April 1926, the Central Committee, following the Leninist principle
of appropriating ideas from the Opposition in order to render them
unworkable, had admitted that industrialisation was "the principal task"
and that "a disciplined plan" was the only way out of the disorder.
Rykov, in his official report on the economic situation and the budget,
attributed the scarcity of goods and the agricultural stagnation from
which the Soviet Union was suffering to the backwardness of industry.
But during the debate Stalin poured ridicule on the idea of vast plans
quite disproportionate to the resources of Russia, and in particular on
the project of an immense power station on the Dnieper, which he
compared to the purchase of a costly and useless gramophone by a mujik
whose cart was in need of repair. Later, in summing-up at Leningrad, he
made frequent allusions to the "industrial deviation," but in an
impersonal manner, since the evasions and shiftings of the Opposition
still left him somewhat in the dark. While reiterating "the slogan of
industrialisation proclaimed at the Fourteenth Congress" and declaring
that "our country has entered upon a new period of the N.E.P., a period
of bold industrialisation," he polemicises thus: "It is impossible to
develop industry in the void, if there are no raw materials in the
country, if there is no food for the workers, if there is no
agriculture, however undeveloped, since this is the prime market for
industry." Even more than in America, according to him, industry must
depend on the internal market, and particularly on the peasant market.
Exports must be developed but not by depriving the population, "since
the workers and peasants wish to feed themselves like men." No
exaggerations of the Dnieprostroy type. "We are too fond of building
fantastic plans for industry without reckoning up our resources. People
seem to forget that it is impossible to make plans, or to embark on any
enterprise, more or less grandiose, without a certain minimum of
resources and a certain minimum of reserves." Finally, Stalin, with
obvious implications, rebuked "those persons who look on the mass of
labouring peasants as a foreign body, an object to be exploited for the
benefit of industry, a sort of colony." As against the industrialist
Left, Stalin set himself up as the defender of the peasants.

In 1923 Trotsky had objected to any additional taxation of the farmers
in order that "the peasant might become richer" -- an incontestable
precedent for Bukharin's "Enrich yourselves!" "We are fond of describing
any peasant who has enough to eat as a _kulak_," said Zinoviev in 1924.
In 1925 Trotsky still spoke of enlarging "the scale of profits of the
capitalist-merchants in agriculture," of strengthening "the capitalist
economy of the farmer." But in the same year Kamenev suddenly discovered
the _kulak_ danger and reproached the Central Committee with
underestimating it. In 1926 the "bloc" was insisting that the better-off
peasants had considerable reserves: it was there that the State should
look for the resources necessary to develop industry and so come to the
rescue of the proletariat. This volte-face had two good harvests in a
ruined country as its only justification.

On July to, 1926, Dzerzhinsky replied to the full Assembly of the
Central Committee: "The mujiks have hoarded up 400 million roubles,
perhaps 4 each...." The disconnected and passionate speech which
contained this pertinent remark, as well as the few lines quoted on
bureaucracy, was his last political act. The founder of the Cheka died
after leaving the tribune from which he had violently apostrophised his
opponents Kamenev and Pyatakov and threatened the Opposition with "fresh
gunpowder" in the autumn. Although this threat was omitted from the
printed text, it made a great impression on the audience. The atmosphere
of tension and nervousness throughout this session of the "Bolshevik
Parliament" was intense, not so much owing to the economic questions
under debate as to the particular political circumstances at that time.
Dzerzhinsky's death, following immediately on his menacing words, which
the press did not reproduce, brought to a head the emotions born of
other events. The Opposition "bloc" openly declared itself, "seriously
and for a long time to come," as Zinoviev said, and the struggle for
power entered on a new phase.

### 9.3

AS SOON as he learned of the result of the negotiations between his
adversaries, Stalin set himself to break up the alliance. He attempted
first to discredit Zinoviev and Kamenev by printing the unpublished
letter of Lenin, in which he stigmatised the "deserters" of October.
This letter had been suppressed in the _Complete Works_, but had already
been circulated illegally in the Party by the Trotskyists. The two
friends replied by demanding the publication of the _Testament_, which
they had themselves helped to suppress, and the existence of which
Trotsky and Krupskaya had only recently been forced to deny. This Stalin
refused, at the same time redoubling police precautions for the
suppression of clandestine factional activity; the increase in secret
meetings, the passing of prohibited documents from, hand to hand, and
the alarming increase in spontaneous strikes, might give the Left their
opportunity. Zinoviev's followers actually held a conspiratorial meeting
in a wood at which Lashevich, the Assistant-Commissar for War, spoke;
the inevitable spy having reported this to Stalin, he seized the pretext
to strike his blow. For this he made use of a private letter seized at
Baku, two years earlier, written by Medvediev, an old member of the
Workers' Opposition which was now part of the "bloc." Stalin always
utilised to the utmost any weapon that came into his hands. He hoped now
by attacking the subordinates to strike at the leaders, perhaps to
overcome them.

_Pravda_ opened a campaign against a new "danger from the Right," with
the idea of compromising the Left. The confiscated letter, mangled and
falsified, formed the basis for this. Medvediev had, in a private
letter, dared to envisage the desirability of a broad policy of
concessions, in imitation of Krassin, just as Lenin before him had
envisaged an extension of the N.E.P. This was sufficient to bring down
on him the accusation of being "100 per cent Menshevik." He had written
in confidence what many, even among those close to Stalin, were saying
under their breath, that the Communist sections in different countries
were artificial growths and the so-called representatives of the
international revolution in Moscow were "lackeys" supported by "Russian
gold." This condemned him as a blasphemer End a liquidator. Medvediev
and his comrades had no means of clearing themselves publicly. Neither
had Lashevich and the others. The Politbureau alone controlled all
newspapers, pamphlets and meetings. Agents of the Secretariat began to
spread the suggestion that the Opposition had not only set itself up
against the Party but also against the State. Voices clamoured for
violent measures, expulsions. Stalin likes to set going exaggerated
demands in order that he may appear in the role of mediator, proposing a
compromise, which can then easily be put over.

When the July session opened, in an atmosphere heavy with alarming
rumours, in which the word "Thermidor" continually recurred, nothing
remained but to ratify the measures which Stalin and his friends had
already discussed. The Control Commission had prepared all their weapons
for intimidating the new Opposition, which was not expected to show
fight. Stalin had boasted privately of "bringing Zinoviev and Kamenev to
their knees." But these two declared their solidarity with the other
militants convicted of "fractionalism" and "defeatism." They declared
their allegiance to the theses of the Left which they had recently
violently abused for imaginary "Trotskyism." Later, they worked
themselves into a state of indignation over the permanent state of siege
then existing in the Party, but it did not occur to them to demand the
restitution of constitutional liberty for everyone else in the
State at the same time. Their opponents reminded them in vain of their
own violent attacks on Trotsky, their demands for his expulsion, even
his imprisonment, with quotations from their own articles and oratorical
diatribes. They replied by lifting the veil from the machinations of the
"anti-Trotskyists," in which they themselves had played a large part,
the activities of the _semiorka_, and the rest. Zinoviev admitted that
he had made a worse mistake in 1923 than in 1917. "Yes, on the question
of bureaucratic repression, Trotsky was right, and I was wrong." He
demanded the reading of the famous _Testament_, which everyone spoke of
by hearsay and yet which was not supposed to exist. Stalin felt impelled
to make known Lenin's secret letters on the national question and on the
State plan; for the curiosity aroused relaxed momentarily the discipline
of the fraction without breaking it. Trotsky alone benefited by this
glimpse into the past, but the audience remained unshaken. The minority
had eighteen votes at the beginning of the session and eighteen at the
end. Of these, five, among whom were Smilga, Rakovsky, and Ossinsky,
constituted a "buffer-group," intended to deaden shocks, a tactical ruse
which had no effect; Stalin always sees through these little games,
although his enemies rarely see through his.

A fresh quarrel broke out over international policy. The Opposition
criticised Stalin for sending an untimely ultimatum to China about the
Manchurian railway, a move which might have led to armed conflict,
without consulting the Politbureau. They held him responsible for the
action of the Polish Communist Party in supporting Pilsudski in his
military _coup d'état_. They challenged him on the sterility of the
collaboration between the Russian and British trade unions, and on
Tomsky's role in the British General Strike. He was blamed for all this
because no internal or external action was ever taken in the name of
"Moscow," except with Stalin's initiative and consent.

The last question raised let loose an interminable polemic in which the
"Anglo-Russian Committee" figured largely and helped to confuse an
already complex question still further. In 1925 Trotsky had written a
book on the future of England in which he predicted the imminence of a
revolution in that country and the final victory of communism. The
Politbureau, which had to conduct simultaneously both the foreign policy
of the Soviet Union, which was necessarily opportunist, and the
Communist International, which was, by definition, revolutionary, had
embarked on a queer diplomatic adventure with the General Council of the
Trade Union Congress using the bureaucratic Russian trade unions as
intermediaries. An Anglo-Russian Committee, drawn from high officials of
both organisations, was set up to secure mutual understanding and
co-operation, based on highly ambiguous principles from which both
parties hoped to further their own ends. The English hoped that by
affecting sympathy for communism they would increase the commercial
relations between the two countries, thus benefiting both their own
capitalists and the unemployed, while the Russians, by professing an
insincere devotion to trade unionism, hoped to make use of the trade
unions for their own ends. When the General Strike began in 1926,
Trotsky felt that his prophecies were about to be confirmed, and that
its sudden collapse could only be due to the treason of the leaders;
from this he concluded that the Angle-Russian Committee must be
dissolved and the "traitors" unmasked. Neither his friends, Rakovsky and
Radek, nor his new ally Zinoviev, shared this simple-minded view.
Tomsky, head of the Russian trade unions, had endorsed the decision to
end the strike, and Stalin's fraction felt that the Committee could
still be put to further use.

The Opposition, which was brought round to Trotsky's point of view, made
yet one more mistake in attempting to use the "English question" as a
stick to beat Stalin, since it was a question in which the distressed
Russian masses had no direct interest. They wasted time on it at the
Central Committee and wore themselves out making speeches behind closed
doors which the press would never publish. They bared the flank of the
Opposition to reprisals without any tactical necessity for so doing, and
thus allowed themselves to be forced out of their last remaining
Government positions without being able either to defend or
demonstratively to retire from them. The result was that the majority,
instead of being split, were driven closer together.

The balance-sheet of the July encounter was strongly in Stalin's favour.
Little he cared about the magnificent doctrinal theses of his critics,
or the brilliance of their literature. His policy was based on more
immediate human realities. Lashevich, caught out in flagrant
insubordination, had been relieved of his military posts, excluded from
the Central Committee and allotted a post of secondary importance in
Siberia; Zinoviev, suspected of connivance, had been eliminated from the
Politbureau, where Rudzutak took his place; Kamenev had been forced to
resign from the Moscow Soviet and dismissed from the Commissariat of
Commerce, which was taken over by Mikoyan; Kuibyshev had been chosen as
Dzerzhinsky's successor on the Economic Council; Ordjonikidze, Mikoyan,
Kirov, Andreyev, and Kaganovich had been chosen as alternates for the
Politbureau -- these were the "organisational conclusions" announced by
Stalin and ratified with mechanical precision by the Central Committee.
Against these minutely worked-out arrangements, the finest thesis in the
world was not worth the snap of a finger.

Following on the thinning-out at the top, came a purge of the lower
ranks; thousands were recalled, particularly in Leningrad, which still
swarmed with refractory persons, despite the apparent unanimity on the
surface; the usual method being an "administrative change" to that part
of the country where the thermometer falls to below forty-five degrees
in winter. "We have triumphed but not convinced," admitted Kalinin on
his return from a punitive expedition to Leningrad. For example,
Ossovsky, someone quite unknown, was expelled from the Party with a
terrific outcry; let those who would not take this warning beware! With
a remarkable unanimity of thought and expression, all the telegrams
received from the provinces expressed their "entire and complete
approval" of the severity of the Central Committee, even demanding that
it be increased. By a curious bureaucratic irony, "Zinovievsk" called
for greater severity against Zinoviev. The machine was so perfected as
to obtain similar telegraphic resolutions from Berlin, New York, Paris,
London, Prague and Stockholm, where emissaries of the Secretariat had
fulfilled their task as prompters to the "bolshevised" sections of the
Communist International.

By increasing the number of alternates in the Politbureau, Stalin was
strongly defending his rear, since the newly promoted members, owing
their improvised careers to him, would certainly support him if
necessary against the titular members who might desert him. Ordjonikidze
had always been a crony of his, Mikoyan was another of his Caucasian
followers, Kirov, who had fallen heir to Zinoviev's position in
Leningrad, had never expected to climb so high, Andreyev and Kaganovich
both had a temporary "Trotskyist" aberration to do penance for, and
Stalin is enough of a psychologist to know that deserters make the
humblest followers. After all that had happened since Lenin's death,
there were plenty of mediocrities who coveted a seat on the Central
Committee or the Control Commission, plenty of third-rate officials who
aspired towards the Politbureau. The expert use which Stalin made of
these ambitions was devastating for his antagonists, who were all
infected with intellectual superiority.

But he was not content merely to manipulate men. He was haunted by the
Leninist tradition which urged him also to meddle with ideas. In any
case, men and ideas appear to him inseparable and he can only understand
the latter through the former. At the Executive of the International,
where Zinoviev, the so-called President, no longer had the right to open
his mouth, Stalin attacked the "deviations of the Right and the extreme
Left," by which he meant anyone who opposed any of the dogmatic
commonplaces of the majority; he accused one opponent who attempted to
carry on an "ideological struggle" without "discrediting the leaders of
the Opposition," of having the "morals of a vicar." He repeated his
well-known assertion: "I say that such a struggle cannot exist in
nature. I say that whoever agrees to the struggle on condition that the
leaders are not attacked, is denying the possibility of any ideological
struggle within the Party." At least his opponents were duly warned, but
instead of acting on the warnings they stuck to their profitless
abstractions.

While implacably abusing other people in order to discredit their ideas
and limit their influence, Stalin was careful to put himself in a good
light in order to strengthen his policy. But he took care always to say
the opposite of what he did, and to do the opposite of what he said. In
making the partly autobiographical speech at Tiflis, from which we have
already quoted, he snubbed the flatterers who described him as the "hero
of October," "leader of the International," etc. "This is all nonsense,
comrades, nothing but foolish exaggeration." At the same time he wasted
no opportunity of commercial self-advertisement in order to acquire that
notoriety which neither his actions nor his work had yet brought him.
All the illustrated papers were ordered to reproduce his portrait, which
still did not become popular, and the walls of all offices were adorned
with a photograph, of which innumerable copies were printed, in which he
figured at Lenin's side ... before the rupture, of which everyone was
ignorant (at the Gosizdat, already several times purged, flourished a
"Stalinist" functionary, as his followers were now beginning to be
called). He wished to give his name to other towns as well as
Stalingrad; Iuzovka became Stalino, and Iuzovka Stalin. One day there
were to be Stalinabad, Stalinsk and even Stalin-Aoul, in the Caucasus.
Many servile functionaries thought to do themselves good by christening
streets, establishments and enterprises in this way; Stalin never
disavowed them since they furthered his own wishes. Bureaucratic
conformism began to consist more and more in a hypocritical admiration,
demonstrated by external signs, of the arid personality of the General
Secretary.

The same brutal contrast between theory and practice was shown when
Stalin, in his April report in Leningrad, exhorted his hearers to
democracy. They knew how much of that to believe. He blamed the conduct
of the "police brigade" established under Zinoviev, while making use
himself of the same methods, doubled and tripled, throughout the whole
of Russia. "The Party ought to embark resolutely on the path of internal
democracy," he declared without a smile to his subordinates, not one of
whom had been elected or was controlled from below, and who had his
mandate to efface all vestiges of liberty and crush out any slight
desire for independence. "The method of persuasion is our principal
method of work," but he was speaking to a circle where it was already
customary, on the pretext of discipline, to suppress the slightest
conscientious objection or the least individuality of ideas as an attack
on morality or the crime of _lèse-révolution_.

The would-be objective historian of the future, who refers only to the
official documents will have difficulty in separating truth from
falsehood in Stalin's written and spoken discourses. He is not the first
statesman who has made use of the spoken and written word sometimes to
conceal his intentions, sometimes to cover up the deficiencies in his
knowledge. But the material and spiritual conditions of Russia and the
resources of modern technique for propaganda and intimidation have
enabled him to achieve heights in this direction which were quite
unknown before the Soviet "experiment." The same applies to his
henchmen. The more the monopoly of the Party developed into the
omnipotence of the Secretariat, the more often one heard autocrats
praising democracy, bureaucrats denouncing bureaucracy, wasters
preaching economy, ignoramuses extolling science, and everywhere a
complete contradiction between the real and the ideal.

After the lively altercation in July, Stalin sought to deprive his
opponents of their favourite weapon by sending out a call "to all Party
organisations and Soviets" to put an end to bureaucracy, waste, and
inertia. "Our economic and administrative apparatus consumes
approximately two milliards of roubles a year. It should be possible to
reduce these expenses to three or four hundred million, to the benefit
of our industry." This was exactly the thesis of the Left, to within a
hundred million anyway. A further unprecedented anomaly: The message was
signed by Rykov, President of the Council of Commissars, by Stalin as
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Party, by Kuibyshev, as
President of the Party Control Commission. These titles and signatures
implied for the first time a public usurpation of attributes and
prerogatives, an open violation of the Constitution, no article of which
allowed for the unwarrantable interference of the functionaries of any
Party whatever in the affairs of the State. But Stalin, by reason of the
powers which the G.P.U. gave him, codified the situation in his own
person. If, on paper, he still allowed a little authority to the Council
of Commissars, it was only for the benefit of the gallery and to soften
the transition.

In his speech at Tiflis he mentioned in particular the General Strike in
England and the happenings in Poland. But anyone unversed in the
casuistry of decadent Bolshevism, unaccustomed to the examination of
this sort of thing, would have had difficulty in distinguishing his
views from those of the Left. Besides which he never hesitated to quote
from Trotsky or Zinoviev without indicating the authors, contenting
himself with arriving at different conclusions or with omitting the
conclusions altogether. When by any chance he produced an original idea,
such as: "The British Communist Party is one of the best sections of the
Communist International," when speaking of a group whose influence on
social life in Britain was nil, he gave a sample of his ability, but the
complete atrophy of all critical spirit among the governed, as well as
the firm hand of the governors, saved him from any unpleasant
contradictions. Except within the walls of the Politbureau and the
supreme Economic Council, where Trotsky and Pyatakov fought side by side
a battle which was never heard of outside, the Opposition kept quiet and
bided its time.

Would it have the wisdom to await the ripening of the disagreements
which were already beginning in the majority fraction? This would not
have suited Stalin, whose aim was to hasten the expulsion of the
irreconcilables. A Party Conference was due to be held in October 1926,
the Congress having been adjourned until the following year. It was
essential to confront the assembly with an accomplished fact, and since
the Opposition seemed in no hurry to attack, Stalin set himself to
provoke them.

He was an expert at this sort of task. In September he launched a
"campaign of explanation," that is to say defamation, against the gagged
minority. Trotsky and Pyatakov were eliminated from the Department of
Economics; Kamenev refused to go to Japan. The Oppositionists,
slandered, abused and subjected to threats, had nothing but secretly
duplicated pamphlets and clandestine conversations to defend themselves
with. The majority of the Party never heard anything of their
declarations or their "theses." Krupskaya decided at last to part with a
copy of the famous _Testament_, which was immediately sent abroad, where
it was published by Trotsky's friends. But in Russia its underground
circulation was very small, and in any case, came too late to be
effective. Under these conditions any attack was hopeless for the
present and without value for the future. Nevertheless, the defiant
Opposition was unable to resign itself to keep silent and "wait and
see," which was the only possible tactic in the circumstances. They did
not then understand the need to take a long view, "to re-educate the new
generation and look ahead" and also, as Trotsky wrote later, but too
late, "not to be impatient, not to fret oneself or others, but to learn
and to wait." The Opposition persisted in visualising the Party as an
unalterable entity, from which it was only separated by a temporary
misunderstanding. After a prolonged internal debate, in which the
prudence of some members continually clashed with the impatience of
others, it was decided to take the decisive step. At the beginning of
October 1926, the foremost militants forced their way into the Communist
cells in the factories, with the intention of replying to the attacks of
Stalin's agents. Stalin asked for nothing better.

### 9.4

THE annals of Bolshevism contain plenty of bitter fights, barbed
polemics and noisy and passionate episodes. But in this Party, where
Lenin practically never used the familiar "thou" to anyone, the
strictest courtesy was always the rule, even in the midst of the Civil
War, and exceptions strike a jarring note. The era of Stalin inaugurated
new usages.

The Oppositionists were made aware of this by their reception at the
workers' meetings: shouts and insults, volleys of whistles, a systematic
uproar. Flying squads of interrupters were dispatched by lorry to any
point where the members of the Left were speaking, with orders to drown
their voices by various methods imitated from fascism, to assault them
if need be and throw them out by physical force. It was not necessary
for Stalin to give exact instructions for this procedure; his
lieutenants were quick to see what was expected of them and to make it
known that the hooligans would not be punished. In general, the
Opposition did not succeed in making itself heard. Even if it had, the
result would have been the same, since the proletariat would not have
followed their overlearned and theoretical viewpoint, being frightened
of prolonged unemployment above all things. Radek was able to speak for
three minutes -- and Trotsky, who had once received an ovation in that
same factory, was forced to leave the platform after an equally short
time, without being able to explain his programme. "The Party does not
want arguments," _Pravda_ constantly stated. An artificial outbreak of
collective hysteria whipped the bureaucracy to a fury. The press devoted
entire pages to vituperation against the renegades, fractionaries and
counter-revolutionaries in prose; Demian Biedny, the official versifier,
abused and mocked at them in verse. Molotov, under the direct
inspiration of Stalin, did not blush to upbraid them for having gone
into emigration under the Tsar, as if Lenin and the entire staff of
_Iskra_ had not done likewise, following the example of Herzen and
Bakunin. Even anti-Semitism was used against the leaders of the
Opposition. One ironic detail was that the Zinoviev University
anathematised the "criminal attempts at schism" of its namesake. And
Kirov announced without a smile: "If we are speaking of democracy, there
has never been greater democracy in the history of our Party than we
have to-day."

After a few days of this unparalleled democracy, the Opposition, faced
with the dilemma of submission or insurrection, chose to retreat. On
October 4th it offered to make peace with the Politbureau, which imposed
its own conditions, and on October 16th it submitted. In a declaration
signed by Zinoviev, Trotsky, Kamenev, Pyatakov, Sokolnikov, and
Yevdokimov, it recognised its offences against discipline, condemned its
own fractional activity, disowned Krupskaya for an innocent allusion in
her speech at the last Congress, repudiated its followers abroad, and
finally abandoned its members of the old Workers' Opposition. While it
is true that they did not abjure their intimate convictions, they
promised to remain in a state of political catalepsy, and to submit
themselves without reserve to the Central Committee, which Stalin had
called in plenary session for the express purpose of receiving this
capitulation and confirming its sanctions: that Trotsky and Kamenev be
removed from the Politbureau and replaced by Kuibyshev and S. Kossior;
that V. Smirnov, author of _Democratic Centralism_, be expelled from the
Party for having spoken without permission; that a whole series of
rank-and-file militants be accused, dismissed, recalled. As for
Zinoviev, he was invited to resign from the Presidency of the
International, which he did soon after. Towards the end of the month,
all the essentials being already decided upon, the Conference was
allowed to begin....

Stalin had prepared a thesis on the "Opposition bloc" to which he
imputed lack of principles, a defeatist ideology, opportunism,
Menshevism, Trotskyism, and which he accused of destroying the unity of
the Party and weakening the dictatorship of the proletariat. He dragged
up again Zinoviev's and Kamenev's celebrated back-sliding in October,
repeated all that had already been said a hundred times on the various
questions in dispute and refuted the industrial deviation afresh: "_The
industrialisation of the country can only be achieved by relying on the
progressive amelioration of the material situation of the peasant
majority_."

During the sitting he gave a long report on the subject. After his
biased history of recent events, he reopened the hackneyed argument over
socialism in one country, then dug up all the old controversies, such as
that on the "permanent revolution," in order to show Lenin and Trotsky
in opposition. He insulted Zinoviev, to whom he attributed a "limited
nationalist spirit," and Radek, who had ridiculed him at the Communist
Academy with his allusions to Shchedrin's satires, coining such phrases
as "socialism in a single district" or even "socialism in a single
street." He quoted Trotsky's unfortunate phrase "the magnificent
historic music of developing socialism," the unflattering appreciations
which Trotsky and Zinoviev had written about one another, their later
retractions, and frequently quoted Lenin, whom the Oppositionists had
constantly used against him. To the industrialists he said yet again:
"One cannot further the progress of industry by neglecting the interests
of agriculture, or by brutally violating those interests." Finally,
Trotsky having predicted the ultimate exclusion of all Opposition, he
made a vehement denial: "This assertion of Comrade Trotsky's is
absolutely without foundation; it is completely false."

The representatives of the minority, present by right at the Conference
as members of the Central Committee, were authorised to reply to the
bureaucracy, which had already decided to hear nothing and to interpret
everything in the worst possible light. They wasted their time and
strength in speaking before this hostile audience as though they
recognised in it the authentic representatives of the Party, and
confined themselves to prudent generalities, couched in an amicable
tone, which corresponded neither to the acuteness of the conflict nor to
the gravity of the occasion. Reduced to a defensive position, enmeshed
in their own unfruitful strategy, they abandoned their most telling
arguments, glossed over differences and blunted their criticisms. The
need to manoeuvre took precedence over their slogans to the point of
rendering them unrecognisable. In order to prove that Trotskyism was no
more, Kamenev read Trotsky's retraction on the "permanent revolution":
"Experience has invariably shown that wherever any of us disagreed with
Lenin on any fundamental point, Lenin was always correct." In his
pamphlet the _New Course_, Trotsky had once written: "With regard to the
theory of the permanent revolution, I can find absolutely no reason for
retracting what I wrote on this subject in 1904, 1905, 1906 and later."

It is quite obvious that these subtleties, incomprehensible to the lay
mind, disillusioned the few remaining workers who were faithful to
communism, disgusting them alike with the Opposition and the
bureaucracy. They had the further unfortunate result of obscuring urgent
and immediate questions under a veil of incomprehensible chicanery.
Although the two fractions agreed on the necessity of safeguarding the
monopoly of their Party, and called vainly on the name of Lenin to
arbitrate between them, the Right still reproached the Left with every
sort of opportunism dressed up in revolutionary phrases, with
petit-bourgeois and Social-Democratic deviations, while the Left accused
the Right of idealising the N.E.P., under-estimating the economic power
of the kulaks, etc. As a practical measure, the Opposition proposed the
exemption of the poor from taxation, the raising of workers' wages, and
the increase of subsidies to industry; all this by means of a milliard
roubles to be obtained, half by cutting down the expenses of the
bureaucracy, and half by increased taxation of the bourgeoisie in the
towns and on the countryside. Already labouring under the accusation of
demagogy, and unsure of its historic parallels, the Opposition did not
dare to speak openly of Thermidor, nor to call Stalin the "grave-digger"
of the revolution, or the Tsar of the kulaks, as he was called in
whispers, nor openly to compare Voroshilov to General Cavaignac.

At the end of his oration, Stalin triumphantly announced that "Comrade
Krupskaya has forsaken the Opposition bloc." Two days before, a letter
from Shliapnikov and Medvediev, extracted by threats, had been made
known, in which the signatories confessed their errors, judged and
humiliated themselves and repented. The moral forces of several
Oppositionists were weakening by reason of the impasse into which
Trotsky and Zinoviev had strayed; new discords on tactical questions
broke out among the shattered ranks. Sapronov and his followers felt ill
at ease among the "big guns" of the industrialists. Stalin was fully
informed of all this and intrigued to his utmost to increase the
differences, while at the same time the machine increased its external
pressure: cells, sections, committees, all manifested a fantastic and
unanimous loyalty, which deceived no one.

During the Conference, the "ideological struggle" continued unabated
outside. Zinoviev complained of a verse quoted from Alexander Blok by a
Saratov newspaper: "Is it our fault if your skeleton is crushed by the
grip of our soft and heavy paws?" In _Pravda_ Larin stated the
alternatives: "Either the Opposition must be excluded and legally
suppressed, or the question will be settled with machine-guns in the
streets, as the Left Social Revolutionaries did in Moscow in 1918." In
an editorial Bukharin swore deliriously to defend, in the name of the
Party, "the Leninist purity of his ideology like the apple of his eye"
and proclaimed Lenin's disputed "heritage" to be sacrosanct.

In December the dispute was carried on at the Executive of the
International, in front of those whom Medvediev had called paid
"lackeys." Stalin could have avoided another sham debate, but he
preferred to save his face by posing as a believer in universal
communism, as continuing the work of Lenin, when he was merely his
temporary heir or at most his imitator. Tirelessly he recited the
statement which all his hearers had already heard or read to satiety,
that litany from the _Complete Works_ which he had already composed for
his earlier interventions. Trotsky and Zinoviev gave everlastingly the
same answers, which to-morrow would be denounced by _Pravda_ as "lack of
discipline." Clara Zetkin, converted to Leninism, mocked at their "bag
full of quotations," and the chorus of international followers reviled
the heterodox.

But the leaders of the Opposition, urged on by their followers who were
weary of diplomacy, began to raise their voices in order to demonstrate
the constancy of their ideas. Stalin became more violent, more
aggressive, in fact more scurrilous. He exhumed all the ancient errors,
real or imagined, of his opponents, and revealed the incident of the
telegram of congratulations which Kamenev had sent to the Grand-Duke
Michael at the time of the February Revolution. Kamenev invoked a
denial, signed by Lenin, in his defence, but Stalin challenged this,
stating that Lenin had, in the interests of the Party, knowingly written
the opposite of the truth. Thus did personal animosity and a spirit of
cliquishness now take precedence over "ideology," so much stressed in
official political literature; and this between persons who had once
prided themselves as much on the correctness of their relations as on
their doctrinal rigour. Trotsky, always anxious to discover a struggle
of classes behind the struggles of the cliques, would nevertheless not
admit the truth of Jaurès's just observation: "History is a strange
battle, where the men who fight against one another often serve the same
cause." Later he was to attempt to explain his defeats, without
explaining anything, by the dumb pressure of the prosperous peasants and
the influence of world capitalism, reflected through the laborious
empiricism of Stalin.

The Party, therefore, began the tenth year of the revolution, more
disunited than ever before. The split which Lenin had foreseen was
gradually taking place in fact. Both camps prepared themselves for fresh
clashes after the end of 1926, putting no faith either in the promises
of democracy from the Right or of discipline from the Left. Stalin
arranged his pieces on the chess-board, where the so-called Trotskyists
were mere pawns: Ordjonikidze as President of the Control Commission;
Chubar to fill the vacancy as alternate of the Politbureau; Bukharin at
the helm of the International, without the title of President; lesser
personages everywhere where the machine did not appear to be secure. The
Opposition, on its side, completed its organisation as a clandestine
Party within the only Party, with its own hierarchy in miniature, its
Politbureau, its Central Committee, its regional and local agents, its
foundation groups, its subscriptions, its circulars, its code for
letters. Nevertheless, Zinoviev became discouraged and hesitated whether
to persevere. The Sapronovists considered blazing their own trail. Among
Trotsky's supporters, many began to doubt their previous convictions.
But a fresh problem arose to reawaken the antagonism of the two
fractions: civil war in China, which _Pravda_ hailed yet again as "the
thunder of the world revolution."

Since the death of Yuan Shih-kai, in the absence of any stable and
recognised power beyond certain provincial frontiers, the Chinese
Republic had been passing through troubled times, delivered over to
military bandits and feudal war lords. The generals, in the pay of the
rival Great Powers, divided between them an ephemeral authority over the
immense territory, broken by alternate advances and retreats, alliances
and ruptures. Finally two poles of attraction emerged: in the North, the
militarist reaction, headed by Chang Tso-lin and centred around Mukden;
in the South, the democratic revolution, directed by Sun Yat-Sen from
Canton. The nominal Government at Peking, which was in the hands of Wu
Pei-fu, really only had jurisdiction within the ancient capital, despite
the support of the British. Various generals, among whom was Feng
Yu-hsiang, converted to Christianity, and thereafter looked on as a pawn
of the United States, sold, lent or withdrew their co-operation in
accordance with a thousand vicissitudes. Thanks to Lenin's policy of
placing China on a footing of equality, without regard to the "unequal
treaties," Bolshevism exercised a considerable influence on the national
revolutionary movement. Joffe, as Ambassador from the U.S.S.R., had
negotiated and begun an intelligent Russo-Chinese co-operation, of which
Karakhan, his successor, saw the first fruits. On his death-bed, Sun
Yat-sen dictated two messages: one to the Kuomintang, his party, and the
other to the Executive of the Soviets, expressing the wish for a
permanent bond between the two revolutions and a lasting alliance of
solidarity between the two countries. With his base in Manchuria and
aided by the Japanese, Chang Tso-lin succeeded in extending his
operations towards the south, preaching the traditional morality of
Confucius as against Sun Yat-sen's semi-socialism. He succeeded in
taking Peking, and even Shanghai for a short while. But the Kuomintang
was supported inside the country by the bourgeois nationalists, the
liberal students, the workers and the peasants, and by the Soviet Union
from outside. It had succeeded, despite the violence with which the
revolting proletariat was treated by the professional soldiers, in
raising and training troops with a new mentality who were capable of
defeating mercenaries not fighting for an ideal. The Chinese University
in Moscow, directed by Radek, the officer-instructors, sent from Russia
to the Military School in Canton, among whom was Blücher, under the name
of Galen, finally the Russian advisers to the Communist Party, now
incorporated in the Kuomintang, such as Bubnov and Borodin, who
dispensed large subsidies -- all these played no small part in the
victorious march of the Southerners towards the North and the valley of
the Yangtse, under the command of Chiang Kai-shek. In 1926 the balance
of forces was in favour of the Reds. Wu Pei-fu, beaten by Chang, by
Feng, by Chiang and others, gradually faded from the scene, as did also
Sun Chuan-fang, another venal general of merely temporary importance.
Feng rallied decisively to the Kuomintang. The so-called "popular"
armies had occupied Hankow and were advancing on Nanking and Shanghai.
This, broadly and simply outlined, was the situation in China at the
time when Stalin began to take an active part in the leadership of the
International.

The young Chinese Communist Party had not renounced its independent
press, its political physiognomy and its freedom of action of its own
free will, to become the powerless Left wing of the bourgeois
Kuomintang. This course of conduct was forced upon it by Moscow. Stalin
and Bukharin, his inspirer and ideologue, claimed to he encouraging a
socialist evolution in China by means of penetration into the
Kuomintang, where the "bloc of four classes," the revolutionaries of the
country and the epoch, was to be sealed. The weakness of the Chinese
bourgeoisie, Stalin told the Executive of the International in November
1926, justified this tactic, and even authorised communist participation
in the capitalist government. He expected that the victory of the
Cantonese would bring about democratic liberties "for all revolutionary
elements in general and for the workers in particular." In order not to
alarm this insignificant bourgeoisie, to reassure Chiang Kai-shek, with
whom he had once exchanged signed photographs in Moscow, and to gain the
confidence of the civil and military chiefs of Canton, he ordered his
emissaries to shut their eyes to the bloody repressions of strikes in
the south. He forbade the arming of the workers, the creation of soviets
and the encouragement of peasant revolts, even ordering the suppression
of these. Already in March 1926, when Chiang Kai-shek had staged a _coup
d'état_ in Canton in order to curb the communists, the Soviet press had
had orders to suppress the truth, while simultaneously Bubnov was urging
his Chinese subordinates to submit. According to Borodin, the latter
were to fulfil the role of political "coolies" in the Kuomintang, which
was now admitted to the International as a "sympathetic" section.

Trotsky, on the other hand, while disagreeing with Radek and Zinoviev on
several points, demanded a separate policy and organisation in order to
rescue the communists from the guardianship of the Kuomintang. Both
sides searched the pages of the _Complete Works_, looking there for a
solution which could not be found. It is true that Lenin had always
recommended the support of all revolutionary movements, whether
bourgeois or nationalist, and advantageous compromises with democratic
and liberal parties, but only on the condition that the Communist Party
did not give up its liberty nor lose sight of its socialist programme,
did not lose itself in or become confused with such parties. Trotsky
could make use of this to the fullest extent. But Stalin compared the
Kuomintang to the British Labour Party, into which Lenin himself advised
the Communist Party to try to enter. Without doubt this was a complete
misunderstanding of the different social nature of the two parties, and
the disparity between their historical circumstances. In addition, since
the death of Sun Yat-sen, the Kuomintang had been transformed in very
much the same manner as the Bolshevik Party since Lenin's death....

In March 1927, following Chiang Kai-shek's entry into Shanghai, where he
formed a "popular" Government, two communist ministers participated in
the national Government at Hankow. In April, the President of the
Kuomintang, Wang Ching-wei, and the Secretary of the Communist Party,
Chen Tu-hsiu, proclaimed a permanent collaboration, and the
subordination of the military authorities to the civil power. In Moscow,
Stalin, irritated by the criticisms of the Opposition, himself
guaranteed Chiang Kai-shek's fidelity to Sun Yat-sen's _Testament_ and
the Soviet alliance, before a large audience of "active" militants.
Radek, on the contrary, predicted a fatal breakdown in the
Communist-Nationalist coalition, and gave warning that the workers were
in grave danger from Chiang's machine-guns. A few days later came the
news of a military _coup d'état_ in Shanghai: of hundreds, presently of
thousands of workers massacred, the Red Government dissolved by the
"popular" army, the Russian agents in flight and the members of the
Communist Party hunted down. The same thing, preceded by a search of the
Soviet Embassy in Peking, took place in Nanking, Canton and elsewhere.
The Soviet press exploded into imprecations, fulminating with rage and
impotence. Chiang Kai-shek was now a deserter, a traitor, a
counter-revolutionary, a feudalist, a dictator, an executioner, a
Cavaignac, a Gallifet. Stalin was just in time to prevent _Pravda_ from
publishing his lamentable discourse. But the disaster on the Pacific
stained him with the blood of the workers. The indignant Opposition came
to the fore again; an address presented to the Central Committee by
eighty-three Oppositionists was covered with signatures. The fractional
struggle broke out with renewed vigour around the Chinese question,
about the middle of 1927.

### 9.5

UNSCATHED, Stalin survived an upheaval which must have overthrown him
under any regime which was in the smallest degree democratic. There was
an excellent reason for this: he enjoyed a complete monopoly of all the
means of information and comment, both in print and on the platform. The
entire press belonged to him and praised his foresight unblushingly. Not
only the immense economic and political administrative apparatus, but
also the police and the army were under his orders, through
intermediaries. He was free to do whatever he liked except against the
members of the Central Committee and the Politbureau, unless he had a
majority there. No despot in any age or in any country, has ever enjoyed
such powers of deceiving public opinion, or, if that failed, of
suppressing it. The Opposition, by word of mouth and by duplicated
pamphlets, were able at the end of several months to influence twenty or
thirty thousand people at most. The "Declaration of the Eighty-three"
collected about three thousand signatures, but most of those
sympathisers who were not already marked down, abstained, not wishing to
subject themselves to reprisals to no good end. A certain number of
workers' circles existed in secret, holding no communication with one
another for fear of the spies, both professional and amateur, which
swarmed everywhere. Collective apathy and individual instincts of
self-preservation between them gave Stalin a free hand, provided always
that he continued to safeguard the privileges of the "oligarchy."

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Griboyedov's masterpiece
_The Misfortune of Having Wit_, which was forbidden by the censor, was
circulated to the extent of some 40,000 copies, according to some
authorities. In the tenth year of Bolshevism, Trotsky's writings were in
the same position. This is not the only instance of regression to an
earlier century, a reaction which makes the parallel between the Iron
Tsar and the "Steel" Secretary even more striking.

When Stalin slakes his vindictiveness by omitting Trotsky from the
official history of the revolution, when he denies facts and falsifies
texts, and removes from the libraries all books and documents which,
though authentic, are contrary to his views, when, in order to deny that
his principal adversary played any part in 1917 or in the Civil War, he
expurgates the life-stories and memoirs of his contemporaries, witnesses
and participants, even Lenin's own unpublished papers, when he causes
the anniversaries of the Red Army to be celebrated without mentioning
the most important name, and orders that the film October be made as
though Trotsky had never existed, how can one help being reminded of
Custine's description of the sovereign autocrat, who "adjusts the
history of his country to suit his good pleasure, and dispenses each day
to his people those historic verities which coincide with the fiction of
the moment"? Whether it be a Tsarist Empire or a Soviet Republic, "in
that country, historic truth is no more respected than the sacredness of
an oath." The printing of certain pages of a _Soviet Encyclopedia_ was
held up so that the biography of various persons who had ceased to be in
favour while it was in the press could be re-written.

The general public was no better informed about the present than the
past, on the defeats in China than on the earlier victories in Russia.
Stalin scourged the Opposition even in their graves. When the ashes of
Skliansky, who was killed in an accident in the United States, were
returned, he refused to allow the urn to be placed in the sepulchre in
the Red Square, as though wishing again to illustrate Custine: "In
Russia, the dead themselves are subjected to the caprices of the man who
rules over the living."

After the sinister miscalculations of Shanghai and Canton, the dark
Story continued with the arrest at Peking of twenty Chinese communists,
condemned to the horrible torture of strangulation by garrotting. Among
them were a founder of the Party, Professor Li Ta-chao, and a young
girl, Chen Pai-ming. But Stalin continued to demonstrate in theses and
in imperturbable speeches the correctness of his line, and to reprove
the leaders of the Opposition for urging a break with the Kuomintang and
the creation of soviets in southern China. At that time he staked his
hopes on Feng Yu-hsiang, the Christian General who claimed to be a
follower of Sun Pat-sen, and who like so many other mercenaries, and
like all the brotherhood of enemies of Bolshevism, called himself a
spiritual son of Lenin.

In any case, the affairs of the Far East only interested Stalin in
relation to his position in the Party. His friends did not conceal his
project of beheading the Opposition by "liquidating" the most important
leaders; once expelled from the Party, these intractables could be
handed over to the G.P.U. But for this it was necessary to have the
consent of the Politbureau. At this period, it was whispered in the
corridors of the Kremlin, by those in the know, that since the
Politbureau had lost its Left wing, it was divided into Right and Centre
factions, four votes against four. Rykov, Bukharin, Tomsky and Kalinin
were named as Rightists, without anyone knowing exactly what the
division was about. Thus one half of the Politbureau paralysed the
other. (The position of Kuibyshev, the ninth member, was still in
dispute, since it was illegal by statute to be a member of both the
Central Committee and the Control Commission.) Stalin found himself thus
in temporary difficulties at the top.

The manner in which he extricated himself from this embarrassment
clearly demonstrates his superiority on the low level where he
manoeuvres with such skill. Foreseeing all eventualities, he had already
enlarged the Politbureau and the Central Committee in order to surround
himself as far as possible with docile followers. But his fraction was
still not entirely homogeneous since he had to take into account those
old Bolsheviks, whose intellectual ability Lenin had not thought much
of, but who had helped to defeat first Trotsky, then Zinoviev. Until the
whole process was complete, until the genuine Stalinist camarilla formed
the majority in the Politbureau, Stalin was forced to make terms, to
manoeuvre, to temporise. For this reason he did nothing in haste, but
continued his silent work of modifying the numerical proportions to his
advantage, even to the extent of only one vote.

On various occasions Trotsky had believed it possible to launch a
frontal attack against the stable kernel of the Central Committee.
Zinoviev had also made two separate minor attempts, once against Trotsky
in concert with Stalin, and once against Stalin with his own forces.
Stalin himself never left anything to chance, and never risked an open
conflict without accurately measuring his forces and reckoning up his
votes. It is therefore necessary to follow carefully the tiresome
bureaucratic mutations, the "general post" of the functionaries, since
the vital and palpable secret of the Secretary's dictatorship lies in
just these colourless combinations, which force us to explore what
Carlyle called "the obscure and indescribable regions of history."

Stalin had against him a body of more or less respectable traditions,
static tendencies consecrated by time, and reputations which were long
established, even overvalued. In order to accustom the Party, or rather
the leading cadres, to a revision of customs and a fresh standard of
values, it was necessary to proceed slowly and by insensible gradations.
After cleaning up the Politbureau, he prepared people's minds for a
purge of the Central Committee. There was no hurry about going further:
people accepted a downfall more readily than an expulsion. Having
already postponed the Party Congress, first for some months, then for a
year, he adjourned the Congress of the Soviets for the same period, and
put off the Congress of the International to an unspecified date. Little
by little it became a habit to allow the Central Committee, or its
organs, or, in the last resort, the General Secretary, to act on their
own. When the Right in the Politbureau began to be irksome, Stalin
exercised patience and compromised, sure of the Central Committee and
reckoning, with undeniable perspicacity, on his adversaries' stupidity
and the poltroonery of his accomplices. And in fact, one after another,
they later came to his aid at the right moment. The period was fertile
in occasions and pretexts.

Diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union and Conservative Britain,
already very strained by Russia's part in the General Strike, became
acute in 1927, after the Chinese affair. Stalin took advantage of an
atmosphere favourable to patriotic exaltation, to take the Opposition at
their word when, before the Central Committee in April and in the recent
"Declaration of the Eighty-three," they imprudently affirmed: "The
threat of war grows greater every day." Exploiting this justification
for a state of siege, he set the ignorant population on the alert and
proclaimed that the revolution was in peril, only too glad to put the
Left in the position of supporting the enemy. Bukharin's and
Voroshilov's speeches having already provoked the beginnings of a panic,
a run on the shops, Stalin had to calm people's fears by declaring: "We
shall not have a war this spring, nor even in the autumn, because our
enemies are not yet ready for it." The bogy of war, first raised by the
Opposition, could only favour the bureaucracy; the closer the danger,
the more severe the dictatorship. At the end of May, Trotsky made an
unusually violent and useless speech before the phantoms who composed
the Executive of the International, in which he mixed the Anglo-Russian
Committee, the Kuomintang, the Soviet bureaucracy and the coming war.
Stalin, replying, refused to consider what he had said, "the more so
since he reminds one more of an actor than a hero," but continued,
nevertheless, to argue step by step the undesirability of forcing the
pace of the Chinese Revolution, the need to maintain the understanding
with the Kuomintang and to oppose the creation of Chinese soviets. He
concluded: "I have just received news that the British Conservative
Government has broken off relations with the U.S.S.R.... The Party is
threatened with war from some directions, with splits from others. Thus
there is a sort of united front from Chamberlain to Trotsky.... Have no
doubts that we shall know how to break this new front." The tone then
became more venomous with mutual accusations of Menshevism and treason.

The Opposition continued to strengthen Stalin's position by its
thoughtless tactics which resulted in bringing together persons who were
previously disaffected. It attacked Tomsky without measure over the
Anglo-Russian Committee, and Bukharin over China, which caused them to
draw closer to their protector. Stalin seized this propitious moment to
summon the Politbureau and propose Trotsky's and Zinoviev's exclusion
from the Central Committee, under threat of resignation. Not realising
the full gravity of their action, which opened an unlimited field of
action for Stalin, the Right gave way. The Control Commission followed
suit, despite the unexpected resistance of Ordjonikidze. A tragic
external event lent its aid to Stalin's manoeuvre. The assassination of
Voykov, Soviet Ambassador to Warsaw, produced a devastating terrorist
repercussion in Moscow. Twenty former capitalists and aristocrats, among
whom was a Prince Dolgorukov, none of whom had anything to do with the
attack, were seized without preliminary warning as hostages, and
executed by the G.P.U. Stalin's hand did not waver, and at such a time,
when the Kremlin was talking of a new Sarajevo, the Politbureau could
not resist.

The Control Commission justified its resolution on "Trotsky's and
Zinoviev's lack of discipline," by the fractional activity of the guilty
ones. The Opposition had broken its promises, distributed its forbidden
literature, held a demonstration by accompanying Smilga (who had been
banished to Siberia under cover of a "mission"), to the station (a lapse
which was made especially marked by reason of a similar demonstration
the day of Kamenev's departure for Rome). In addition, Zinoviev had
allowed himself to make certain criticisms at a commemoration ceremony,
and Trotsky had done the same at the Executive of the International.
Previously he had "libellously accused the Party of Thermidorianism"
before the Control Commission, which therefore submitted to the Plenary
Session of the Central Organs a demand that "Trotsky's and Zinoviev's
names be erased from the list of members of the Central Committee."
There had been no instance up to that time of anything unexpected
happening in such a case. It seemed as though nothing now remained to
impede the bureaucratic Nemesis.

Stalin, however, met with misfortune in China, where Feng Yu-hsiang,
following in Chiang Kai-shek's footsteps, severely discomfited him by
turning on the communists. _Pravda_ covered the new "traitor" with
insults, which, however, in no way prevented the various Chinese
generals from hanging and shooting Reds of all shades of opinion,
decimating the workers' trade unions and drowning the peasants' revolts
in blood. "More than ten thousand proletarians and revolutionary
intellectuals have already fallen beneath the murderous blows of the
united counter-revolution. Hundreds of the finest sons of China are
being slaughtered daily. Prisoners are submitted to indescribable
tortures," so people read in a manifesto in Moscow. It only remained for
Stalin to pick on Wang Ching-wei, representative of the Kuomintang Left,
in order to bring about a fresh disaster, the debacle of the social
revolution in China, the collapse of his last illusions, and an exposure
of the scandalous bankruptcy of his adventurist strategy. This final
turn took place in July 1927, when the session opened in an unbelievable
state of disorder.

In order to divert attention from his own heavy responsibility, Stalin
made use of an audacious diversion, which deceived no well-informed
militant, but might affect the morale of their followers. He sought for
a scapegoat, finally throwing on to the shoulders of his Chinese
subordinates, his instruments and victims-those who survived the
butcheries -- the responsibility for the whole series of mistakes
committed, thereby stirring up an opportune crisis within the Chinese
Communist Party. He had already ordered them to leave the nationalist
coalition government, if not the Kuomintang, and he now, at last, took
over the Opposition slogan, "Form Soviets." Now that the game was lost,
he considered this appropriate. But his chief manoeuvre consisted in
threatening the Bolshevik assembly with the menace of war.

"The foremost problem at the present moment is the danger of a fresh
outbreak of war ... directed particularly against the Soviet Union," he
wrote, without believing it, since in private conversations he was
cynical enough to comment ironically on this fairy-story. The Left
walked into the trap, the more readily in that they had been the first
to sound the alarm. The war question became the centre of all the
debates. "The Soviet Union is menaced by armed aggression, and in these
conditions ... it is essential that our Party be a united whole, and
that the masses which surround it also close their ranks," said
Krupskaya, who found it natural to read her one-time fraction a lesson.
Chicherin and Ossinsky alone stood out against the panic thesis, and the
future was to confirm their sensible and courageous words. Trotsky
affirmed the willingness of the Left to fight for the "socialist
fatherland," without subscribing to any union sacrée, but considered
Stalin incapable of achieving the victory, and posed the alternatives:
"Thermidor or the Opposition." When accused of defeatism he quoted the
example of Clemenceau, who opposed the Government of his country and his
class, not in order to hinder its defence but to help in the conduct of
the war. When he was interrupted with reminders that the Party existed,
he replied: "You have strangled the Party," yet he continued to express
his irrational belief in that Party, which Sapronov had called a
"corpse." Stalin jeered at the "comic-opera Clemenceau" and his "little
group which has more leaders than soldiers." What did the signatures at
the bottom of the "Declaration of the Eighty-three" signify when
compared to the immense majority which he professed to represent? And
his tone changed for a final warning. "_In order to conquer this
majority it would be necessary to start a civil war in the Party_." This
was clear. Stalin would not abandon power without resorting to armed
force. As for the Opposition, it never made use of anything stronger
than words.

Apart from the artificial bogy of war which dominated the assembly,
almost all the old disputes which had been argued and re-argued since
Lenin's death, were brought up once again. Differences over October,
divergencies during the Civil War, the antecedents of Trotskyism, the
Anglo-Russian Committee, the Chinese affair. The two fractions fenced
indefatigably with quotations, contradictions and threats. But, as
usual, the decisive struggle took place in the wings, where the
monolithic character of the bureaucratic machine was, as everyone knew,
beginning to show serious fissures.

Stalin worked hard to separate Trotsky from Zinoviev, to expel the first
and to bring the second to his knees. This calculation was sound, but a
little premature. As a result of their frantic cries that war was
imminent, the deceivers had finished by half-convincing themselves, and
had certainly terrified the majority of the deceived. If the Soviet
Union was perhaps on the eve of general mobilisation, how could they
afford to dispense with the services of such tried combatants as
Trotsky, Smilga, Muralov, Mrachkovsky and so many others' Ordjonikidze
could not resign himself to it and sought for a compromise. The
provincial delegates were also uneasy and argued that people's minds
were not yet prepared. Nevertheless, the exclusion was unanimously
voted, following the usual rule, but amid a feeling of great uneasiness,
and by an irregularity of procedure, in the absence of Ordjonikidze, who
did not concur.

Meanwhile Stalin could content himself with the results achieved, in
order, later, to press his advantage further. There was no urgent
question for him in the Party at that time and from then on no one in
the State could oppose him. The Congress fixed for December 1927, would
be chosen so as to ensure the election of a truly harmonious Central
Committee. The preliminary discussions in November would coincide with
the Tenth Anniversary celebrations, whose well-organised atmosphere of
overpowering enthusiasm, would facilitate the task of the omnipotent
apparatus. Stalin therefore came to an agreement with Ordjonikidze, who,
in turn, invited the Left to take up a more conciliatory attitude in
order that they might be saved. Trotsky and Zinoviev agreed and after
various hidden manoeuvres and laborious bargainings, the exclusion was
annulled, the Opposition once more promised to dissolve, and escaped
with "a severe reproof and a warning." Twelve days spent in settling
accounts and in exasperated altercations terminated with a soothing
remonstrance. But Stalin had trimmed his sails only in the absolute
certainty of finally achieving his aim. If he was unable to find a
pretext, he would know how to invent one.

"Never before has the Opposition been so unshakably convinced of its
position, nor held to it with such unanimity," said Trotsky. In fact,
however, his disorientated fraction had already lost or was about to
lose, in addition to Krupskaya, many prominent people originally in
Zinoviev's circle, notably Sokolnikov, Zalutsy, Shelavin, and Zoff who
had made a full apology. Each week other less prominent Oppositionists
recognised their errors, sometimes stooping to denounce their comrades
as proof of their servile submission. Conversely, Sapronov's group
detached itself in order to take up a franker and more radical position.
His "Platform of the Fifteen" pointed out the pressing danger of a
Thermidor, demanded the re-establishment of the soviets, defended
Lenin's democratic principles formulated in _State and Revolution_,
criticised the G.P.U. for "suppressing the legitimate discontent of the
workers," and the Red Army "which threatens to become an instrument of
Bonapartist adventurism." The disintegration which was beginning could
not be checked so long as Trotsky persisted in regarding the symptoms
merely as growing pains.

Nevertheless, the weakness of the Opposition was due far less to lack of
numbers than to its intrinsic inability to reason concretely, to its
insoluble internal contradictions and to the impenetrable obscurity of
its perspective.

Although the Party was no longer a party, although the Party had been
strangled, yet for Trotsky the Party still remained sacred, untouchable
and taboo. In his eyes, the State, the proletariat, the _kulak_, the
N.E.P. man, the bureaucrat, were so many definite abstractions like the
Party. At first he based his hopes on the new generation, which as a
whole displayed all the defects of the preceding one, together with a
few of its own, and with certain good qualities lacking. Common sense
and experience told him to spend time on educating an elite, but,
himself a prisoner in an unfortunate "bloc," surrounded by vulgar
politicians, he acted as though he shared their absurd impatience and
incurable aberrations. When aiming at the oligarchy, he attacked only
individuals, not principles, failing utterly to engage the attention of
the working masses, the importance of whose active adherence he
discounted.

The members of the Opposition vied with one another in mystic and
dogmatic Leninism, burying beneath an avalanche of captious quotations
from the Scriptures, or unintelligible pamphlets on China, a people who
lacked everything and no longer had any rights but only duties. In the
new religion of the State, its best elements represented, as against the
Jesuitism of the bureaucratic caste, not Free Thought or Rationalism,
but a sort of Protestantism or Jansenism, respectful towards a common
Scripture. Certainly it can be said of them that, members of a
privileged Party and yet despising these privileges, the original core
of their group contained "the only characters who never succumbed to the
universal fascination of power," as Renan wrote of Port-Royal; but such
little public opinion as still existed was unable to distinguish shades
of Left and Right in the degenerate Bolshevik Party and therefore unable
to tell the good from the bad in it. Such sympathy as the Oppositionists
did succeed in arousing or conserving, was, generally, less for their
doctrines than for the men who were sufficiently courageous to defy the
dictatorship and thus give to the one-time citizens, now become passive
subjects, an onerous example in revolutionary citizenship.

Trotsky feared that if he were defeated there was bound to be a
Thermidor, followed by the inescapable Brumaire, yet he declared to the
Americans in August 1927, speaking of the opposing sides in the
struggle, "_What separates us is incomparably less than what unites
us_." He saw himself in the position of Babeuf under the Directory, and
would have liked to bring about an upsurge of proletarian Jacobinism;
but far from conceiving of a supplementary revolution in order to
suppress the regime of oppression and Bolshevik-Soviet exploitation, he
planned long-term reforms which would only perpetuate it.

His views on external politics were equally unconvincing. He was
over-anxious to load on to Stalin's shoulders what was really a
collective responsibility, in which Lenin had a large share, and in
which all the chief Leninists have had a part according to their
importance. He was careful not to criticise that political dualism which
had been shown for example by the Party's verbal solidarity with the
Turkish Communists, at a time when the State was in fact allied with
Mustapha Kemal who was dispatching them to the scaffold; but he waxed
indignant over the collusion with Mussolini, to whom Rykov had
telegraphed astonishing congratulations. He is not convincing when he
holds Stalin responsible for all the reverses and misfortunes in the
international arena, where communism under Lenin had already met with
defeat in Germany, in Hungary, in Finland and in Italy, and under
Zinoviev in Germany again, in Bulgaria and in Esthonia, long before the
checks in Britain and the Chinese catastrophe.

Inconsequent tactics complemented the theoretical contradictions and the
illogical policy of the Opposition. It did not know the correct time to
throw its full influence and weight into the scale, nor when to be
patient and allow favourable circumstances to ripen, while still working
for its revenge. By aiming its blows at the wrong time and place it
rallied the maximum of bureaucratic unity against itself, and lined up
all the conservative interests, whether conscious or unconscious, behind
Stalin, instead of disarming some and neutralising others. Passing from
sterile waiting to a hopeless offensive, it struck blindly at the "wall"
of the Party, and set against itself those whom in other directions it
sought to convert to its ideals. It dissipated its energies on doctrinal
exegesis and problems of revolutionary strategy when it should have
concentrated on the root question of the regime, on which all the rest
depended....

### 9.6

BETWEEN two sessions of the Central Committee, Stalin speeded up the
preliminaries for a major surgical operation which he had been planning
for a long time. One may well believe that the rupture with the
Anglo-Russian Committee (finally accomplished in September 1927 -- but
by the trade Union Congress), and the final doom of the Chinese
communists, had aroused his deepest rancour against his too
clear-sighted adversaries. His spokesmen therefore took advantage of
their monopoly of the press and platform to deal a moral blow at the
Opposition, already physically fettered, and to prepare people's minds
for the "dry guillotine," at the very moment when _Pravda_ was boasting
of "the unprecedented extension of democracy under the Soviet regime."
Stalin's spies strained every nerve to ferret out indiscipline, or, if
possible, to provoke it in order to suppress it. Expulsions multiplied
throughout September, and towards the end of the month the Executive of
the International eliminated Trotsky, in defiance of the statutes. A new
"crime" was discovered by the G.P.U. in the shape of a "clandestine
printing plant"; twelve persons, guilty, or said to be so, were expelled
from the Party. Preobrazhensky and Serebriakov attempted to shield them
and met the same fate; so did thirty of their comrades in Leningrad, on
other charges. Mrachkovsky and various others were thrown into prison.
Obviously the long-awaited denouement was at hand.

In October, Trotsky and Zinoviev were finally expelled from the Central
Committee, before whom they made yet one more superfluous speech, amid
an unprecedented uproar, drowned by interruptions and insults. For the
last time they seized the chance to lend themselves to a scene which
Stalin had adroitly prepared. The latter no longer thought it necessary
to preserve any decorum. His discreet and valued agent, Menzhinsky,
nominal chief of the police, presented a report on the Opposition which
consisted of an absurd and incoherent story about a military plot,
intended to implicate them in counter-revolutionary activity with one of
Wrangel's officers, who was, in reality, an agent of the G.P.U. This was
an obvious provocative machination -- "Thermidorian" Trotsky called it
-- in which the uneasy but submissive audience clearly perceived
Stalin's expert hand.

One cannot even compare the Soviet G.P.U. to the Tsarist _Okhrana_. It
is necessary to go back to the time of Nicholas I in order to have some
idea of this formidable institution, a cross between the famous Third
Section of the Chancellery and the terrible Corps of Gendarmes, but with
an up-to-date technique. The parallel is rendered more exact by the fact
that the veritable head of the police was the "Steel" Secretary, as the
Iron Tsar had been in his time. Everyone felt himself to be under
Stalin's surveillance, direct or indirect, and no member of the
Bolshevik Parliament, outside the Left, dared to contradict or to oppose
him. Corrupt persons and fanatics set the tone and the rest resigned
themselves to voting anything. Amid an inconceivable uproar, in which
the efforts of the cabal were clearly evident, Trotsky, the finest
orator of the Party, was forced to _read_ his speech word for word in
order not to lose the thread, and to cut it short before he had
finished. None of those who expressed their disgust confidentially in
the corridors had the courage to declare it in the hall. Amid a chorus
of outcries, only the more moderate of which were recorded by the
stenographer, "renegade... traitor ... scum.., chatter-box... boaster...
liar.... Menshevik," Trotsky succeeded in making himself heard above the
racket: "Stalin's present organisational victory is the prelude to his
political collapse." Whistles and cat-calls prevented him from going
further.

Stalin, certain of an attentive silence, replied first by a personal
defence, delivered in his repetitive style: "That the principal attacks
are directed against Stalin is perhaps explained by the fact that he has
a greater knowledge than certain comrades of the knaveries of the
Opposition, and that he is less easily deceived. That is why Stalin is
particularly attacked. Who is Stalin? Stalin is an unimportant
individual. Take Lenin..." And he quoted yet again the old polemics from
the days of emigration, when Trotsky harshly castigated "Maximilien
Lenin."

On the question of the _Testament_, which the Opposition always raised,
he denied having suppressed it, took refuge behind the unanimous
decision not to publish it, and finally quoted Trotsky's denials of its
existence to Max Eastman. "It is said that in this _Testament_ Lenin
proposed that the Congress should examine the question of replacing
Stalin in the post of General Secretary. This is quite true. Let us read
this passage, although you have already heard it several times ..." And
he read aloud Lenin's well-known lines:

>Stalin is too rude, and this fault, entirely supportable in relations
>among us communists, becomes insupportable in the office of General
>Secretary. Therefore, I propose to the comrades to find a way to remove
>Stalin from that position and appoint to it another man who in all
>respects differs from Stalin only in superiority -- namely, more
>patient, more loyal, more polite and more attentive to comrades, less
>capricious, etc.

He went on to vindicate himself, secure in the mathematical conviction
that the votes were already his, but strengthened also by the errors of
his opponents.

>Yes, comrades, I am rude towards those who rudely and traitorously
>break their word, who split and destroy the Party. I have never
>concealed it and I do not conceal it now. Right from the first session
>of the Central Committee, after the Thirteenth Congress, I asked to be
>released from the obligations of the General Secretaryship. The
>Congress itself examined the question. Each delegation examined the
>question, and every delegation, including Trotsky, Kamenev and
>Zinoviev, voted unanimously in favour of Stalin remaining at his post.
>What could I do then? Abandon my post? Such a thing is not in my
>character.... At the end of one year I again asked to be set free and I
>was again forced to remain at my post. What could I do then?

After this self-justification came the speech for the prosecution:

>They complain of our arresting wreckers, men who have been expelled
>from the Party and are carrying on anti-Soviet intrigues. Yes, we have
>arrested them and we shall arrest them so long as they undermine the
>Party and the Soviet power.... They say that such things are unknown in
>the history of the Party. This is not true. What about the Myasnikov
>Group? And the Workers Truth group? Does not everyone know that
>Comrades Trotsky, Zinoviev and Kamenev themselves supported the arrest
>of the members of these groups?

He turned derisively to Zinoviev who had predicted war in the spring of
1927, then in the autumn: "Now it is winter and still the war has not
come." He observed that before his "chatter" about Thermidor, Trotsky
had in the _New Course_ denied "those historical analogies with the
great French Revolution (the downfall of the Jacobins) with which the
superficial and inconsequent liberals and Mensheviks seek to console
themselves." He accused the Opposition of wishing to form a rival party,
which they denied. The intransigence of the Bolshevik caste on this
point is well known. "Under the dictatorship of the proletariat, two,
three, even four parties may exist, but on condition that one is in
power and all the rest in prison," as Tomsky and Bukharin, the
Rightists, were soon to say, paraphrasing one another. What a regression
in the ten years since Lenin promised "a peaceful competition between
parties inside the Soviets!"

The assembly arranged the programme for the next Congress. By an
impudent paradox they rendered involuntary homage to the industrialist
Left at the very moment when they condemned it to death, by adopting
"Directives for the elaboration of an economic Five Year Plan," thus
breathing life into the project that Trotsky had cherished since 1920.
But there was a great difference in the tone of the two projects, and
the proposed tempo of future industrial progress. The Opposition
hastened to prepare "counter-theses" of a more ambitious nature,
destined for the Congress. The Governmental fraction, safe in its
control of the means of persuasion and coercion, finally allowed, with
democratic generosity, one month and a special page of _Pravda_ for
preliminary discussions. The Left asked for three months, since several
weeks at least were necessary to get replies to certain correspondence.
As to the freedom to speak one's mind, no one was deceived on that
score, knowing very well what it cost those who were courageous enough
to make their views known.

The officials of the Party, according to Stalin, numbered 100,000
persons in 1927, out of a total of 1,200,000 members and candidates. In
addition, approximately half the effective total, say nearly half a
million, consisted of State functionaries, trade union or Co-operative
administrators, or those of other institutions connected with the Party.
The other half, employed on production, enjoyed appreciably greater
material security than non-party members and asked only to be allowed to
consolidate this. In these conditions, the rank-and-file communist was
faced with a choice between comfortable orthodoxy and hopeless
unemployment. Those heroes who were prepared to sacrifice their minimum
of comfort, sometimes their children's bread, for their principles, were
still unable to make their voices heard at the Congress through the six
successive stages, which filtered opinions from below, deadening them
from stage to stage and finally suffocating them altogether.

At the end of October, Rakovsky and Kamenev took the risk of holding an
open meeting in Moscow, but they were greeted with howls and were unable
to speak. In other places similar attempts met with the same result.
Nevertheless, the Opposition decided to continue with its combative
tactics and to risk a street demonstration on the day of the great
anniversary. Encouraged by the modest but fortuitous success of a
demonstration in Leningrad, it hoped to make an impression on the
bureaucracy by the evidence of its popularity.

That Zinoviev should show such presumption is not surprising. But
Trotsky might have remembered Cromwell who, when he returned
triumphantly from his campaign in Ireland, wisely remarked that "the
crowd would have been still larger if they had come to see me hanged,"
or Washington, meditating, as he listened to the acclamations after his
elections to the Presidency, "on the quite different scenes which
perhaps I shall one day witness, in spite of all my, efforts to do
right." But, relying on their hypothetical and dogmatic social science,
Bolsheviks of the Left, as well as those of the Right and Centre, are
disposed to mistake their desires for the reality, their fears for a
certainty, and to generalise from every occurrence, no matter how
accidental. The Opposition was intoxicated by contact with its partisans
in small illegal meetings, particularly when it unexpectedly succeeded
in filling the amphitheatre of the Higher Technical School. On November
7, 1927, aliens amid the joyous mood of the celebration, carrying
enigmatic slogans inscribed on placards, they launched themselves into
the unheeding crowd which filed past singing revolutionary songs -- a
crowd like that of any other country but at the same time a Soviet
Russian crowd, trained to march in line, collectively credulous but
sceptical in its component elements, worried and passive, animated by a
vague sentiment of revolutionary patriotism tempered with lassitude.

This time Stalin was not caught unprepared. The Opposition, submerged in
the indifferent multitude, found itself face to face with well-trained
bands, which, according to an official communique "pelted them with
rotten potatoes and galoshes," which proved that these henchmen were
there on purpose, since no one habitually sets out to celebrate the
anniversary of a revolution supplied with rotten potatoes, and galoshes
are far too expensive for anyone to throw away, especially at the
beginning of the winter. The placards of the Opposition were torn down,
the carriers molested, pushed, battered and sworn at by the crowd. A
pistol shot -- the bullet glanced off Trotsky's car. In Leningrad a
brisk skirmish of the same kind resulted in Zinoviev's arrest for
several hours. These were all the outstanding incidents of the day. Two
small but fierce minorities alone were opposed to each other, the masses
remained neutral and inert. On this point Trotsky notes in his _My
Life:_ "Those who could see, understood that a rehearsal for Thermidor
took place in the streets of Moscow on November 7, 1927."

### 9.7

THE over-emphatic and banal manifesto issued by the Soviet Executive in
honour of the anniversary contained a "surprise" among its hackneyed
pronouncements and sacramental exclamations: the seven-hour working day
was proclaimed, but in the form of a promise to bring this into
operation a year later, by successive stages determined by the progress
of the rationalisation of industry. In a country where it was officially
admitted that the eight-hour day was not enforced, and where the
workers, most of whom earned famine wages, were compelled to devote long
hours each day to buying poor quality necessities such as bread for
themselves and milk for their children, this future reform had not the
importance that it was given in the official statement. The position,
infuriated by the demagogic unreality of this "gift, never ceased to
point this out, a fact which did not endear it further to its opponents.
But this new quarrel was only accessory to a wider disagreement over
economic policy. The manifesto said nothing about the Five Year Plan,
already agreed to in principle by the Central Committee; the leaders
still refused to give it a position of more than secondary interest. The
counter-theses of the Opposition soon made it a centre of conflict.

A vast mass of apparently documented literature, filled with figures and
illustrated by diagrams, purported to show that materially Russia, after
ten years of the revolution, had been restored to the low level of
before the War. But the whole thing was based on false premises and
conditional assumptions. It did not take into account the movements of
population, the loss of huge productive territories, the depreciation of
the currency, the collapse of external trade, the destruction and
depredations caused by the Civil War. On the other hand the Gosplan
admitted that the average level of consumption per head still remained
well below the wretched pre-War level, and according to the economic
plan under discussion, it would not equal it until 1932, which would be
the fifteenth anniversary of October. These authoritative calculations
showed up the statistical fictions published for propaganda purposes,
and stimulated the Left, whose counter-theses criticised such an
"insufficient and utterly pessimistic plan."

The Five Year Plan produced by the Right did not, according to these
theses, resolve a single difficulty, neither unemployment, nor low
wages, nor the housing crisis, nor the inflation of the currency, nor
the famine of goods. Indirect taxes, which increased with each budget,
were crushing the working class. The production of spirits alone would
have tripled in five years, while the development in general consumption
goods would be trifling. What was necessary, according to the theses of
the Left, was an increased investment of capital in industry. There were
a milliard poods of grain in reserve on the countryside; by means of a
forced loan of 150 million poods, the State could give a vigorous
impulse to the whole economic system, find work for the thousands of
unemployed and put fresh goods on the market in considerable quantities.
The subsidies allowed to industrial production should be raised, first
to 500 million roubles a year, and then increased progressively up to a
milliard roubles during the next Five-Year period. It went without
saying that this plan could not be realised without the collaboration of
its Left promoters, still less against their opposition, and it
therefore implied a more democratic "regime within the Party."

But the Opposition had by that time scarcely any means of making known
its views, which were ironically dubbed "superindustrialist." By the
time _Pravda_ published the counter-theses, the delegates to the local,
regional, provincial and national conferences which preceded the
Congress, had already been chosen almost everywhere. Further, a
merciless repression choked the voices of all minorities. The few
discussion journals, a parody of democracy, only served to encourage
one-sided polemics. Finally, the Central Committee openly encouraged the
breaking up by force of the private meetings of the Opposition. During
an arranged interview with foreign visitors Stalin replied to a
well-timed question: "You will not find a State anywhere else in the
world where the proletariat enjoy so great a liberty of the press as in
the U.S.S.R."

On the same occasion he expressed himself on the subject of vodka, the
returns on which were more than 500 million roubles, a proportion more
or less equal to the "budget of drunkenness" under Tsarism. "I believe
that we shall very soon succeed in abolishing the vodka monopoly, and
reducing the production of alcohol to the minimum required for technical
needs, and later in liquidating the sale of spirits altogether." But his
most interesting remark this time was on socialism in the countryside.
"_We hope to realise collectivisation with reference to the peasants,
little by little, by means of orderly economic, financial, cultural and
political measures_." This is the traditional Bolshevik thesis, in which
there is no question of using force. "Collectivisation will be complete
when all peasant enterprises have been transformed on a new technical
basis of electrification and mechanisation when the majority of working
peasants have been organised in co-operatives, and the majority of
villages contain agricultural associations of a collective character."

The interview ended with some grandiloquent words about the G.P.U.,
which Stalin was not afraid to compare to the Committee of Public Safety
of the French Revolution, despite the fact that the Soviet Union had not
been at war for seven years and that more exact comparisons could be
found in the history of Russia under the Tsars: "We do not wish to
repeat the mistakes of the Paris Communards. The G.P.U. is necessary to
the revolution and the G.P.U. will continue to exist for the confounding
of the enemies of he proletariat." No allusion here to the hunting down
of proletarians, socialists, libertarians, syndicalists, Tolstoyans,
communists, revolutionaries of all schools, of which the various
opposition tendencies were the victims.

On November 15th the Control Commission decided to expel Trotsky and
Zinoviev from the Party. Everyone knew that this meant prison or
deportation almost at once if the Congress approved of it. The other
Left leaders were expelled from the Central Committee and deprived of
their offices in the Party and the State. In Moscow people said that
Stalin was determined to "strike the Opposition in the belly," to
deprive it of work and hence of food and lodging. On the 16th, Joffe,
one of the principal inactive Oppositionists, committed suicide. He had
been ill for a long time and exposed to the hostility of the
Politbureau, but above all, depressed by the persecutions of his
fraction, he wished to register a protest against the expulsion of his
friends: "This infamy ... means inevitably the beginning of a
Thermidorian period" in Russia. In his spiritual testament, a poignant
letter to Trotsky, he adjured him to stand firm as Lenin had done and
refuse to compromise. The G.P.U. searched the dead man's home and
attempted to forbid the funeral cortege entrance to the cemetery. They
were still afraid of using physical violence and creating a scandal,
without direct instructions from above, but the hour when they would
repay their opponents was soon coming.

One week after the first Soviet Ambassador to Europe and Asia had made
his tragic gesture, Stalin announced the discomfiture of the Opposition,
which, for very good reasons, had not obtained one per cent, and would
not have a delegate at the Congress. "A declaration of unity signed by
thirty-one Trotskyists has been sent to the Politbureau," he declared,
"but what answer can one make to this hypocritical declaration by
thirty-one Trotskyists, when the lying promises of the Opposition have
again and again been contradicted by their splitting activities?" On
December 2nd the Fifteenth Congress opened, a real conclave of
functionaries, where "100 per cent unanimity" was guaranteed by every
conceivable means.

It was a real masterpiece of its kind. In the whole solid mob of 1,669
delegates, the Left did not possess a single vote. One or two of its
representatives, candidates for expulsion, were present according to
their incorrigible custom, with consultative rights. What the right to
speak consisted in, they were again to learn to their sorrow when they
attempted to exercise it. Ceremonies of congratulation took up an
enormous proportion of the time. The Congress received nearly 1,500
addresses, motions, telegrams of greetings and congratulations,
dispatched under instructions from the centre, and the delegates
applauded a vast number of so-called workers' and other delegations, as
was expected of them. The less the time allowed for debate, the heavier
and longer grew the reports: a vast tome of 1,400 pages enshrined these
oratorical excursions, which stretched over thirty sittings. Stalin held
forth throughout an entire day, showing his powers of endurance at
least, and the other rapporteurs did their utmost to hold the floor for
the longest possible time, making up in quantity what they so completely
lacked in quality. On a "proposal" from the leaders, which was
equivalent to a command, the obedient assembly "decided," that is to say
accepted, a modification of the statutes which, in effect, legalised its
arbitrary adjournment. Thereafter the Congress would not meet more often
than once every two years. But there was no guarantee that this new
stipulation would be respected, any more than all the other protective
clauses, legal or constitutional. Finally, in accordance with Stalin's
secret desire, the membership of the Central Committee was increased to
121, including alternate members, and that of the Control Commission to
195, in order to enlarge "the basis of the apex" for the benefit of the
Secretariat.

The long Political Report given by the General Secretary, a document
typical of bureaucratic optimism, concluded with a flattering
enumeration of ten Bolshevik victories on diverse fields, both internal
and external. Everything was for the best under the best possible
dictatorship.... Surrounded by serried ranks of interested henchmen and
docile followers, Stalin was secure in spinning out a string of
statistical material, which had been furnished by prudent functionaries,
far too cautious to risk allowing a personal idea to creep in. If he
light-heartedly affirmed that: "We live on the eve of a new
revolutionary upsurge, both in the colonies and the older countries,"
and was later proved wrong by facts, he could always fall back on
Lenin's similar prediction, made at quite a different time. Having
stolen from the Left his plans for industrialisation, at least on paper,
he boasted of "the unprecedented rhythm of our socialist industry," and
borrowed from Lenin a vague phrase on the need to "catch up with and
surpass the most advanced countries on the economic field," which he
transformed into an urgent slogan.

It goes without saying that the more backward a great country is, the
more rapidly it will advance in certain circumstances, under the
pressure of external competition and the application of the technical
knowledge of its rivals, in order to raise itself to the level of a
modern state. But this very rapidity demonstrates its backwardness, and
is not a cause for boasting, for that "com-boasting" which Lenin so
disliked. Tsarist Russia knew periods of feverish industrialisation,
before the Soviets. And although one cannot conceive of democratic
socialism without mechanical production, it is easy enough to speed up
the production and forget the socialism.

Stalin was less satisfied with the state of agriculture, which was too
widely spread, in too small strips, and insufficiently productive.
Following the Opposition, he awoke, in his turn, to the _kulak_ danger.
According to the evidence, the well-to-do Peasants were forced to hoard
their grain since they were unable to exchange it for stable currency or
for manufactured goods, while the poor peasants vegetated on infinitely
subdivided patches of ground, without the necessary manure or tools.
"What is at issue is the change from small individual peasant
enterprises to large-scale cultivation, on the basis of collective
cultivation of the soil ... using a new and improved technique," but
always going slowly, without compulsion, using the forces of persuasion
and example: "Those comrades who think of disposing of the _kulak_ by
administrative measures, by the G.P.U., are wrong. This is an easy but
not an effective way. The _kulak_ must be dealt with by economic
measures on a basis of revolutionary legality. And revolutionary
legality is no empty phrase. It does not, however, exclude the use of
certain administrative measures against the kulaks...."

No administrative measures, therefore -- but administrative measures all
the same. And by this euphemism Stalin meant what Lenin termed "the
abominations of Bashi-Bazouks," confiscations of wheat from the more
provident cultivators, pillage which was at the same time official and
illegal, and which could not be carried out without clashes and cruelty.
"Administrative" meant the police and the military, since such
administration is only practicable by armed men. This prospect meant war
against the peasants who held back their grain, or a policy of
spoliation such as the majority had reproached the minority with
advocating, but which they had annexed, like industrialisation, to their
own programme.

On the Opposition, which was the principal theme of the Congress, Stalin
was content to repeat all the old stories. He drew up a brief
"balance-sheet of the discussion": approximately 4,000 votes were cast
for the Opposition, he said, but without explaining that more than a
thousand expulsions had intimidated the Party members. A year later
Stalin was to speak retrospectively of 10,000 votes against the Central
Committee, plus twice as many who did not vote, say 30,000
Oppositionists under the bureaucratic terror, "under the knout of the
administration" as Trotsky and his followers named it later. Here is
another example of the truth of statistics: Stalin mentions 10,346,000
as the round total of paid workers in all categories both in the towns
and country, and S. Kossior gives the number of trade unionists as
10,00,000. The entire total of wage-earners would thus be enrolled in
the trade unions, including children, day labourers, domestics,
wet-nurses and the millions of illiterates in remote places, far from
towns and communications, where occupational unions could not possibly
exist.... The other calculations, coefficients and percentages with
which the various secretaries and reporters juggled are as little to be
trusted.

"The Opposition must disarm, utterly and completely, both in the
ideological and the organisational spheres," Stalin concluded. The
audience, excited by a series of venomous speeches, knew what its
masters expected of it and demonstrated without stint. Trotsky and
Zinoviev, already expelled, were not there to reply. Rakovsky, only
recently Ambassador in Paris and recalled by the Government as the
result of a hostile campaign waged against him by the reactionary French
press, was abused like an intruder, covered with insults and sarcasms,
interrupted and mocked at every phrase, then at every word, finally
chased off the platform, where he had had the useless courage to expose
himself as in a pillory. Other comrades of the same tendency were not
much better treated. Kamenev alone succeeded more or less in making
himself heard, for his conciliatory manner, full of implications, seemed
to indicate new possibilities. Nevertheless, the Opposition renewed its
desperate efforts to avoid the inevitable.

In a declaration signed by 121 names and countersigned by another 52,
the Opposition protested its loyalty and admitted responsibility for the
lack of discipline: "We have no disagreement of principle with the
Party." It denied having accused the Central Committee of Thermidorian
deviations, promised to cease the fractional struggle, to dissolve its
organisation, to be completely obedient in future and to propagate its
opinions only within the limits laid down by statute. By this means it
hoped to obtain the reinstatement of those who had been expelled and the
release of the prisoners.

But everyone at the Congress was aware of a latent split in the fragile
"Opposition bloc"; the G.P.U. had spies everywhere and was well informed
through its censorship of correspondence. According to Trotsky, Zinoviev
had already been considering "capitulation" for a year. Further, Stalin
insisted on a complete surrender and the abjuration of all heresy,
without reserve. On December 10th Ordjonikidze received two separate
declarations of submission, one from Kamenev and others who renounced
even their right to propagate their ideas legally, and one from Rakovsky
and others who were not prepared to do this. On the 18th the expulsion
of the 75 leading members of the Trotsky-Zinoviev group and of 23
members of the Sapronov group was voted unanimously. Immediately after,
Rakovsky and his friends drew up a fresh declaration of their fidelity
to Bolshevism: "Having been expelled from the Party we shall make every
effort to return to it."

The Opposition "bloc" was at an end. Zinoviev and Kamenev Who had formed
it "seriously and for a long time to come," also made a fresh
declaration in which they retracted their most intimate convictions,
confessed imaginary sins, endorsed the accusations made against them and
disavowed their foreign comrades. "Deserters" in 1927 and "capitulators"
in 1927, they crawled on their knees before Stalin, exactly as he had
calculated that they would. Nevertheless, this mea culpa did not save
them; the Congress postponed taking a definite decision on their fate
for six months in order that they might give proofs of their conversion.

The Opposition having been put outside the law, if one can so express
oneself with reference to a regime so completely illegal, the Congress
had fulfilled the main task which Stalin had laid down for it. On all
other points on the agenda it adopted resolutions put forward by persons
in the Secretary's confidence, Rykov's and Krizhanovsky's "directives"
on the Five Year economic plan among them. Neither the directors nor the
directed understood as yet exactly how and when the plan could be
realised, as seven variations of it were being examined. Unless it drew
on those sources of revenue indicated by the despised Left, which would
bring it into violent conflict with the peasant producers, or took steps
to suppress private trade, which was going against the fundamental
principles of the N.E.P., the Soviet State would be unable to find the
means to finance industrialisation on the grand scale. At the same time,
various technical and cultural problems, which could not be solved in
five years, presented themselves. But no one wasted time on these
considerations, since some had no voice in the proceedings and the rest
relied on the conclusions of the experts.

The Congress automatically ratified along with everything else the
double-faced foreign policy of the Politbureau, which was pacific,
accommodating and compliant on the diplomatic side, and subversive,
arrogant and disastrous on the side of the enslaved ex-International.
Recent happenings had revived interest in China in a most sinister way:
during the night of the 10th to the 11th of December -- (its coincidence
with the Congress clearly demonstrated its lack of spontaneity) -- a
local rising broke out in Canton. Stalin's agents fomented this action
in order to provide their chief with news of a victory to use as an
argument against the "pessimism of the Opposition." It was a
revolutionary rearguard action, isolated, artificial and doomed to
failure. The Canton Commune, surrounded by the military forces of the
Kuomintang, only lasted forty-eight hours, and its downfall let loose an
appalling carnage. More than 2,000 communists, or those who were
supposed to be such, were massacred on the spot, or tortured. One of
Stalin's emissaries to China, Lominadze, had reported to the Congress
that approximately 30,000 Chinese workers had been put to death in the
five months from April to August 1927. After the crazy uprising in
Canton and the bloody repressions which resulted during the next few
weeks, the most reliable estimates put at 100,000 the total of victims
of the catastrophic policy pursued under orders from "Moscow." With
Chinese communism practically annihilated, a handful of survivors, among
whom was Chen Tu-hsiu, the ex-secretary, went over to the Opposition and
were expelled. Thus ended a whole cycle of aberrations and adventures
from which Stalin emerged utterly discredited as a theoretician and
strategist of revolution, at the price of a hundred thousand human
lives.

But no one in Russia understood the cause of the disaster, and those who
knew, or who wished to know, were paralysed. Having defeated the
Opposition, Stalin hastened to finish it off. He was only waiting for a
pretext to apply Article 58 of the Code which dealt with
counter-revolutionary crimes and misdemeanours. He was very soon to find
this in two letters intercepted by the G.P.U., inoffensive documents in
which the anonymous authors stigmatised the "treason" of the
"capitulators" considered as a "fact of history" -- large words for a
beggarly recantation which was not difficult to predict.

On January 19, 1928, the press announced in veiled terms "the banishment
from Moscow of the thirty most active members" of the Opposition, with
Trotsky at their head. On the list of the proscribed were Radek,
Preobrazhensky, Smilga, Serebriakov, I. Smirnov, Byeloborodov,
Sosnovsky, Muralov, Sapronov, and V. Smirnov. Various others, such as
Rakovsky, Boguslavsky and Drobnis, were "requested to leave Moscow." It
was the deportation of the irreconcilables under a hypocritical guise.
Hundreds, then thousands of arrests and dismissals followed in an effort
to exhaust physically or to break the morale of those "traitors" who
dared to take the name of Bolshevik-Leninists. One typical
characteristic of post-Leninist Bolshevism: Zinoviev and Kamenev seized
the same pretext as Stalin for denouncing the comrades of yesterday and
begging indulgence from their masters by shamelessly treading the
defeated underfoot. In their individual as in their international
relations, Lenin's epigones passed with the utmost ease and with no
intermediate stage from extreme humility before the strong to extreme
arrogance towards the weak. _Pravda_ let it be understood that these
capitulators who had taken "the decisive step" would soon be restored to
grace. As a contrast, the tribune and leader of the October Revolution,
the organiser of the Red Army, took the road to exile, as he had done
under Tsarism.

### 9.8

THE Opposition was defeated more by its own faults than anything else.
The simple fact that Stalin tool; four years to bring it to its knees,
shows how badly it made use of the resources it had acquired from the
past, while remaining incapable of reserving anything for the future.
Even if one believes, like Trotsky, that the outcome of the conflict was
inevitable owing to the irresistible reflux of the revolutionary wave,
an unsatisfactory and metaphorical explanation, yet a more conscious and
better directed minority might have gained time and strength in order to
intervene effectively. The original positions held by the Left in the
Politbureau, the Central Committee, the Council of Commissars, the
economic sphere, the army and diplomacy were by no means negligible, so
long as they did not persist in attacking with their eyes shut the
largest possible number of adversaries at one time, or in competing with
the majority in orthodox Leninism. At least these positions provided an
opportunity for some serious work of consolidation, to be undertaken
without hope of immediate success, but while patiently awaiting the
inevitable regroupment of forces. Instead of this, the Opposition
sacrificed everything and threw everything away, only to finish by
proclaiming its principled agreement with its persecutors.

This fundamental identity prevented them from making a bid for the
active sympathy of the masses, "deceived in the hopes which the first
days of the revolution had given them," as Buonarotti wrote of the
French masses at the time when Babouvist ideology and the Conspiracy of
Equals were being elaborated. In Russia under the Secretary, as in
France under the Directory, the masses were "starving, without work,
spending each day in a struggle to live till the next, languishing in a
profound indifference: some of them even blamed the revolution for the
countless evils that oppressed them." Trotsky, pushing the parallel with
the French Revolution to its limit, compared himself in 1927 to a Babeuf
who had not lost his head; by this honoured but out-of-date authority he
sought to conceal his suicidal tactic. This historical example was not
to his advantage, since his precursor had excuses for his equalitarian
utopianism, inspired by antiquity, which a realistic disciple living a
century and a quarter later, could not lay claim to. As an additional
contradiction, Trotsky confirms the neo-Bolshevik doctrine of the unity
of the Party, while the whole logic of his attitude drives him to ask
for help from outside it -- an unconscious justification for the
persecutions under which his fraction disintegrated, denied their
principles or went astray.

It seems as though the Opposition were unaware of one essential
phenomenon: that the best men of the revolution had been absorbed into
the minor, intellectual offices of the State, by reason of their
capabilities, while the most mediocre, those who were useless in the
domain of production, exchange, finance, teaching, etc., had become the
buttresses of the Party, the "top layer" of Soviet society, by reason of
their political prerogatives. Lenin had already been alarmed by these
facts when he commented on "the lack of culture in the leading cadres of
communists," who were not even aware of their own ignorance. Every
Bolshevik who showed himself unfit for responsibility in one of the
vital spheres of work, finished up by finding a place in the hierarchy
of the secretaries. Thus a process of natural selection was already
taking place, even before Stalin took control of it for his own ends,
and this became more and more accentuated as the needs of the national
economy became more pressing. A division of function very quickly
produces a social differentiation as a result of material favours being
added to civic privileges. Trotsky did not show clear-sightedness in
respecting the new dominant caste of parasites as if it constituted a
permanent elite.

There is some resemblance between this formalistic respect for the Party
and Robespierre's deference towards the Convention in Thermidor. Trotsky
even repeated his French predecessor's mistake in unnecessarily
alienating, by vague and hidden threats, those whom he should have
reassured, won over or rendered neutral. In both cases the actual power
of empirical politicians, by a cynical combination of force and
astuteness, won a victory over doctrinaires, ill-provided with common
sense. Trotsky, although always prompt to refer to the Thermidorian
precedent, preferred not to dwell on this aspect of things. Neither did
he realise how closely the Bolshevik Left were related to the Jacobins
who, in the year II, succumbed to a coalition which included the
Maratists, the "enragés" and the future Equalitarians, together with a
mixed pack of demagogues, moderates, speculators and terrorists. On the
other hand, he, who was unable to learn from the teachings of history,
nevertheless drew exaggerated, superficial or contradictory parallels
with Thermidor, in order to construct a rigid scheme which finally
misled the Oppositionists.

In 1921 he visualised the N.E.P. as a sort of auto-Thermidorianism,
salutary if kept within bounds. In 1923 he denounced as inconsistent the
implicit hypothesis of a Thermidor among the other historical analogies
with the French Revolution. From 1926 onwards he became disquieted by
the menacing Thermidorian perspectives, and the 7th November 1927,
seemed to him a repetition of Thermidor. In exile his views became more
dubious and conditional. But in October 1928 he deduced that unless the
Opposition had a place in the Government, the Right would enter
directly, and Stalin circuitously, "on the Thermidorian-Bonapartist
road." In December of the same year he accused the Politbureau of
"preparing a Thermidor, the more dangerous because unconscious," and
declared: "For six years we have lived in the U.S.S.R. under conditions
of a growing reaction against October, and in this way are clearing the
way for Thermidor." In his _My Life_, written in exile in 1930, he wrote
without equivocation: "With us, Thermidor has been very long drawn out.
At least for a little while, intrigue has taken the place of the
guillotine." Finally, to complete the muddle, he denies all his previous
reiterations, in order to teach a lesson to the Leftists of the
"Democratic Centralism" Group who were too inclined to follow them to
the letter, and asserts that the Soviet Thermidor is not an affair of
the past or the present, but a question of the future. He thus avoids
giving a clear answer to a question which he himself boldly posed before
he shrouded it in obscurity.

Without going further into the large number of variations, which it is
not necessary to describe in detail, nor into the undoubted similarities
between the two post-revolutionary situations, it is, however, essential
to bring their vital differences into relief, in order that the subject
may be fully understood. As Marx noted in another connection:
"Happenings which are strikingly analogous but which occur in different
historic milieux, often produce totally different results." In France,
the direct economic consequences of Thermidor were the end of
requisitioning, of the taxation and rationing of prime necessities, the
annulling of the _maximum_ and of the law allowing suspects to be
dispossessed, the decrees of Ventôse. In Russia exactly the opposite
effects began to be felt, following on the deportation of the
"ungovernables." On the political plane, Thermidor meant the abolition
of the Committee of Public Safety, the dilution and dispersion of the
power in favour of the Consulate, and, after the recall of the Girondins
and the partial return of the émigrés, it led to the White terror. In
Russia, on the contrary, the power became more concentrated, the
Dictatorship of the Secretariat was reinforced, and the regime could
only maintain itself by a fresh outbreak of Red terror.

In truth, the year 1928 shows a marked recrudescence of police
oppression both in the Party and the State. Stalin struck unceasingly
both at the Left and the Right whenever the least objection was raised.
As Fouché suppressed the "remains of Robespierre," so he attacked the
remnants of Trotskyism first. The G.P.U., no longer held in check,
discovered traitors in all directions, and when it could find none it
invented them. The demoralised Opposition disintegrated, and the
majority of its supporters in Leningrad capitulated in small groups.
Yaroslavsky's statistics calculated that by February 1st, 5,755 had been
accused of deviations, 3,258 had been expelled and 3,381 had capitulated
individually. There is no record of the numbers imprisoned and deported.
Trotsky noted in his recollections: "Krupskaya once said in 1927 that if
Lenin were alive he would probably be in a Stalinist prison. I think she
was right." On the last day of February, Pyatakov, the best known of the
Opposition leaders after Trotsky, recanted in his turn. "One of the
pillars of Trotskyism," as the communist press said, had collapsed. One
month later, Krestinsky and Antonov-Ovseenko also abandoned their
comrades in misfortune and did penance. The decomposition of the
traditional Left had begun.

Ever since Brest-Litovsk in 1918, the moment when the majority of the
Central Committee were for him, Trotsky had been gradually losing his
supporters through a long series of internal crises. At the time of the
Kronstadt affair in 1921 he still had nearly half the leading circle at
his side. During Lenin's illness in 1923, an imposing fraction remained
faithful to him despite the earlier defection of Bukharin, Dzerzhinsky,
Andreyev and others. After the Fifteenth Congress, Zinoviev and Kamenev
abandoned him, together with their followers. During the interval he had
broken with old rebels such as Bubnov and Rosengoltz, as well as with
recent ones, such as Krupskaya and Sokolnikov. He had lost his support
from the army and his followers among the youth. Sapronov's group broke
away from the main fraction for other reasons. The defection of
Pyatakov, Krestinsky and Antonov at the beginning of 1928 was a split in
the fundamental nucleus.

After each of these incidents, Trotsky attempted to console himself by
saying that revolution is a great destroyer of men. He heaped praises on
his comrades in arms before their defection, and spared them no reproach
after, but he never paused to assess his own responsibility. The truth
was that if the turncoats were able to change from one camp to another
with such ease, it was because only a short distance lay between them.
Many Bolshevik-Leninists were unable to see anything fundamental enough
in their divergencies with the Leninist-Bolsheviks, to make suffering
and adversity worth enduring. The special psychology of Bolshevism also
helps to explain these sudden turns which at first sight seem so
disconcerting. One knows that for Lenin's disciples, the end justifies
the means. The ethical notions to which all revolutionary schools
subscribe, were not current in the higher ranks of this Party, except in
the form of literature. Thomas More beheaded, Giordano Bruno burnt
alive, Campanella tortured -- these are examples of heroic constancy
which might be praised but should not be followed. The plain fear of
being rejected by the patrician caste of Bolsheviks, of sinking among
the plebeians of the Soviet, was sufficient to shake the weaker ones.
The risk of uselessly exposing their innocent families to cruel
reprisals sometimes broke the resolution of the strongest. But the
Opposition only became indignant against this monstrous abuse of the
"police knout" in those cases when its own members were the victims.

For Stalin allowed to no one the exclusive role of martyr. He treated
difficulties of all kinds by the same methods. In an effort to cauterise
the sores of industry, he attacked the technicians and the
functionaries, whom the G.P.U. accused of "economic counter-revolution,"
misconduct, sabotage, spying, and high treason by preparing for a
military intervention on the part of France and Poland, champions of the
expropriated Russian bourgeoisie. According to these accusations it
would appear that a widespread conspiracy, lasting five or six years,
had been able, with impunity, to ravage the Donetz coalfield, flooding
the pits destroying machinery, embezzling the funds, ill-treating the
personnel, even beating up the workers, unknown to any of the Soviet
institutions, trade union or governmental, economic or political,
administrative or police. The worst enemies of Bolshevism never levelled
a severer accusation against the regime. The idea was to stage a trial
amid terrific publicity, which, by its resounding death sentences, would
terrify all the intellectuals in the State service, and exculpate the
apparatus, which was responsible for the catastrophe. In the "Shakhty
affair" the people were presented, for the first time, with the
astonishing spectacle of fifty accused who seemed more anxious to
convince the judges of the gravity of their crimes than to extenuate
them. By what methods of interrogation and procedure did the G.P.U.
obtain these astonishing and all too impressive results? No one was to
know exactly until later but already it was possible to form an
approximate idea.

This dismal parody of justice, carried through in the supposed interests
of an ailing industry, was matched by fresh troubles in the domain of
agriculture, where Stalin also made use of harsh measures of constraint.
During the winter, foodstuffs were scarce in the towns because the
peasants stored their harvests rather than sell them to the State at the
low price offered. The shops, co-operatives and warehouses were denuded
of their stocks in order to provide food, but still supply and demand
remained unequal, and an extreme scarcity resulted. Extraordinary
measures were necessary to feed the Red Army and the centres of
production: communists were mobilised for expeditions and requisitions
in the villages, cereals were requisitioned by violence and peasants
arbitrarily arrested. The number of assassinations corresponded to the
crimes and misdeeds of the tax and food collectors. The Congress of the
Soviets was adjourned to the following year. Stocks of rye were
purchased from Canada. In the spring, when the famine danger had
receded, but only as a result of brutal measures, a fresh menace
appeared: the peasants, despoiled, molested and discouraged, cut down
their sowing so as not to produce any excess over their own needs. War
to the knife was declared between the bureaucratic State and the rural
population, for although the Party only denounced the malignity of the
kulaks, the entire peasant population stood together against the enemy.
Stalin who had quite failed to foresee this critical situation attacked
it with his usual energy. Most unwillingly, and only at the eleventh
hour, he began to apply some scraps of the programme of the Left which
he had rejected. "The machine sometimes gets out of control.... The
machine does not work exactly, and often not at all, as the man at the
wheel expects," as Lenin once said.

In April 1928, Stalin announced the naked truth before an audience of
functionaries: decrease in the wheat harvest, scarcity of goods,
inadequate industry, and technical backwardness of agriculture, which
was on too small a scale and too primitive. In place of the 18 millions
of peasant enterprises existing before the revolution, ten years after
it there were 25 millions, and the process of subdivision was still
going on. Conclusion: the development of large-scale rural enterprises
must be pushed to its limit, _sovkhoz_ (Soviet State farms) and
_kolkhoz_ (collective farms) must be developed into "grain factories," a
perspective which implied a more resolute class struggle against the
kulaks and speculators, pioneers of capitalist economy.

From the depths of Siberia, Turkestan and Kazakstan, the Oppositionists
applauded this "turn to the left" as a confirmation of their theories.
Animated discussions were carried on, verbally and by letter, as to the
attitude to be taken up to the new position. Stalin purposely allowed
those in deportation a relative freedom of expression in order to keep
himself informed on their state of mind and to make use of their
disagreements. He learned thus that Radek, Preobrazhensky, Smilga,
Serebriakov and various others thought of giving in and asking to be
reinstated in the bosom of the Party which had now turned towards their
ideas. While still carrying on repression everywhere, he did his utmost
to stir up discord among the exiles by means of intermediaries. But a
fresh crisis was developing in the Politbureau, which threatened his
personal dictatorship. The harsh emergency measures during the winter,
which had violated the agricultural Code, and resulted in renewed War
Communism, had alarmed the Right, who wished to preserve the N.E.P. and
fought against the turn to the Left. Bukharin, Rykov, and Tomsky were no
negligible opponents since Voroshilov and Kalinin supported them.
Against this new majority Stalin could count for certain only on
Molotov. The two unclassified members, Rudzutak and Kuibyshev, were
generally supposed to be waiting on events, before throwing their weight
on the stronger side, but the truth was that certain bureaucratic
complications at that time kept them temporarily out of the discussions.
The Party, the International, and the public both within and without,
were ignorant of all this, since nothing leaked out from the Central
Committee, which, in its session of April 1928, had been unanimous in
its decisions. Lenin's inheritor was face to face with his final test.

His tactics consisted, as they always did in such circumstances, in
marking time, avoiding any open conflict until such time as he had a
majority in the Politbureau, even in satisfying the new Opposition by
words, which he did willingly so long as he retained freedom to act as
he wished. In his aforementioned speech, he soothed the Right on the
N.E.P. question: "It would be foolish to speak of ... suppressing the
N.E.P., of a return of food requisitioning, etc. Only enemies of the
Soviet power could think of this. No one draws greater advantages from
the N.E.P. than the Soviet power." At the Fifteenth Congress Molotov had
also declared: "On what road must we continue to advance towards
socialism? No one can have any doubts on this question. It must be on
the road of the N.E.P. and unity with the peasants." An editorial in
_Pravda_ on April 12, 1928, demonstrated the perfect accord in the
Government. "Only counter-revolutionary liars could talk of suppressing
the N.E.P."

But in other directions Stalin prescribed in his circulars "the building
of socialism" on the countryside, and the more rapid fusion of small
family or individual holdings into large holdings cultivated in common,
despite the fact that Molotov had said at a recent Congress: "We must
certainly not forget that in the coming years our agriculture will
develop principally in the form of small peasant enterprise."
Secretaries of parties cannot control evolution, although they have
authority over men. "The machine gets out of control...." One
contradiction more or less mattered little to Stalin, whose great gift
was for hanging on.

This man, who was reputed to be taciturn, let himself go at that time in
frequent and prolix speeches. In May, at the Communist Youth Congress,
he returned again to one of the main themes of his April report,
"self-criticism," the special liberty to censure oneself and make
periodic confessions, thus encouraging mutual revelations everywhere but
among "the tops," which meant that the dictators became invulnerable. In
June he again spoke about agriculture to an audience of students: the
"normal" sowing of pre-War days had been reached in 1928, he affirmed,
in fact in cereals it had been exceeded by 5 milliards of poods,
approximately 81 million tons. (The following year Rykov established
that the said harvest had in fact fallen from 96 million to 73 million
tons, for a population which had increased from 138 millions to 154
millions, a considerable drop in the relative average, and that the sown
corn-lands had diminished by sixteen per cent per head.) In a letter
published on June 12th, he appears to attack abuses of his instructions
committed by subordinates who were in too great a hurry to confiscate
all the belongings of the kulaks: "Dekulakisation under our conditions
is lunacy."

In July, after an ordinary session of the Central Committee which passed
a resolution tending to encourage individual agricultural enterprises,
"which will be the basis of wheat production for a long time to come,"
he admitted in a report to Leningrad "administrative despotism,
violation of revolutionary legality, searching of homes, illegal
perquisitions, etc., which have worsened the political situation in the
country," and promised "the immediate liquidation of any renewal of food
requisitioning or of attempts to close the markets," which meant a
continuation of the N.E.P. After these intentional concessions to the
Right, he made a mysterious reference to "certain comrades" who wished
to favour light industry at the expense of heavy industry, and to "those
who do not understand" the official policy. In Party circles these
veiled references were understood to convey a warning. Only the
best-informed understood to what and whom Stalin referred. But
information was secretly whispered and soon became well known.

On July 11, 1928, Bukharin and Kamenev had a secret interview arranged
by Sokolnikov. The same evening Kamenev dispatched an account of the
conversations, completed by some of his own reflections, to Zinoviev,
doing penance at Voronezh. Six months later the Trotskyists secretly
published these revealing documents. Thus Bukharin, in spite of himself,
makes a truthful and sincere contribution to Stalin's biography, the
most noteworthy after Trotsky's evidence. His words, recorded by Kamenev
often literally, throw a brilliant light on diverse obscure points.

### 9.9

SOKOLNIKOV was the first to tell Kamenev of "the final rupture between
Bukharin and Stalin." In addition, Voroshilov and Kalinin had "betrayed"
the Right, which was rendered powerless in the Politbureau. The two
chief figures, searching for reinforcements for the future, would
doubtless turn to Zinoviev and Kamenev, whom Stalin boasted of "having
in his pocket." "In this tragic situation," Bukharin asked for an
interview.

An hour later, at Kamenev's house, the foremost theoretician of the
Party gave the impression of being "at bay"; his lips trembled with
emotion"; he was terrified of carrying on him anything "in writing."
Why? "Do not let anyone know of our meeting. Do not telephone; it is
overheard. The G.P.U. is following me and watching you also." He expects
the Stalinists to make advances to the Left, including the Trotskyists,
and wishes to keep his interlocutor informed. His disconnected and
feverish story would hardly be comprehensible outside a very close
circle of initiates; it is sometimes necessary to reverse the order so
as to give it some kind of coherence, quoting actual topical allusions
and making a resume of the rest.

"We consider Stalin's line fatal to the revolution. This line is leading
us to the abyss. Our disagreements with Stalin are far, far more serious
than those we have with you." He regrets that Zinoviev and Kamenev are
no longer in the Politbureau.

"For several weeks I have refused to speak to Stalin. _He is an
unprincipled intriguer who subordinates everything to his appetite for
power_. At any given moment he will change his theories in order to get
rid of someone." Relations have become bitter to the point of insults.
If Stalin pretends to retreat, it is only so that he may the better grip
his opponents by the throat. "He manoeuvres so that we appear as
splitters." A significant fact: when Bukharin had to read a declaration
to the Politbureau, he had to take great care not to let the manuscript
leave his hands, because "you cannot trust _him_ with the smallest
document."

The Right theoretician attempts to define Stalin's "line." "Capitalism
has developed through its colonies, through loans, and by exploiting the
workers. We have no colonies and no loans, so our basis must be tribute
paid by the peasants." This is equivalent to Preobrazhensky's thesis, he
says indignantly. According to Stalin, "the more socialism grows, the
stronger will grow the resistance" (which Bukharin describes as "idiotic
illiteracy") and as a result "a firm leadership is necessary."
Self-criticism must not approach the leaders but compromise the
Opposition. "_This results in a police regime_."

In foreign affairs Stalin's policy is further to the Right than the
Right itself. "He has succeeded in expelling the Communist International
from the Kremlin." At the time of the Donetz trial (in which German
engineers were implicated) "he did not demand any capital punishments."
In discussions with foreign powers, Stalin always gives way. "This line
is disastrous but he allows no opportunity for discussing it." The
leitmotiv throughout is: "_He_ will suffocate us."

"Us" means Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky, supported by Uglanov, Secretary
of the Moscow Committee. The higher functionaries in Leningrad "are
mainly with us, but they are terrified when we speak of removing
Stalin," so they oscillate without being able to make up their minds.
"Andreyev is with us, but he is being removed from the Urals. Stalin
bought the Ukrainians by withdrawing Kaganovich from Ukraine ... Yagoda
and Trilisser are with us. There have been 150 small rebellions.
Voroshilov and Kalinin funked at the last minute.... Stalin has some
special hold on them that I do not know of.... The Orgbureau is with
us." Nevertheless the majority of the Central Committee do not yet
realise how grave the peril is. And Stalin is working to replace Uglanov
by Kaganovich and to regain control of the Moscow and Leningrad
_Pravdas_ which are edited by Rightists. Bukharin has already discounted
Ordjonikidze's co-operation. "Serge is without courage. He came to me
abusing Stalin in the most violent fashion, but at the decisive moment
he betrayed us."

The conversation touches at intervals on the food problem. The
Politbureau would again have to take extraordinary measures to procure
cereals in October: "_It means War Communism and shipwreck_." With
Stalin and his "obtuse" supporter, Molotov, "nothing can be done." But
what does the Right suggest? "The kulaks can be hunted down at will, but
we must conciliate the middle peasants."

At the forthcoming Congress of the International, Bukharin was to
present and comment on a projected theoretical programme: "Stalin has
messed up the programme for me in dozens of places. _He_ wanted to read
a report on this subject to the Central Committee himself. I had great
difficulty in preventing him. _He_ is eaten up with the vain desire to
become a well-known theoretician. _He_ feels that it is the only thing
he lacks."

In despairing tones the narrator asks himself whether all is not already
hopelessly lost. "What can be done?" he asks several times. He compares
Stalin to Genghiz Khan, and says that whether the Right intervene or
whether they refrain, he fears they will be "strangled." Faced by this
gloomy perspective, a last-minute lucidity inspires him: "_The Party and
the State have become one: this is the misfortune_." Stalin, who is
leading the country "to famine and ruin," will accuse the Right of
defending the kulaks and speculators. "Stalin is only interested in
power. While giving way he has kept hold of the leadership, and later he
will strangle us. What is to be done? Psychological conditions in the
Central Committee for dismissing Stalin are ripening but they are not
yet ripe.... Stalin knows only vengeance ... the dagger in the back. We
must remember _his theory of sweet revenge_." (One summer night in 1923,
opening his heart to Dzerzhinsky and Kamenev, Stalin is supposed to have
said, "To choose one's victim, to prepare one's plans minutely, to slake
an implacable vengeance, and then to go to bed.... There is nothing
sweeter in the world.")

After this discomforting reminiscence, Bukharin relates the most recent
happenings. He had demanded that a resolution to be submitted to the
Central Committee should be examined collectively. Stalin refused and
then tried to coax him: "Bukharin, old fellow, you would really unnerve
an elephant." Nevertheless, neither would give in. Bukharin insisted and
Stalin invited him to talk it over, flattering him: "You and I are the
Himalayas, the rest are unimportant." But later, in the Politbureau, a
"savage scene" took place. Stalin started to "shout," Bukharin repeated
the "Himalaya" metaphor and Stalin cried: "You lie! You invented that in
order to rouse the members of the Politbureau against me." After this
the decisions which were unanimously adopted favoured the
"anti-Leninist" Right, but as always, were only on paper. Stalin
believes that he is indispensable and attacks Bukharin, but he is
leading the revolution to ruin. Industrialisation will inevitably lead
to famine. "_Stalin's policy is leading us to civil war. He will be
forced to drown the rebellions in blood_...."

Through these disjointed confidences, shot through with occasional
well-known truths, one can discern nothing of the old Party of Lenin.
The degeneration which had been taking place for a long time had now
become complete degradation. The faults which always existed in the
Bolshevik Party in embryo, and which were so repugnant to Plekhanov,
Martov and Trotsky, had now developed to the point of crushing any
respect for the individual, any ethical or scientific scruple, and all
sentiment of human and social dignity.

Stalin had now reached the point of having his closest colleagues spied
on, though the latter nevertheless made use of Yagoda and Trilisser,
Menzhinsky's two assistants at the G.P.U., who had come over to the
Right as the result of 150 peasant insurrections in six months.
(Similarly, a collision in Moscow in June 1928 between unemployed and
militiamen, following the pillaging of several shops, had given the
Chekists food for thought.) In the Politbureau, arguments had been
replaced by sordid trickery and coarse offensiveness. On both sides the
adversaries lent themselves to unprincipled combinations with those whom
they had tried to discredit, for at the same time that Bukharin was
sounding out the capitulators, Stalin was intriguing with the banished
fraction, bargaining, tricking and finally withdrawing. Both sides had
appropriated some portion of the dismembered Opposition's programme, the
Right the democratic demands, and Stalin the economic plans. The
Politbureau dictated to the G.P.U. and the courts the sentences they
were to pass in important cases. If Stalin had been relatively
restrained over the Donetz affair, it was not from mildness but from
diplomatic fear of Germany, who would protect her nationals. Although
the Right had a majority, the General Secretary could freely disregard
decisions which had been taken in opposition to his wishes. "Do not
think that the Politbureau is merely a consultative organ to the General
Secretary," Bukharin said to him one day, but without making any
difference to the state of affairs.

What was the "special hold" that Stalin had over Voroshilov and Kalinin?
Certainly he had access to all the police records and dossiers through
Menzhinsky; he knew some people's pasts and the present history of
others, but even this does not explain all his exploits. The explanation
is to be found in the incredible anecdote of "the Himalayas." Stalin
flattered or slandered grossly in private conversations, stirred up
hatred among his satellites, caused the best friends to quarrel, put
words into people's mouths that they had never used, and won over the
uncertain by insinuations, lies, provocations and threats. We know this
through Bukharin, and other sources confirm it: anecdotes on this theme
were rife everywhere. All the suspicions of his criminality; aroused in
his youth at Tiflis and Baku, both when he was in prison and at liberty,
by the curious coincidences which occurred and by his underhand
manoeuvres, were confirmed by time and experience. However low and
vulgar his oriental method of dividing in order to rule, it produced
some astonishing results in the Politbureau, where a majority vote at
the decisive hour gave him freedom of action for a long time.

He made use of the same weapons against the new Opposition as he had
against the old: recalls, displacements, nominations -- the
"bureaucratic knout" until the time came for the "police knout." At the
"Congress" of the servile International, which sat for forty-five days
in July and August, he did not deign to put in an appearance, but
allowed Bukharin to discourse to his heart's content. There did not
appear to be any difference between the two policies.

Particularly on foreign policy, Stalin expressed the same views as both
the Right and the Left. In July 1928 he said that "the essential problem
... is the struggle between Britain and America far world domination," a
plagiarism from Trotsky, and predicted a breakdown of the unstable
equilibrium between "the Soviet and the capitalist worlds." He always
kept up the fiction that Europe and America thought of nothing but
attacking Russia. In August, his mouth-pieces vigorously denounced the
1928 Pact "renouncing war" as being a war-like manoeuvre against the
U.S.S.R. "The Kellogg Pact is an integral part of the war preparations
against the Soviet Union," declared Chicherin among others. Shortly
afterwards, the Council of Commissars, at the command of the
Politbureau, ratified the "imperialist" document.

From September onwards, the Party press began to hint vaguely at a
danger from the Right. But Bukharin was still allowed to publish in
October his _Observations of an Economist_, urging the need to form
reserves, not to force the pace of industrialisation too rapidly, nor to
invest excessively in heavy industry, to take the material resources
into consideration when making plans for construction, etc. Stalin
affirmed in a speech: "There is neither a Left nor a Right in the
Politbureau. I can say that here in all frankness" (sic). But in a
circular letter to the Central Committee he spoke of opportunist
deviations in the Moscow Committee, and sanctions swiftly followed.
Various functionaries were dismissed from their posts, including a
certain Riutin, noted in the past for his violent persecution of the
Left. The following month Uglanov was forced to resign. The Right took
these blows without flinching, following the example of previous
oppositions as though resigned to suffering the same fate.

Nevertheless, its leaders conceived a curious and misguided tactic to
clear themselves of all suspicion of heresy and to defeat Stalin's
manoeuvres. They produced theses and resolutions against their own
tendency, for submission to the Central Committee, called for November.
Another account by Bukharin is in place here, transcribed and published
like the other by the diligent efforts of the Trotskyists.

While on a visit in the Caucasus, the unhappy author of _The A.B.C. of
Communism_ became alarmed by the "stupidities" of Uglanov, who was
already preparing to recognise his errors, and by Rykov's isolation in
Moscow:

>Not being able to arrive in time for the next session of the
>Politbureau, I took an aeroplane. At Rostov we were stopped. The local
>authorities received me queerly, implying that flying was not good for
>me, etc. I wished them in hell, and we went on. At Artemovsk we landed
>again. I was hardly out of the cabin when I was handed a sealed letter
>from the Politbureau with a categoric order to put an end to the flight
>on the pretext of the state of my heart. Before I had time to pull
>myself together, G.P.U. agents had led my pilot away and I was faced by
>a workers' delegation demanding a conference. I inquired the times of
>trains; nothing before the next day. There was nothing for it but to
>have the conference.

Arrived in Moscow after this tragi-comic Odyssey, Bukharin and his
supporters formulated a list of demands, which Stalin feigned to accept
at once. A commission was set up to put them into action, but the wily
Secretary did not call it together, and by this means he gained three
days. Under the veil of unanimity in the Central Committee then in
session, the Right presented him with an ultimatum. Violent disputes
broke out behind the scenes and the three leaders of the Right resigned.
According to Rykov, Stalin received their statement "with trembling
hands. He was pale and said he was prepared to give in." This was merely
pretence, let it be understood. These trifles shed more light on the
state of men and things than all the literature, solid, pretentious and
indigestible, which is turned out by the yard to deceive public opinion.

Other conversations, reproduced by the same sources, show the opinions
of outstanding people on Stalin and his entourage. Pyatakov, who advised
the Right not to do battle, observed: "Stalin is the only man we must
obey, for fear of getting worse. Bukharin and Rykov deceive themselves
in thinking that they would govern in Stalin's place. Kaganovich and
such would succeed him, and I cannot and will not obey a Kaganovich."
Kalinin, a shame-faced Rightist, used these actual words when speaking
of Stalin: "He chatters about veering to the Left, but in a short space
of time he will have to apply my policy threefold; that is why I support
him...." Amid inextricable conspiracies, consultations, comings and
goings and minor intrigues, Zinoviev and Kamenev abased themselves by
importunate prayers, in the hopes of improving their rank in the
bureaucracy. Ordjonikidze listened to them, offered to intervene, made
constant promises, but never obtained anything. What equivocal game was
this other sly Georgian playing, with his sympathy for all splitters and
condolences for all unfortunates! "Ordjonikidze told me in 1925 to write
against Stalin," Zinoviev stated before his expulsion. Bukharin
considered him a coward. Krupskaya explicitly warned against him. The
most plausible hypothesis seems that he was the conscious instrument of
Stalin's Machiavellism.

This was the atmosphere, these the realities behind the austere facade.
At the Plenary Session of the Central Committee in November, Stalin
pronounced yet one more discourse on the "industrialisation of the
country and the Rightest deviation." Repeating Lenin, he went back to
Peter the Great and paraphrased a classic passage from a pamphlet
published on the eve of October: "We must catch up and surpass the most
advanced countries, or perish. Full steam ahead or we perish." Thus he
justified the tense financial effort shown by the increase of the
subsidies to industry to 1,650 million roubles for the current financial
year. (The Left, accused of industrial demagogy, had not asked for half
that.) On the burning question of cereals he said nothing new, merely
wrangling for a long time with Frumkin, a Rightist, who said that
agriculture in the U.S.S.R. was in jeopardy. He demanded that collective
enterprises be developed and individual cultivation stimulated, both at
the same time; an insoluble contradiction arising out of the compromise
adopted at the Politbureau. Finally, while denying the existence of a
deviation to the Right in the Party, he devoted half his comments to it,
and concluded: "On the Politbureau we are, and shall remain, united to
the end."

This gratuitous assertion resolved none of the outstanding problems,
neither that of wheat nor any of the others. The year 1928 finished as
badly as it had begun, if not worse. In December the famine made itself
felt even in Moscow, which nevertheless occupied a favoured position.
Soviet economy had reached a fresh impasse. The interdependence of
stunted industry and backward agriculture brought corroboration to the
theories of any opposition, whether of the Left or the Right.

On the countryside, forced "bargaining," a recent introduction, State
buying of the harvest on the spot at a non-remunerative price, and a
fresh agricultural tax on the kulaks, had not made good the deficit in
the winter stores. The obstinate peasants buried the grain, or refused
to sow it. Others took up technical cultivation which was more
lucrative. An unnatural and unforeseen phenomenon was that a number of
mujiks, hounded by the militia, went to the towns to buy their rye
flour, in order to profit by the fixed scale of prices, which was often
five times less than the market price. Avid speculators exploited the
differences in prices. Local famines caused an outbreak of brigandage.
The stubborn peasant resistance flamed into revolt against the
insatiable police State, and the "Red Cock," secular symbol of the
Jacquerie, sprang to life everywhere on the communal _ishas_, the
village soviets and the barns of the _sovkhoz_ and _kolkhoz_. A
ferocious guerilla war was waged against rural journalist-informers,
hated functionaries, and honest communists whose zeal carried them too
far. Statistics of attacks, murders and burnings increased from day to
day.

In the towns, rationing, bread cards, endless queues outside shops,
privation and insecurity, growing unemployment and the fall in real
wages, the constant decline of the rouble and the constant rise in the
cost of living, all gave the lie to Stalin's optimism. Industry produced
bad goods at exorbitant cost price, and always ran at a loss. The
seven-hour day was still nothing but a fraud, like most of the
legislation for the workers. Everything was lacking except _vodka_,
which ravaged the working class. Against this background of material and
physical misery, a sharp moral crisis was corrupting the youth and
undermining Soviet society, prostrate beneath the knout. The press
pointed to an alarming increase in prostitution, and the growth of
antisemitism. The depravity and criminality engendered by poverty,
drunkenness and bureaucratic oppression had grown to such proportions in
1927 and 1928 that the official records could no longer suppress them,
since a "flood of scandals" had tarnished the reputation of the Party.
"Thefts, lies, violence, cheating, unheard-of abuse of power, unlimited
arbitrariness, drunkenness, debauchery, everyone speaks of these as
facts that have been admitted for months and years, tolerated, no one
knows why." Thus wrote Rakovsky on the liabilities of this retrograde
regime, which announced its ambition of building socialism in a single
country in order to set up there a civilisation without parallel.

### 9.10

BUT as the granaries emptied the prisons filled. Stalin began the year
1929 with a round-up of approximately 300 communists suspected of
"illegal Trotskyist organisation," and charged with "anti-Soviet
actions." Only half of these were mentioned in the press. Nothing
restrained him any more, now that he had collected five votes in the
Politbureau. Before dislodging the Right he intended to sweep out the
remains of the Left. The dismembered Opposition reckoned that at that
time, between 2,000 and 3,000 of its members were in captivity, but this
approximate figure was later raised to 5,000. Among those detained were
Stalin's old Caucasian comrades: Mdivani, Kavtaradze, Okudjava, and even
Koté Tsintsadze, once the hero of the expropriations. If Kamo had not
been the victim of an ordinary street accident in Tiflis in 1922, he
would no doubt have shared the same fate as so many of the original
revolutionaries who had rebelled against servile bureaucratism. Police
operations were crowned in February by Trotsky's exile to Turkey, the
only country which would agree to harbour him. The Right, behind the
closed doors of the Politbureau, voted against Stalin's "sweet revenge,"
but this platonic gesture from the minority had no concrete value. It
had let its hour go by.

Freed from the "super-industrialists," Stalin hastened on with
super-industrialisation. He no longer had any choice: pressure from the
peasants forced him to radical action. There was shortage of bread, and
in order to obtain a sufficiency for the future, the State had to set up
its own "grain factories." In a circular published on January 1st, the
Central Committee urged its thousands of subordinate committees "to
reinforce the socialist sector of mass economy ... to develop the
_kolkhoz_ and the _sovkhoz_ ... to take the offensive against capitalist
elements." Collectivisation of agriculture, an unexpected but inevitable
corollary of increased industrialisation, called for appropriate
machinery, tractors, steel, petrol. Enlarged industrial production
called for factories, equipment, modern constructions. Everything hung
together, wood, oil, iron, cement, naphtha, electricity, transport. To
obtain the indispensable aid from abroad, it was necessary to export raw
materials to pay for technicians and tools. It was therefore essential
to co-ordinate all the elements of economic activity into a general plan
to suit the circumstances. Stalin, who had despised Trotsky's
"plan-making," now found himself forced, in self-defence, to put the
Five Year Plan, still in the exploratory stage, into execution. Arguing
against the Left, he had predicted in 1925 that "the future development
of our industry, will probably not be so rapid as up to the present,"
and he fought against the "industrialist deviation" by demonstrating
that too rapid progress "_will certainly ruin us.., undermine our
currency ... inevitably lead to ... a great increase in the price of
agricultural produce, a fall in real salaries and an
artificially-produced famine_." Nevertheless he went forward amid all
these perils.

In February 1929, following the "brilliant success of the second
industrial loan," the press announced the irresistible desire of the
proletariat to subscribe to a third issue. By a miracle, each of these
efforts corresponded exactly to the calculations already made by the
Gosplan and the Finance Commission. From March onwards, still with the
same remarkable spontaneity, workers began to form themselves into
"shock brigades," Issuing "challenges" to one another to speed up
production in the name of "socialist competition." The newspapers were
full of figures, percentages, coefficients, diagrams and comparative
tables. Platforms and loud-speakers rang with slogans and appeals.
Assemblies, conferences and congresses of all kinds echoed and amplified
them. It was essential to "catch up with and surpass" Europe and
America, and even to bring about complete socialism, a classless
society, almost immediately.

To these methods of persuasion, which aroused the sporting spirit of a
part of the naive and ignorant youth, who were captivated by the scope
of the task and the grandeur of the ultimate aim, Stalin added the
pressure of his ultimate argument: in May, three of the most eminent
Russian technicians, von Mekk, Velichko and Palchinsky, were tried
without witnesses, condemned without proofs and executed without
comment. The G.P.U. accused old men of seventy and seventy-five of all
kinds of counter-revolutionary activity in the railways, and gold and
platinum mines, with the aim of overthrowing the Soviet power and aiding
foreign military intervention. How an engineer in the auriferous
district of Siberia could foment counter-revolution and encourage a
non-existent invasion, it is difficult to understand. But the G.P.U. had
power of life and death over the subjects of the "socialist fatherland"
without being called on to submit proofs. And Stalin felt that it was
necessary to use these exemplary punishments in order to inspire the
leading personnel of industry with salutary terror. For him also, the
famous epigram, "bloodletting is a necessary part of political
doctoring," was true.

"The Government has not yet approved any Five Year Plan," Molotov had
declared in February, commenting on a suggestion for estimating future
progress and comparing it with the present rate: "Cast-iron and steel
have not yet reached the pre-War level.... with a few exceptions (coal
and sugar), the Soviet Union's share in world production is still below
what it was." The imposture of the Tenth Anniversary announcements on
the economic restoration of Russia, having thus been admitted by one of
the imposters, he goes on to praise the "general line" of the Party and
to attack again the already prostrate body of Trotskyism and, finally,
the deviation of the Right. In April, the Central Committee adopted
further theses from the Politbureau on the Plan. In May, the Council of
Commissars ratified the "optimum version," the Sixteenth Congress
accepted it, and finally, the Fifth Soviet Congress consecrated it. The
Five Year Plan, already more or less in application before surmounting
all these bureaucratic hazards, then ceased to be a means and became an
immediate end and the ruling idea of the regime.

Following the adoption of this "historic" resolution, of "world
importance," as the Soviet press was fond of saying on any and every
occasion, the bureaucracy evolved fresh innovations and novelties with
the aim of "speeding-up the rhythm" in order to realise the grandiose
_piatiletka_ in four years instead of five. After "work without pauses,"
devised in order to get the most out of the material, came the five-day
week, which meant a reform of the calendar, the suppression of Sundays
and religious holidays. There followed a flood of decrees of "capital"
importance, according to their promoters. "Shock brigades" went to the
villages to lead the "socialist offensive" against private property.
Stalin presently decided to "suppress the kulaks as a class," he who,
six months earlier, had expressly encouraged individual enterprises and
had written the year before, "Dekulakisation under our conditions is
lunacy." Military language corresponded to the methods of the time;
frequent "mobilisations" Of "shock troops," "attacks" on all "fronts,"
"conquests" of "strong-points" by "detachments and brigades"; all that
this vocabulary meant was that workers, galvanised by frenzied
propaganda, threatened with penalties, and stimulated by bonuses, had
hewed coal, melted steel or cultivated the land. "_Russian government
consists in barrack discipline in place of the normal order of a city, a
state of siege has become the normal state of society_," stated Custine
once, probably not realising how long this would remain the case, and
that a century later it would still be true.

The banished Opposition could have disavowed any responsibility for this
return to War Communism. But, on the contrary, it hailed the first signs
as a "step to the Left," and the final arrangements fixed in 1929, as a
true march to socialism, inspired by its own ideas. In this state of
mind, those Oppositionists who had already been tempted to "turn towards
the Party," now thought only of getting back there at any price. In
July, Radek, Preobrazhensky, Smilga, Serebriakov and Drobnis broke with
Trotsky and capitulated to Stalin, out of love for the Five Year Plan,
and a few weeks later I. Smirnov, Byeloborodov and hundreds of others
followed them. Even the last four intractable ones, Rakovsky, Sosnovsky,
Muralov and V. Kossior, and their friends, raised no objections to the
official policy except the injustices done to the original
"industrialists," and the danger of a future "zigzag to the Right." "The
Left Wing, from whose platform all the essential ideas of the Five Year
Plan have been copied, still suffers under repressions and calumnies,"
Trotsky complained in November 1929, but, he wrote, "the greatest
successes are combined with the most formidable difficulties." He
admitted that already "prodigious conquests" had been made in industry,
paralleled by a slow but real progress in agriculture.

Stalin rapidly disillusioned them over the expected "zigzag to the
Right." Certainly he did not relax his rigorous treatment of the
impenitent Trotskyists. The _Bulletin of the Opposition_ published in
Paris described the appalling conditions of imprisonment in the Siberian
"isolators," and called for aid for those in deportation who suffered
from privations, illness and police surveillance. The defeated fraction
already mourned several of its members; in October 1928, Gregory Butov,
one of Trotsky's secretaries, died in prison from a hunger strike; in
November 1929, another of Trotsky's collaborators and secret agent of
the intelligence service, J. Blumkin, was executed by the G.P.U. on his
return from a mission abroad: he had had an interview at Stamboul with
his old chief and agreed to convey an innocent message to Russia. V.
Smirnov, the theoretician of Democratic Centralism, was to perish in
Siberia. Others, less well known, suffered or were to suffer similar
fates. But without relaxing the struggle against the Left, Stalin began
to take more and more brutal measures against the Right, whose revealing
silence and secret obstruction threatened to interfere with his policy.

Throughout 1919 he repressed the "opportunists" by the methods which had
already been proved effective in earlier conflicts. After humbling the
smaller fry, of the calibre of Uglanov, he turned his attention to the
more important sinners. It was in vain that Bukharin quoted, a little
later, one of Lenin's letters in which he wrote, "If you get rid of all
those who are intelligent, but not strictly obedient, and only keep the
docile idiots, you will certainly ruin the Party" -- he in his turn was
able bitterly to estimate how short was the distance between the Capitol
and the Tarpeian Rock, as he passed rapidly along the road to disgrace
on which Trotsky, Zinoviev and their followers had already preceded him.
The revelation of his interview with Kamenev and Pyatakov had
irreparably damaged him. But this time history repeated itself in a
totally uninteresting manner: it would have been possible to predict all
the main stages in advance. Furthermore, the Right never had the courage
to stand up for its opinions, it allowed itself to be defeated over
details, and never used any other manoeuvre than flight. There was no
need to deport it in order to make it bow the knee.

In July, Bukharin was expelled from the Bureau of the International. In
August, _Pravda_ opened fire against its own editor, who "lacked faith"
like Trotsky, "over-estimated difficulties" like Zinoviev, and had never
ceased, all his life, to be wrong, and even to contradict Lenin.... All
his present and past, genuine or imaginary, faults were listed. The
Lenin Institute searched through old papers, deciphering notes and
scribbles of the Master, in an effort to find critical and derogatory
remarks about Bukharin, and even printed intimate marginal annotations
in order to discredit him. A special pamphlet was devoted to his old
differences with Lenin. Papers and reviews published in a slightly
altered form so as to turn them against him, those diatribes from which
the Opposition had had to suffer at his hands. His works, which millions
of young people had been taught to regard as classics, were suddenly
discovered to be full of heresies and were put on the Index. The _A.B.C.
of Communism_, which had already had Preobrazhensky's section cut out,
was now withdrawn from circulation. In November, after the usual threats
and attacks, Bukharin was thrown out of the Politbureau. Rykov and
Tomsky, accomplices whom Stalin wanted to segregate from him, escaped
with a severe warning. At the same moment, Uglanov and three others
capitulated. The indifferent public were told only that the "bankrupt"
Rightists, who had once been model and irreproachable Leninists, had
accused "the Party" -- for which read Stalin and his acolytes -- of
bureaucracy, Trotskyism, military-feudal exploitation of the peasants,
and had condemned the "offensive against the _kulak_." A few days later,
Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky, branded as criminals and filled with panic,
recognised their errors....

It is scarcely worth while describing how these so easily terrorised
terrorists were supplanted by greater mediocrities, eager to inherit the
places around Stalin which they had been promised in exchange for their
support. The majority of the newcomers are not worth naming, nor are
their bureaucratic achievements worth a mention. More significant is the
sudden collapse of this timid and calculating opposition, made more
marked by other simultaneous manifestations of the same kind: the
repeated confessions of Zinoviev and Kamenev, in astonishingly
platitudinous terms, the fresh recantation of Shliapnikov, at a time
when all these men were out of political activity and had neither said
nor done anything worth repenting -- finally the shameful recantations
of the "red Professors" of Bukharin's school. The Bolshevik mentality,
which had evolved from implicit amoralism to declared cynicism, no doubt
explains many things, but not such a complete and rapid triumph for
Stalin. The main reason must be sought in the "police regime" which
Bukharin once lamented in despair, and which made Chernishevsky's words,
repeated by Lenin, so true: "Unhappy nation, nation of slaves; high and
low, all are slaves."

Russia under the Soviets was not so much reminiscent of
pre-revolutionary Tsarism, which was a worm-eaten autocracy, a despotism
tempered by corruption and lightened by certain tolerances and
relatively liberal customs. It was more like Russia in a more barbarous
age, notwithstanding the modern technique. One notices more and more
analogies with the observations made by the first travellers or
ambassadors to Muscovy: Guillebert de Lennoy, the Fleming; Barbaro and
Contarini, the Venetians; Chancellor and Fletcher, the Englishmen;
Possevino, the Italian; Margeret, the Frenchman; Olearius, the German;
and their successors, Carlisle, Collins, Jean Struys, without going back
as far as Marco Polo. "The revolution has overthrown the monarchy....
But perhaps it has only forced the external malady deeper into the
organism," wrote Gorky in 1917, a poor theoretician but an intuitive
essayist and, for once, a good prophet. The G.P.U. which at first was
reminiscent of the _Okhrana_, then of the Third Section of the
Chancellery, and finally of Ivan the Terrible's _Oprichnina_, revived
the grim ancestral tradition of the knout. S. Platonov in his _History
of Russia_ says: "The banishments, deportations and executions of
suspects, the violence with which the _oprichniks_ treated traitors ...
all this made Moscow tremble and inspired in everyone an attitude of
passive and resigned submission." Under Stalin, as under Ivan the
Terrible, the Opposition was broken by the same measures, and it is no
accident that S. Platonov himself died in exile. Under Stalin as under
Godunov, informing was turned into a system of government; finally, as
under Peter the Great, into a State institution. No one trusted his
fellows any longer or dared to express his thoughts to neighbours,
friends, or relations. The G.P.U. had approximately 20,000
functionaries, 30,000 secret agents, 60,000 chosen spies, without
counting those in the _Chon_ (detachments for special purposes), at the
disposal of the Party; but these figures give a feeble idea of its
power: as auxiliaries it had not only the militia and the army, in case
of need, but the millions of Party members and the Young Communists, all
pledged to denounce their comrades, and, in addition, the thousands in
the so-called voluntary associations subject to the State power, the
offices of the Soviets and trade unions, the house committees, and all
the multitude of secretaries and employees which made up the structure
of the State. Reversing the old axiom which Peter the First introduced
into military law, and to which Catherine II gave lip-service, namely,
that it is better to pardon ten criminals than to condemn one innocent
man, the G.P.U. sacrificed a hundred innocents rather than miss one
"traitor." Spying in all forms, paid, voluntary or obligatory, and
Sometimes provocation, furnished ample material for its amazing
technique of inquisition and punishment. The knout, which had been
abolished by Tsarism in the preceding century, under Stalin became once
more "the favourite instrument of the State Nemesis" as Shchedrin once
put it. Between the hammer and Sickle, emblems of primitive manual
labour and an unproductive economy, the subjects of the Soviet caught a
glimpse of the invisible but terrible threat. The mystery which
surrounded all the Proceedings of the G.P.U. aggravated further the idea
which the Population had formed of the physical and moral tortures
inflicted in the Lubianka prison and its fellows in the provinces. But a
modern all-powerful police has more refined instruments of torture for
extracting confessions than actual knouts, racks and thumbscrews. The
Bolsheviks condemn themselves by quoting the famous example of Peter,
the reformer Tsar, with whip and gallows, who "civilised with a knout in
his hand and knout in hand persecuted the light" as Herzen described
him, and of whom Puskin said that his ukases were "as though written
with a knout." Although their favourite historian, Pokrovsky, had
condemned Peter for "believing in the knout as an instrument of economic
progress," Stalin fell into the same error. "Civilisation and science
were offered us at the end of a knout," Herzen once wrote. Stalin did
not conceal that the Five Year Plan, and socialism in a single country,
could not be achieved in any other way. Under his empirical but resolute
leadership, the knouto-Soviet State, if one may thus revive one of
Bakunin's forgotten formulas, blindly tackled a more profound social and
economic upheaval than that of October, a revolution decreed from above
against the feelings and interests of those below -- the widespread
collectivisation of agriculture, by force if necessary, in complete
violation of the elementary principles of socialism, and even the
calculations of the controlling plan itself.

Lenin had always conformed strictly to Marx's and Engels's ideas on
agricultural theory. "Engels underlined the fact that socialists do not
dream of expropriating the small peasants, who will come to understand
the advantages of mechanised socialist agriculture only by force of
example." He had emphasised this on many occasions, and under War
Communism he stated: "We will not permit any violence towards the middle
peasant. Even in the case of the rich peasant we do not say 'complete
expropriation' as firmly as for the bourgeoisie...." He introduced this
explicit thesis into the fundamental resolutions of the Communist
International: "_As a general rule the proletarian power should leave
the rich or comfortably off peasants their lands, only taking them over
in the case of direct opposition_." For him, the peasants expressed "the
will of the immense majority of the working population." And in one of
his last speeches he recommended that the peasant masses be moved
"immeasurably, infinitely more slowly than we have dreamed, but in such
a fashion that the whole mass comes with us." Stalin, who was familiar,
at least at second hand, with Marxist thought on this point, and had
plagiarised from Lenin on more than one occasion, boasted of being able
to solve the agricultural question in a socialist sense and with great
rapidity, by using terror.

Strengthened by the apparent rallying of both Left and Right around the
Five Year Plan, free of any open opposition, and undisputed master of
the machine, the "genial secretary," as he was ironically called, could,
in future, do as he liked. Of the Bolshevik Old Guard, some of whom were
dead, some politically moribund, shackled and discredited, he alone
remained amid the "nonentities" that he had jeered at in front of
Bukharin. He did not fail to take advantage of an opportunity which
presented itself to strengthen his authority over the G.P.U., which had
become contaminated by opportunism at the top. Terrified of returning to
Russia, the Soviet functionaries abroad preferred emigration, and a
scandal broke out in Paris when the First Counsellor at the Embassy,
terrified by a superintendent from Moscow, climbed over a wall in order
to get away. Stalin profited by this to accuse the G.P.U. of lack of
vigilance; he replaced Trilisser, a Rightist, by Messing, and
reorganised the board of control. As first assistant alongside
Menzhinsky, the irremovable President, he retained Yagoda, whose
sympathies with the Right had not been lasting. Feeling this instrument
to be reliable for the future, he accelerated industrialisation in the
towns and collectivisation in the country, he spurred on the Party and,
in particular, the Young Communists, which speeded up the inexorable
wheels of the bureaucratic and police machine. Everything for the Plan
and by the Plan: the entire life of the Russian people could thus be
summed up from 1929, "the year of the great turn."

Adopting this proud title, Stalin waited only five months after the
adoption of the _piatiletka_ before announcing victory. In an
economico-military speech of untranslatable bombast, in which the ritual
refrain "Lenin said" frequently occurred, he announced "a great turn on
all fronts of socialist construction ... under the banner of a stern
socialist offensive against all capitalist elements." In a paroxysm of
"corn-lies" and "corn-boasts" he announced that all levels set by the
plan had been reached and passed, except perhaps the formation of cadres
of "red technicians," but that the Party only had to make up its mind,
in order to "attack the problem of cadres and carry this fortress at
whatever cost." ... He stated that investments in industry had increased
in one year from 1,600 million roubles to 3,400, without revealing how
this had been done, or why the Left had once been guilty of an
unforgivable crime in proposing an annual subsidy of from 500 to 1,000
millions. He enumerated a list of extraordinary successes and final
conquests, of "formidable progress" and "increased rhythm," and mocked
at the bankrupt Right, to whom he had recently publicly sworn
"solidarity to the end." But for "unprecedented success" there was
nothing to equal agricultural collectivisation, despite "the desperate
resistance of all the forces of darkness, from kulaks and priests, to
Philistines and opportunists of the Right." Entire villages, cantons,
districts, even regions had joined the _kolkhoz_, it appeared, but
Stalin made no mention of the implacable pressure on them, beyond a
brief reference to the "workers' brigades, disseminated by tens and
hundreds throughout the principal districts of our country," and whose
task, not yet fully understood, was already beginning to resemble the
"dragonnades" of the Camisard war. He expatiated on the collectivisation
of millions of hectares and the number of quintals harvested,
emphasising the importance of tractors in the future. "We are going full
steam ahead towards socialism through industrialisation, leaving our
century old 'racial' backwardness behind. We are becoming a land of
metals, a land of automobiles, a land of tractors, and when we set the
U.S.S.R. on an automobile and the mujik on a tractor, let the noble
capitalists, so proud of their 'civilisation,' attempt to catch us up.
We shall see then which countries can be 'labelled' as backward, and
which as advanced."

These elephantine boastings, in which ignorance and presumption,
complicated by nationalism, were mingled, merit comparison with the vain
words of Peter the Great: "Let us hope that in a few years we can
humiliate the neighbouring countries." ... One trait which persists
through the centuries is the disdain which Russia, Tsarist or Soviet,
affects for the west, whose civilisation she copies, paying the teachers
highly, without ever succeeding in catching up with or outstripping
anyone. Peter is said to have made the impudent assertion: "We need
Europe for a few dozen years, after that we will turn our backs on her."
Stalin was content to reduce the period to five years, then to four, and
his courtiers exaggerated even further. General Brussilov was thinking
less of this aspect of things than of parallels with important
personages, when he wrote in his _Memoirs:_ "Many of these historical
characters who are thought of as great men were Bolshevik in their
methods of government and action: Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great,
Pugachev." It is worth noting that Lenin had anticipated Gorky,
Brussilov and many others, in drawing a somewhat damaging parallel
between Peter and himself. "If the revolution in Germany does not come
quickly, we must apprentice ourselves to the school of German State
capitalism, imitate as closely as we can, not sparing dictatorial action
to make this imitation even more rapid _than Peter's forcing the
imitation of the west on barbarous Russia_, not shrinking from barbarous
methods to fight barbarism." But Lenin thought it necessary to cut out
the phrase referring to the cruel, torturing Tsar, who assassinated his
own son, when he quoted his own remark three years later. Stalin, devoid
of any socialist humanity, seems to have followed particularly the
advice to make use of barbarous methods, one of those imprudent phrases
which "the old man" must have regretted leaving for his narrow-minded
disciples, who were unable to understand the spirit of it. No doubt the
aphorism comes from a reminiscence of Engels, from whom Lenin borrowed
so much: "Humanity, descended from animality, has needed to use
barbarous, almost animal, methods in order to escape from barbarism" --
a retrospective view in which one finds not the slightest suggestion for
future conduct.

Stalin's article on the "great turn" written in cold blood for the
Twelfth Anniversary of the Revolution, hardly represents the tone of
delirium demanded from the press. "Prodigious," "colossal,"
"unforgettable," "marvellous," every sort of superlative was dragged in
to describe achievements which would have seemed ordinary and everyday
anywhere else -- achievements such as digging a hole, laying bricks,
sowing rye, or particularly those magnificent plans, still merely
sketched, or in the blueprint stage, whose fulfillment was said to mean
"catching up with and surpassing" Europe and America. Ten years before,
when the first electrification scheme was proposed, Bukharin had
produced a lyrical invocation to Bogdanov's _Red Star_, a utopian
romance in which an earthdweller finds himself on a socialist Mars
during a period of "great works," the transition from capitalism to
communism. After treating the author as a counter-revolutionary (he was
one of the pioneers of the movement, remarkable both for his knowledge
and character, and he died in 1928, following a medical experiment which
resembled suicide), the Bolsheviks drew inspiration from his romance,
characteristically exaggerating it and indulging their passion for the
gigantic, their cult of machines, their mysticism over tractors and
their novel form of "delusions of greatness." Lacking any sense of
reality, Stalin and his apparatus satisfied themselves with dreams, and
by a curious auto-suggestion perhaps even persuaded themselves that
their vague hypotheses were well founded, since their subjects appeared
to be deceived by them. One has only to read Custine to find this
tradition already well rooted: "The best way to give the lie to the most
patent facts and to deceive everyone's conscience most completely, is to
begin with one's own."

Starting with the astronomer, the Abbé Chappe d'Auteroche, in the
eighteenth century, all serious observers have noticed that Russians
have a "particular gift for imitation." In this direction, Stalin, by
imitating the external aspects of American industrialisation, was no
more an innovator than Peter before him, since from the time of Godunov,
Russia has mimicked the Poles, the Swedes, the Dutch, the Prussians, the
English and the French in succession. Herzen truly said "We have been a
thousand years on earth and two centuries at school, learning
imitation." All backward countries must go through a stage of scientific
and technical instruction, during which they must borrow from other
civilisations, but the knouto-Soviet State, following its own line of
national despotism, cut itself off from real progress by concealing a
genuine inferiority under a mask of arrogance. Lenin's bitter remark
about Zinoviev, "He copies my faults," applies even more strongly to his
heir, who, in addition, copied all the defects of his capitalist models.
And just as the Bolsheviks were unable to assimilate Marxism, a
synthesis of various western cultures, but took over a simplified form
decked out with learned terminology, so they could not take the shortest
road to rational production, but ruined their natural economy in order
to erect vain-glorious "giants" of electricity, metallurgy and
machinery, "the greatest in the world," or said to be so.

It would be difficult to distinguish in Stalin's professions of
socialist faith at that time the varying proportions of hypocrisy and
ignorance. But as one watches the sacrifice of the individual worker to
the parasite State, and that of the revolutionary generations to the
myth of the too-fascinating Plan, one cannot doubt one primary fact:
five years after Lenin's death, Leninist notions of socialism had no
longer anything whatever in common with the doctrines put forward under
the same label. Stalin's industrialisation was based on an intensive
over-exploitation of the workers, and his collectivisation on the
absolute servitude of the peasants. Since there were no large loans from
abroad, nor rich classes to be taxed, the workers in the factories and
the semi-proletariat in the fields had, in Russia, to bear the cost of
"building socialism" in a single country. In order to finance the Plan,
which had been transplanted from the planet Mars to a sixth part of the
terrestrial globe, and which was out of all proportion to the normal
resources of the Soviet Union, there was no other method than to
increase the many schemes of extortion and coercion which were already
in operation under various pretexts, heavy taxes, unlimited inflation,
continual rise of prices, forced-voluntary loans, raised by a levy on
wages. As even this was not enough, there was nothing left but to
expropriate the few remaining possessors of goods or means of
production, the kulaks first, "those who have enough to eat," and then
the small shop-keepers, the artisans, the middle peasants. This road,
meant the end of the N.E.P., of concessions and private trade. Before
the end of 1929 Stalin was to declare: "Lenin said that the N.E.P. was
introduced thoroughly and for a long time. But he never said for ever."
The inconsequent Secretary had already promised several times during the
year to maintain the N.E.P. as a working principle. Judging from the
evidence, he no longer knew himself where his empiricism was going to
lead. "The machine gets out of control." Less than a month after Stalin
had pronounced a funeral oration over the N.E.P. in ambiguous terms,
Krizhanovsky, the chief engineer of the Plan, quoted with remarkable
appropriateness some other words of Lenin's: "How can We approach
socialism? Only through the N.E.P." -- a last echo of a policy in its
death-throes.

A marked revival of War Communism and terrorism accompanied this new
effort to bring about socialism by "assault," this time without the
excuse there had been in October 1917. While sparing the skilled workers
who were recognised as indispensable, and even given certain material
privileges at the expense of the disinherited classes, Stalin redoubled
his demands on, and severities towards, the harassed, overburdened and
undernourished proletariat. He wished to raise the level of production
by means of decrees and disciplinary regulations, and to compensate for
technical deficiency, bureaucratic fraud and governmental incompetence
by the sheer physical effort of the workers, who had the alternative of
consenting or running away to wander in thousands from shop to shop and
factory to factory, seeking bearable conditions of life. But the misery
of life in the towns was "caught up and surpassed" by the horrors of the
collectivisation. In spite of the "victory on the wheat front"
proclaimed by Mikoyan, the communist brigades, which scoured the
countryside in order to convert the recalcitrant mujiks, committed
excesses before which the earlier "abominations of Bashi-Bazouks," and
even the historic exploits of the _Oprichnina_, paled. Entire trainloads
headed north, transporting the de-kulakised kulaks, who were nothing but
uprooted peasants with their families, deprived of everything, torn from
the _isha_ and their native land in mid-winter. By ruinous taxes, sales
by auction, total confiscations followed by series of arrests, sometimes
by summary executions, murders of revenge and ferocious reprisals, by
the use of every method of pressure and constraint, the machine, under
Stalin's orders, produced a panic rush towards the refuge of the
_kolkhoz_. The majority of the peasants, after this education, preferred
to kill their stock and destroy their belongings rather than hand them
over to the despoiling State; the poorest alone, having nothing to lose,
and hoping to benefit from the loans, seed, and tractors promised in the
Plan, allowed themselves to be rounded up. Complete migrations
depopulated regions which had been made fruitful by the labour of many
generations: for example the departure en masse of the German colonists
on the Volga, the exodus of the woodcutters from Karelia, the shepherds
from Kazakstan, the escape of the inhabitants of the frontier zones
under the fire of the frontier guards. "The whole of peasant Russia at
this moment is screaming with pain and despair," stated a correspondent
of the Paris _Communist Bulletin_. Innumerable suicides which found no
place in the statistics, even collective suicides among the Chermisses
in Siberia, darkened the tragedy still further. This is how the miracle
of the increase in kolkhoz, which made Stalin dizzy, was brought about.

While struggling against the workers and the peasants, the technicians
and the intellectuals, the Left and the Right within his party, Stalin
was also waging a pitiless war against the Church and the believers,
thus betraying once more, by his methods, the Bolshevik tradition to
whose heritage he laid claim. Lenin had subscribed unreservedly to
Engels's views when he reproved the Blanquist Communards for attempting
to "suppress God by decrees," and later reproached E. Dühring with
"surpassing Bismarck" by his methods of combating religion. His definite
conclusions in this domain were the complete opposite of the aggressive
and brutal egoism of his epigones. Ever since the days of _Iskra_, he
had maintained that "even the Jesuits had a right to freedom of
propaganda," with the stipulation that the proletariat should be
protected from it by persuasion. "To declare that war against religion
is one of the political objects of a workers' party, is merely an
anarchist phrase," he affirmed, and even said that "if a priest comes to
us wishing to join in our political work, if he carries out
conscientiously the tasks which the Party gives him, without interfering
with its programme, we can accept him into the ranks." The Soviet
Constitution "allows to every citizen the right to put forward religious
or anti-religious propaganda" (an article which was modified with a
stroke of the pen in 1929), and the Bolshevik programme prescribes
"careful avoidance of any offence to the sentiments of believers." For
ten years the separated Church and State had managed to live in relative
peace, occasionally broken by bloody conflicts as when, during the great
famine, precious metals were requisitioned from the sanctuaries for the
alleged benefit of the sufferers. The Government limited itself to
encouraging schisms, supporting the dissident sects, while at the same
time stimulating anti-clerical propaganda. But a fresh phase began when
Stalin reopened hostilities against the peasants. The alliance between
priests and kulaks served to justify all the misdeeds of the Party in
the countryside. Official irreligion was transformed into systematic
de-Christianisation by violence: churches of the various faiths were
closed and demolished or taken over, as were chapels and monasteries,
sacred books were seized, and proselytism forbidden, icons were burnt
and priests deported or condemned to death. Under pretext of a militant
materialism, by methods which were a caricature, adults suspected of
"idealism" were forcibly inculcuated with atheism, which was already
obligatory in the schools. Peter the Great took a quarter of the bells
from the churches and melted them down for artillery, Stalin confiscated
the whole lot to make carburettors. With two centuries between them, the
savage Tsar and the police Secretary made use of the same blasphemous
buffoonery, educative carnivals, burlesque processions and profane
parodies, but the second, like the first, succeeded only in wounding the
faithful by his persecution of the clergy, and outraging their forms of
worship, without uprooting any of their beliefs and superstitions, which
took refuge in clandestine prayers and were hidden deep in their
consciences. The degenerate Bolsheviks appealed to Marx's words about
religion being "the opium of the people," but their "victories on the
religious front" were obtained by the same barbarous methods as those of
the greatest of the Romanovs, the most arbitrary of despots, and they
had themselves made use of Leninist dogma as a narcotic, and then
indulged in the fetichist worship of a mummy.

On December 19, 1929, Stalin's fiftieth birthday, the entire Soviet
press came out with immense headlines, immense portraits and immense
articles. The praises of the Dictator were also immense. The finest
human qualities and many super-human virtues belonged to Stalin, the man
of steel, according to the censer-bearers of his train. His modesty, his
courage and his devotion to the cause were only equalled by his wisdom
and foresight. It was he who had organised the Bolshevik Party, led the
October Revolution, commanded the Red Army, and been victor of the Civil
War and the wars outside Russia. Added to all this, he was the leader of
the world proletariat. His practical ability was on a level with his
theoretical gifts and both were infallible: no one had ever seen him
make a mistake. And the _leitmotiv_ which recurred through all these
dithyrambs was: the man of iron, the soldier of steel, with variations
on the metallic theme: Leninist of brass. Bolshevik of granite. The same
formulas, the same hyperboles, the same exaggerated expressions of
admiration and submission, all conforming strictly to the model as
issued from Moscow, were to be found in the thousands of addresses,
messages and telegrams received from all parts of Russia, which filled
entire pages of the newspapers and continued to occupy several columns
for weeks to come. The State publishers issued millions of copies of
selections, in which the panegyrics stretched to more than 250 pages,
without counting the innumerable greetings which were simply listed
under their place of origin. An official bust was mass-produced and
distributed by order. Stalin's name, which had already been given to
several towns, was now bestowed on factories, power stations,
agricultural ventures, barracks and schools....

Ten years earlier, on April 23, 1920, the fiftieth birthday of Lenin had
been celebrated in Moscow -- Lenin, who was the true originator of
Bolshevism, the founder of the Communist Party, the authentic victor of
October and the real creator of the Soviet State. It was an intimate
gathering of the Moscow Party Committee. A modest pamphlet of thirty
pages remains as a souvenir of this gathering of old friends. Between
1920 and 1930 a profound change had taken place in Moscow, and the
contrast between these two celebrations illustrates its original
national aspect. Lenin, who was loved and admired by his Party and
honoured by his adversaries, would never have put up with anything
resembling these fawning eulogies, still less with an adulation inspired
by self-seeking and fear. Stalin, who was detested even by his
dependents, but who was addressed like a Tsar or a God, rewarded his
self-seeking apologists, bought or extorted insincere compliments and
unloosed a torrent of immemorial servility. He himself had changed
greatly since his speech at Tiflis when he reproved his flatterers. The
historic atavism of ancient Muscovy, held in check for a long time by a
slow capitalist evolution and by western influences, revealed its
tenacious vitality both in Stalin's omnipotent person and in the
transitory regime, which was struggling to lift the Soviet empire to the
level of the highly-industrialised countries, "not shrinking from the
use of barbarous methods," in order to arm it for the universal conflict
and prepare it for future conflagrations. But there was not the smallest
trace of socialism, either in fact or in tendency, at this moment when
the new privileged caste was elevating its chief to such a pinnacle.

In the unlimited homage rendered to Stalin by servitors who were anxious
to attribute to him merits which he had not got, and talents which he
undoubtedly lacked, while not yet daring to make him out a genius, one
is struck, amid a thousand declarations of the same value, by those
which couple "a rhythm of industrialisation such as the history of
humanity has never known," or "the great process of socialist
industrialisation," with the name of Stalin, the persecutor of the
industrialist communists. Propaganda blazoned abroad the balance-sheet
for 1929, which was insignificant compared with the expenditure of
workers' energy and the amount of capital invested, and which made use
of tons of metal which were still to come from furnaces not yet
completed. It seemed as though the peasant from the Caucasus, who had
resisted so obstinately the industrial projects of the Opposition,
before deporting them, was now especially anxious to demonstrate his
priority in this sphere. Nevertheless, the material conditions of
existence went from bad to worse in Russia, which was "going full steam
ahead towards socialism." After bread, the other foodstuffs were
rationed, then manufactured goods. The number of mouths to be fed
increased, but goods of primary necessity became more scarce as the
prices rose. At the beginning of 1930, the level of consumption per head
was below the wretched pre-War level both in quantity and quality, for
even the President of the Gosplan had admitted at the last Party
Conference "that in two fields, that of iron and that of wheat, we are
considerably behind 1913." The birth-rate (2.3 per cent) showed that the
population was growing annually by 3 1/2 millions and was approaching a
total of 160 millions. And with still greater reason than Custine in the
preceding century, "one trembled to think that for such a multitude of
arms and legs there should be only one head."

## Chapter 10: Stalin

### 10.1

BEFORE the Five Year Plan the "totalitarian" Soviet State was already
acquiring its distinctive features, and the same may be said of the
personality of Stalin who was its incarnation. Both were fully developed
during the course of the memorable five years of industrialisation and
collectivisation. Even the memory of the socialist or communist
programme disappeared, except for the prisons; and the initials
"U.S.S.R." took on their enduring if not definitive meaning.

The fulfillment of the Plan was to triple or almost triple the
industrial production of pre-revolutionary days, and to increase
agricultural production by half in absolute figures, without taking into
account the development of the population. To succeed it was necessary
to invest the maximum amount of the national resources in the planned
economy, eighty-six thousand million roubles according to financial
calculations, whence the necessity of taking, for this purpose, a
growing share of the general revenue, by the employment of various
unavowable means -- indirect taxes, forced loans, low wages and high
prices, unlimited fiduciary inflation, the seizure of crops and
livestock; that is to say, by robbing the working masses, restraining
their purchasing power to the extreme limit, and inflicting unspeakable
privations and suffering. It was necessary to acquire the technical
equipment of foreign capitalism at great expense and, in order to do
this, to export at a loss, challenging world competition by a species of
dumping and emptying the country of a large part of its economic
substance in spite of the dearth of manufactured commodities and
foodstuffs in the interior. (Ordjonikidze stated in 1929: "On the
twelfth anniversary of the Soviet Power, we are lacking almost all the
products of agriculture.")

On the other hand, a theoretical rise in salaries would follow,
estimated at seventy-one per cent, but on the impossible condition of
doubling the output of work, noticeably reducing the cost of production
and retail prices, increasing the quality of merchandise, enlarging the
areas of cultivated land, and increasing the productivity of the soil.
This was to augment the rouble's value by one-fifth.

The Plan, therefore, in practice, exacted the sacrifice of the
contemporary generation, which was bled and oppressed in the name of a
slender material progress, doubtful for future generations, and with
very problematical perspectives for economic progress in the present;
this apart from political, social, intellectual and moral problems. The
bureaucracy, under the pretext of reinforcing the "socialist sector," in
reality a new sort of State capitalism, was postponing the human
conditions of socialism to the Greek Kalends.

It is true that the _piatiletka_ prophesied and the Government promised
to raise the cultural level of the population. Industry could not hope
to catch up with any country, much less to outstrip it, without a
certain degree of public instruction and the necessary staff. In four
years a new personnel of 80,000 engineers, 150,000 technicians, and
800,000 qualified workmen was to augment the old. Collectivised
agriculture needed specialised workmen, agriculturists and mechanics by
the million. But to educate the population and to form an elite needed
time, experience, material means and above all other spiritual
conditions. The failure of Bolshevism in the matter of primary education
and general culture did not encourage hope for the miraculous change,
notwithstanding many noisy but sterile scholastic reforms. Within their
own Party the Leninists replaced scientific doubt and the critical
spirit by the _magister dixit_ of the worst mediaeval scholasticism,
borrowed from the decadent Pythagoreans. Thus they have instinctively
fallen into their own specific type of obscurantism with a forbidding
terminology, and have brought even lower into the depths the people whom
they claimed to have freed front the powers of darkness.

"Ignorance," said Clara Zetkin, "has surely, in a measure, facilitated
the revolution, by preserving minds from the contamination of bourgeois
ideas." Lenin agreed with this, but only during "a certain period of our
struggle," that is, during the period of destruction, for "illiteracy is
difficult to reconcile, cannot in fact be reconciled, with constructive
activity." He had to remind his obtuse disciples several times of the
impossibility of installing socialism without universal elementary
education. His latest writings advocated "putting education and culture
in the centre of our activity," and reproved vain tirades on proletarian
art in order to insist on reading and writing before anything else. He
recommended also "giving the teacher a higher place amongst us than in
any other country." But after his death, the lamentable state of public
education and the privations of the teaching body contradicted the
grandiloquent and lying assertions of official propaganda.

In 1923 the Party had proclaimed its intention of "liquidating
illiteracy" amongst adults for the tenth anniversary of October, an
"historic decision" according to Bubnov and others. But in 1924 at the
Communist Congress, Krupskaya stated: "In November the teacher got four
roubles, now he gets 10-12 a month, and he is starving ... the price of
bread has risen and for 10-12 roubles he can buy less bread than he
could previously for four. But the teacher draws this miserable salary
only after a delay of two or three months, and at times never receives
it at all." At this Congress the teachers' delegate admitted to about
seventy per cent of illiterates, a figure which Zinoviev confirmed.
Shortly afterwards Zinoviev revealed a "shocking situation" in the
country schools, and depicted the school-mistress as being in rags and
without fires in winter-time, and the master "who has no means of living
because we have paid him nothing."

That same year Lunacharsky spoke plainly in this connection of a
"catastrophe": there were less than 50,000 primary schools in place of
the 62,000 under the old regime, and that for an increased population.
The average salary of a rural instructor, drawn often after a delay of
six months, was at times lower than to roubles per month. There was a
whole series of provinces where the teacher was starving in the full
sense of the word. Not until 1925 did the teachers hold their first
semblance of a conference, convened, in fact, by the authorities; they
were then admitted to the rank of citizens and electors and became
eligible for non-existent soviets. They were no longer treated as
intellectuals without a place in the sun. Their way of life was
improving little by little, that is to say, hunger, illness and
mortality were growing less amongst them, and prostitution and
mendicancy were tending to disappear. But salaries, premises and
scholastic supplies remained far below a decent minimum.

In 1927, after the tenth anniversary, there was no longer any question
of liquidating illiteracy, in spite of all the "historic decisions." The
programme of the Party: free and obligatory, equal and polytechnic
education; free food, clothing and scholastic material for all students;
pre-school and post-school institutions, creches, clubs, libraries,
popular universities, etc., showed itself on all points a mockery like
the other promises of Bolshevism. In 1928, _Pravda_ (2nd September)
recorded the "stabilisation of illiteracy." In 1929, _Izvestia_ (11th
July) calculated the proportion of absolute illiterates to be sixty per
cent, without counting the aged or incurably ignorant who had forgotten
their alphabet; nothing then had changed since Tsarism. It was the first
year of the industrial Five Year Plan, and it was no longer a matter of
lectures or of literature, but of coal, of iron, of tractors and
turbines. Stalin aimed at doing for the advancement of technique what he
would not do for socialism: Lunacharsky, dilettante, prattler and
muddler, nominally the principal cause of the careless handling of the
Commissariat of Instruction, was abruptly relieved of his functions and
replaced by Bubnov, who introduced the discipline of the army into
educational methods. In 1930, the Central Committee decreed compulsory
education, of course without being able to carry it out, and beginning
with the following year all the so-called revolutionary innovations were
one by one annulled. The former classical system was reestablished,
including the one man management of schools, a university hierarchy,
uniformity of curriculum, discipline, text-books, examinations and
diplomas. Even the brigades of students which had formed part of
Bubnov's plan for taking "the offensive on the cultural front" did not
survive the experiment.

Stalin believed that he could solve every problem simply by means of his
machine. From some 800,000 in 1913, according to N. Rubakin, the number
of functionaries had increased to more than 7,365,000 before the N.E.P.,
to decline later and establish itself at about 3,722,000 in 1927,
excluding those belonging to the Party with its multiple affiliates and
those in the trade unions and co-operatives. Even more than in Custine's
time, there was "a whole crowd of people whose interest lay in
perpetuating and concealing abuses." The incomplete statistics do not
permit an exact estimate of the total, which perhaps exceeded 5,000,000
in 1930. "We are unable to master this enormous machine created by the
extraordinarily backward state of civilisation in our country," sighed
Bukharin in the days when he was permitted free speech; but Stalin did
not intend to lessen the instrument of domination which he had inherited
and which he has since learned to perfect. On the contrary, by
suppressing the N.E.P. he added still more force to the bureaucracy,
which, by means of the _kolkhoz_, began to penetrate even into the
practical management of agriculture, as well as to achieve control of
commerce, the co-operatives and the body of artisans. Step by step with
the industrialisation of the country, an unprecedented bureaucracy
increased and solidified. Varied in its forms, it was fundamentally
unalterable, the curse of a country lorded over by "too large a number
of all too petty functionaries." It would require a special work to
describe the mischief done by redtape, the insatiable parasitism,
certain monstrous effects of which are occasionally pointed out in the
leading Bolshevik organs which, however, carefully avoid speaking of the
real causes of the evil. "Take our immense Soviet administration. You
will find there a colossal number of good-for-nothings who do not want
socialism to succeed," declared Ordjonikidze in 1929, already with no
illusions; and he added: "People nobody knows what to do with and whom
nobody has any use for are placed in the Control Commission." The fatal
consequences reveal themselves in every economic and political
balance-sheet of the regime.

At the top of the bureaucratic pyramid, the Party machinery, purged of
all heterogeneous elements, gave Stalin perfect security after the
pitiful collapse of the Right. The occurrence of new insubordination,
individual or on the part of small groups, seemed not unlikely in the
immediate future, but this would be a mere game which "the master" could
put an end to at once.

It becomes useless to follow in detail the operations styled
"organisational," revocations, nominations and mutations whereby Stalin
exercised a limitless sovereignty, the secret efficacy of which may be
explained in three letters -- G.P.U. After Lunacharsky, other People's
Commissars who had served their turn -- Semashko, Unschlicht, Briukhanov
-- were sacked peremptorily, without even the usual formalities observed
in the dismissal of domestic servants. Beyond the bureaucratic corps
whom these matters closely concerned, nobody gave any attention to the
paltry four or five lines in which the newspapers mentioned the
degradations, without any explanation. Public opinion was annihilated
and experienced Bolsheviks thought in slogans learnt by heart. The only
apparent reason for the sudden ascent of a Syrtsov, promoted to the
presidency of the Council of Commissars for Russia in place of the
deposed Rykov, was that Stalin had to nominate somebody of whom he could
be sure, right or wrong. Nobody could otherwise explain the appointment
of Molotov to be head of the Council of Commissars for the Soviet Union
-- another post withdrawn from Rykov -- unless one assumed also that
Stalin wanted to get rid of the Secretariat. The endless succession of
interchangeable personages in the reigning oligarchy ceased to impress
-- whether Ordjonikidze returned to the Politbureau, or Kaganovich
succeeded Molotov as First Under-Secretary of the Party, or the endless
mutations of the Kuibyshevs, Andreyevs and Rudzutaks. In the
bureaucratic constellation, whence the Yaroslavskys, the Skrypniks and
even the Kirovs were shining with a somewhat tarnished brilliance, new
and obscure stars appeared, from Akulov to Postyshev, without anyone
knowing why or how. Voroshilov and Kalinin, shamefaced Right-wingers who
had deserted at the right moment, vied with each other in orthodoxy and
submission for the sake of keeping their places.

It was no longer sufficient for Stalin to be feared and obeyed -- the
defeated victims must further his career and honour his person in order
not to disappear altogether. Fallen to the rank of subordinate
functionaries, Pyatakov and Radek multiplied their pledges of servility
in the hope of inspiring some confidence in "the boss." Zinoviev and
Kamenev, crazy with terror after the revelations of their relations with
Bukharin, bought their pardon by denouncing the latter. Bukharin managed
to save himself by denials and fresh reiterations of repentance, apart
from the threat of suicide.

By preference, Stalin avoided surrounding himself with corpses; not that
human life seemed precious, or worthy of respect, but because he found
greater advantages in dishonouring an adversary than in causing his
death. He could crush oppositions without physically suppressing their
leaders who in any case would not take up arms. Experience taught him to
despise men, consciously to exploit their weaknesses, to adjust
suppression proportionately to the resistance offered. A new procedure
made its appearance in _Pravda_, that of declarations of apostasy and
letters of denunciation, worthy products of post-Lenin Bolshevism.

Before calling the Sixteenth Party Congress in 1930, Stalin reorganised
the staff of the Secretariat, rearranged the functions of the Central
Committee, renewed bureaux, sections, commissions, and the myriad
committees which form the close network of his administration. The Party
dealt with, there was a clean up of the trade unions, the libraries, the
universities, and theatres. In one case it was the friends of Bukharin,
Rykov and Tomsky, the former supporters of the Right, who suffered; in
another, the victims were now Dostoievsky, now Schiller, now Dickens,
then Lohengrin and Werther, according to the initiative or influence of
ridiculous but powerful ignoramuses. The Academy of Sciences was not
spared. By means of various arbitrary sanctions, a number of Bolsheviks
was forced upon it, under the threat of cutting off its income and on
the pretext of strengthening the social sciences. Thus the ruling power
forbade all impulse to intellectual independence and in practice
subordinated the Academy to the needs of its own propaganda. Custine had
already seen in the Russia of old that "here, even men's souls are led
by a rope." When the Central Statistical Department annoyed Stalin, he
suppressed it, because according to his press "statistics cannot be
neutral" and "class statistics" are necessary. Accordingly, the
professors of Soviet journalism maintain that "information does not
consist in the dissemination of news, but in the education of the
masses," "information is an instrument in the class struggle -- not a
mirror to reflect events objectively." Thus every lie is justified in
advance in the name of the more or less misunderstood interests of the
revolution. To make use of another century-old observation of Custine:
"Here to lie is to protect society, to tell the truth is to upset the
State."

The Sixteenth Congress, held two and a half years after the fifteenth,
in total disregard of the statutes, at last realised Stalin's ideal,
long accomplished in the congresses of the Soviets: a meeting where
chosen orators discourse to order, where the chorus applauds to order,
carries motions to order and sings the International to order.
Henceforward, in the Party sessions, as formerly in the deliberative
State Assemblies, the delegates confined themselves, like good little
children, to hearing the lesson they would subsequently have to recite
to their inferiors, in their capacity of pretentious school-masters.
Many previous Congresses had shown the same tendency; but the process
was more marked the further one went from the October Revolution.
"Russia, this infant nation, is only a school on a huge scale.
Everything goes on there as in a military college, except that the
students don't come out of it until death." Thus wrote Custine; but if
the present resembles the past, history has left no memory of a
spectacle as degrading as that of these Bolsheviks. The Right-wing
cowards were dragged onto the platform to beat their breasts and confess
their errors before an audience of fanatic or venal delegates, which
thundered its hatred according to instructions with the one and only
motive of pleasing the despot. Rakovsky, from his exile, could well
comment on "this savage picture of bureaucrats let loose, it is
difficult to say who has most lost the feeling of dignity, those who
bend humbly beneath the jeers and hoots, submitting to the outrages in
the hope of a better future, or those who, in the same hope, are
responsible for these outrages, knowing beforehand that the adversary
must yield." Hideous scenes these, but on the morrow, insulters and
insulted will sit side by side as colleagues on the Central Committee.

Stalin's report to the Congress expounded once more the platitudes of
Leninism in regard to international politics: the whole world was
undermined with antagonisms, the bitterest of which ranged in opposite
camps the United States and England; the League of Nations was a
moribund institution; Social-Democracy was losing all influence while
the Communist Parties were marching from victory to victory; capitalist
stabilisation was ending and everywhere the revolution rumbled; the
bourgeoisie, especially in France, "the most aggressive and militaristic
country in the world," was seeking a way out in war against the
U.S.S.R.; etc., etc. The rest of his speech was devoted to the internal
situation and summed up in the stereotyped formulas of the orthodoxy of
the moment the more or less bogus statistics prepared by frightened
experts without convictions, terrorised by politicians without
knowledge. The same assertions reproduced in all the official literature
of this period only assume their full significance when placed in the
framework of the ill-matched facts and contradictory proceedings which
trace from day to day the tortuous graph of the "general line."

### 10.2

STALIN scarcely counted on the good will, still less on the spontaneous
enthusiasm, of the workers in order to arrive at the remote aims
formulated in the Plan. He had opposed himself too much to the
industrialist tendency to have any illusions in this respect. His
optimistic public statements might deceive a large part of the youth,
but not the majority of the working class, jaded by promises, and still
less the peasant masses, defiant by nature and hostile by experience. He
foresaw a certain "artificially organised famine" in consequence of a
too rapidly organised industrialisation, but did not change his policy
until forced to do so by the circumstances or, more precisely, by the
growing difficulty of stocking the cereals indispensable to the food
supplies of the towns. Through lack of industrial merchandise to
exchange for agricultural products, he had to use force to tear the
crops from the peasants. Thus necessity compelled him to take the road
which foresight had prompted Trotsky to urge upon him. Passing from one
extreme to the other, from caution to rashness, he remembered a phrase
of Lenin as justification and cover for the wildest extravagances: "We
must excite the enthusiasm of conscientious workers and peasants by a
great ten or twenty years programme, by a clean-cut and lively
perspective, absolutely scientific in its foundations." But the joy in
labour demanded or stimulated by vulgar artifices won over neither the
exhausted proletariat nor the sceptical peasantry, and the strenuous
efforts of the "shock-brigades" with all their badly-paid rivalry did
not compensate for material unpreparedness, technical backwardness and
professional incompetence. Stalin as much through natural inclination as
through the logic of the system was led to break through obstacles by
draconian measures.

The cruellest "offensive" made itself felt first in the country
districts. Collectivisation, like every other obligation imposed upon
the people of the Soviet Union, was styled voluntary, in flagrant
contradiction of the Plan which had established beforehand the
percentages to be realised. "It would be the greatest absurdity to try
to introduce communal agricultural work into such backward villages,
where a long education would be necessary before the preliminary
attempt." Lenin had said this repeatedly. He had been resolute on the
necessity of "getting into the good graces" of the small producers, to
transform them by "a very long, very slow and very prudent work of
organisation." He could only conceive of harmony between a socialised
industry and an individualistic agriculture in a free and pacific
co-operation, without the least constraint, direct or indirect. Stalin
appeared to understand him, to judge by the speeches which preceded his
pitiless mobilisation of the "shock-brigades" against the peasantry. But
in complete contradiction to his reassuring declarations, and without
taking any account of the Plan, which contemplated collectivising and
mechanising in five years one-fifth of the agricultural establishments,
he carried through by blood and iron in one year three times the
expectations of the Five Year Plan. In a single month the number of
farms grouped in the _kolkhoz_ exceeded that brought about by twelve
years of revolution -- on paper, that is, for tractors and machines, not
to mention organisation and the consent of the victims, were still sadly
lacking. This result was obtained by arbitrary expropriation and illegal
pillage, and only at the price of an unexampled repression. This Stalin
entitled "liquidation of the _kulak_ as a class," but thousands of poor
and middle peasants themselves succumbed. No contemporary records have
been able to keep up with all the mass arrests and executions, the
suicides and the assassinations which collectivisation dragged in its
wake. Statistics abound in empty figures and trifling coefficients, but
do not register these numerous victims, any more than the G.P.U. yields
its secrets of the barbarous deportations of millions of human beings,
transplanted to arctic regions and beyond the Urals. Whole villages,
cantons and districts were depopulated and their inhabitants dispersed
and decimated, as happened in ancient times in Assyria and Chaldaea. An
American correspondent extremely favourable to Stalin's interests
estimated at 2,000,000 the approximate number banished and exiled in
1929-1930 (New York Times, 3rd February, 1931). But the truth would
appear still more atrocious in its full extent if it were known that the
"dekulakisation" was pursued without respite in the course of the
following years, and that the official figures vary between five and ten
million for the number of kulaks, not including the unfortunate mujiks
presumed to possess a little more than the average. (Shortly after the
first Five Year Plan, in 1933, the Rostov press, accidentally disobeying
the command of silence, announced the deportation _en bloc_ of three
_stanitsy_ of Cossacks from Kouban -- about 50,000 persons; but more
than 100,000 inhabitants of the same region had preceded them on the
northern road to misery.) It can be considered then that 5,000,000
villagers _at least_, regardless of sex and age, have been chased from
their hearths and doomed to a life of iniquitous misery, many to death.
Mr. H. Walpole, who has attentively scrutinised the data of the
Commissariat of Works, arrives also at the total of 4 to 5,000,000 for
1931, a figure which the succeeding years easily surpass. He has noted
it in his introduction to _Out of the Deep, Letters from Soviet Timber
Camps_, a collection of heartbreaking letters from deported Mennonites,
the authenticity of which is guaranteed by the editor of the _Slavonic
Review_. A qualified and informed eyewitness, I. Solonevich, one of the
few who have escaped from the Soviet prison where he worked in the
departments of planning and assessment, confirmed these estimates in
1935 with new data. It is impossible to know how many have perished of
hunger and cold in the northern forests, in the building of great public
works and in concentration camps. But partial information gives us some
idea, not precise though none the less terrible -- especially of the
appalling number of child victims expelled with their mothers, sometimes
in the dead of night, and transported from the temperate climate of the
south to glacial regions where many of these little innocents have found
premature deaths through lack of shelter, of proper care and of the
barest necessities. What, in the face of such facts, were the famous
proscriptions of Sulla and the two triumvirates, so often evoked by the
socialists after the Commune? The historians of the Asiatic empires of
antiquity or the middle ages could alone produce anything comparable.

But Stalin, though deaf to the misfortunes caused by his blind policy,
could not remain indifferent to its disastrous results on economy. If
human life were of little account to him, he at least had to grapple
seriously with the problem of livestock and crops. The outraged peasants
killed their animals and ate their seeds, either to avoid confiscation,
or to protest in their own way. Millions of beasts of burden were killed
at a time when mechanical traction only existed on paper -- and the
result was an automatic restriction of ploughing and corn-sowing. Tens
of millions of oxen, sheep, pigs and poultry succumbed to the same fate
-- there was to be a lack of milk, meat and eggs for pears. Improvised
legislation, too tardy and not very efficacious, punished with
imprisonment the murder of an ox or calf perpetrated "through
malevolence." All products were rationed, the rations grew smaller, but
the greater part of the foodstuffs disappeared and the revictualling of
the industrial centres was endangered for a long period. The bureaucracy
blamed now the rain, now the fine weather, at times the kulaks, and at
last bureaucratism itself. Rumours and alarms, collected by the G.P.U.,
spread among Stalin's associates. High functionaries in informed circles
glimpsed the approach of an immense catastrophe, perhaps a change of
rule, and prepared for any eventuality in their conversations, the
intimacy of which did not prevent the presence of spies and
_provocateurs_. The sorcerer's apprentice of the new agrarian
revolution, intoxicated with his facile victory over the disarmed
peasants, over women and little children, recoiled before the spectre of
a famine, and decided to retreat. In an article _Dizzy with Success_
(2nd March, 1930) he ceased to extol the "unheard of rhythm" of this
"formidable avalanche" which had swept over the countryside, and threw
the responsibility of his actions on the shoulders of the agents who
carried them out. To them he imputed his own madness of a short while
before; he denounced bureaucratic procedure, condemned excessive
violence, the removal of the church-bells and the socialisation of the
hen-houses. He discountenanced the forming of communes where production
and distribution would be collectivised, and prescribed that the form
should henceforth be the artel, where the house, the kitchen garden, the
cow and the smaller livestock remain individual property. A circular of
the Central Committee "against Leftish exaggerations" followed,
reproving "the abominable, the criminal, the exceptionally brutal
conduct" of certain subordinates towards the people. It denounced the
division of goods, the deprivation of civic rights, the arbitrary
arrests, the closing of churches, the suppression of markets, etc.,
seeking to limit this irresistible "voluntary" movement, and authorising
the malcontents to leave the _kolkhoz_. In two weeks the number of
"hearths" included in the "socialist sector" fell from 14,264,000 on the
1st of March to 5,778,000 On the 15th of the same month. The reflex
continued, the "dead souls" dispersed. It was a short-lived respite,
however, for the dispersal was brought to a standstill in December of
the same year. Stalin then ordered the entire collectivisation of wheat
districts and the partial collectivisation of other districts, with
definite percentages. Under cover of the recent retreat he had had a
breathing space in which to repair losses, to consolidate the positions
won and to increase tenfold "police precautions." He was preparing with
deliberation for "a sort of artificially-organised famine."

A veritable enslavement of industry soon rivalled the peasant servitude.
A decision of the Central Committee (7th September, 1929) had instituted
the "one-man leadership" of the manager in every industrial undertaking,
abolishing the theoretical rights of the workmen's committees. Ensuing
decrees accumulated, damaging beyond repair the sovereignty of the
proletariat.

Stalin sought first to fight against the mobility of labour, for the
wretched standard of living was driving the workers from one town to
another, and a disorganisation of production resulted from this
permanent migration. As in the eighteenth century when desertion was the
last resource of the serfs if oppression became unbearable, flight
seemed to the Soviet workers the only way out of their impossible
situation. In October 1930, with the explicit connivance of the G.P.U.
came an ordinance forbidding movements of workers engaged in rafting
(wood being an essential article of foreign exchange). Another decree
extended the same measure to every other industry so as to "rivet" the
workers, to dispose of them regardless of their preferences, without
considering bonds of parentage or friendship, and increasing the
penalties for disobedience. A third measure suppressed unemployment
relief and every facility for choosing abode or work. Another in
November closed the Labour Exchanges and ordered that the unemployed be
summarily sent where they were needed. After which the officials claimed
_urbi et orbi_ the disappearance of unemployment. But the following year
Stalin admitted to fluctuations of labour that implied millions of
workless on the roads. And the economic reviews estimated many more in
the country where the non-producing surplus of the population found no
employment whatever.

In January 1931, a decree requisitioned former railway workers to
replace them in their previous occupation, whether they would or no. An
addition to the Penal Code gave ten years' imprisonment for lack of
discipline among the transport workers, and prescribed the _death
penalty_ in cases of premeditation. In February was instituted the
obligatory "work-certificate," modelled on the soldier's certificate,
which contained a summarised history of the bearer, his type of
employment, punishments, fines, reasons for dismissal, etc. The object
of this was to suppress indiscipline and desertions. In March there were
further measures to enforce dictatorial authority in the factories, to
bring pressure to bear against backward workers guilty of absence,
negligence, drunkenness or laziness. In April came preferential rations
for the "shock-brigades" -- true blackmail of the stomach -- and
priority rights of lodging, heating and the most urgent necessities. In
June the workers were made responsible for damages to material, thus
allowing accusations of sabotage for accidents due to defective quality
of tools and raw materials and to administrative chaos and governmental
carelessness. The factory chiefs received full authority from the
Commissariat of Works to transfer technicians and specialised workers,
regardless of their consent, and to send them from one place to another
like machines in contempt of every sentiment of humanity.

These were the principal links in an unending chain. The decree of the
7th August 1932 on the preservation of State property stipulated the
death penalty for theft of merchandise in transport. In November of the
same year followed new decrees. One of them punished by dismissal a
single day's unjustifiable absence from work. The other placed the
former co-operatives under the direction of the factories. Thus the
dismissed or defaulting worker lost his food-ticket issued by the
director and, as a general rule, his lodgings. The same power of
personal control was exercised in regard to production and consumption.
These convicts of industry could no longer move an inch without exposing
themselves and their families to death from starvation. Yet, incredible
as it may seem, even with this monstrous system of repression, which is
absolutely unparalleled in any capitalist legislation, Stalin was unable
to control all the workers, for many preferred vagabondage to slavery.
In December of this last year of the plan, he decided upon a police
measure which exceeded in its scope and rigour any analogous measure
under Tsarism, viz., the obligatory interior passport for the entire
urban population; and for a part of the rural population living near the
large towns. Nobody could move or stay twenty-four hours away from home
without the visa of the G.P.U. militia and this incriminating document
indicated the social origin of the bearer, his family attachments, his
occupation and movements; a complete police dossier with all the
elements necessary for an eventual prosecution. During the three months
that "passportisation" was being introduced, Stalin vetoed marriages,
divorces, adoptions and changes of address in order to render fraud
impossible. He condescended, however, to permit deaths and to tolerate
births.

The peasant-proletarian was no better situated than the worker-dictator.
The _death sentence_ for theft applied equally to theft in the fields. A
starving individual who had gleaned a few ears of wheat or stolen a few
vegetables from the products of his own labour would be eligible for the
capital sentence. There was subsequently a similar decree of the Central
Committee against vague offences like sabotage in agricultural works and
"intent to damage" in tillage and sowing. A series of contradictory
decrees followed one another: piecework and payment by results were
imposed in collective agriculture, everything was regulated down to its
most minute details, standards of work were established, and the amount
of produce expected from labourers and tilled fields, and even from
cows, was fixed by statute. All this time a rain of circulars was
pouring on the _kolkhoz_ where an unprecedented social phenomenon, a
gigantic agrarian bureaucracy, was being formed. In 1931, the number of
functionaries in the new "socialist sector" was reckoned at more than
2,000,000 -- administrators, managers, controllers, brigadiers,
commissioners, and divers employees. The mujiks, also divided into
brigades to regulate their daily tasks, had to support whole legions of
parasites who encroached on their own personal share, and to bear the
enormous general expenses which burdened net costs and were responsible
for budget deficits. Arakcheyev, the Minister of Alexander I, famous for
his military peasant colonies, would not have dreamed of calling a
shepherd a "commander of the flock" nor dared to have envisaged a
bureaucratic militarisation on such a scale.

In proportion as collectivisation extended, famine became rapidly
accentuated. Tractors transformed after a short while into scrap iron,
mechanical instruments left to rust in the open, did not balance a
diminution in the flock or the abandonment or destruction of old
implements. All the orders, counter-orders and decrees from Moscow could
not save wheat from rotting, potatoes from frost-bite, or weeds from
springing up, where there was a lack of elementary precautions and of
any stimulus to work. Losses and waste took on extravagant proportions.
Neither the mobilisation of workmen and students and of school-children
for the sowings and harvestings, nor the mobilisation of young
communists for wood felling, of doctors, scientists and artists -- each
in turn organised into shock-brigades -- could take the place of the
good will or the interest of the cultivators, any more than the
mobilisation of the peasants for heavy industry could answer the needs
of modern mechanisation. Stalin tried in 1932 to ward off the crisis
caused by the break up of the agricultural system by means of new
decrees, such as the right to individual possession of a cow and of
small domestic animals granted to members of the _kolkhoz_ (March),
reduction of stocks and of State levies (May), conditional semi-freedom
of trade granted to _kolkhoz_ after payment of rents and taxes (May),
guarantees to the communal groups of the boundaries of their domains
(September), obligation of the last free peasants to lend their horses
to the _kolkhoz_ that needed them (September). All these palliative
measures brought some not very palpable relief, but it was of short
duration, as Stalin is always ready to take back with one hand what he
gives with the other. And as a result of his opportunism and his
intransigence, the flow of blood and tears never ceases.

"Evidently killing is easier than persuasion and this very simple method
is very easy for people who have been brought up amongst massacres, and
educated by massacre." Gorky wrote this at the beginning of the
revolution apostrophising the Bolsheviks. "All you Russians, still
savages, corrupted by your former masters, you in whom they have infused
their terrible defects and their insensate despotism." Babeuf made
similar reflections on his contemporaries: "Tortures of all kinds --
drawing and quartering, the wheel, the stake, the gibbet, the plague of
executions. What evil precedents our masters have given us! Instead of
keeping us in order, they have made barbarians of us, because they are
barbarians themselves." There is no difficulty that Stalin does not
boast of being able to solve by capital punishment or at least by prison
or exile.

In 1930, when there was a currency shortage, a mere decree was
sufficient to send to the firing-squad scores of Soviet subjects
suspected of hoarding a few hundred roubles. Industrial miscalculations
and agricultural mishaps were treated in the same way as financial
difficulties. Forty-eight alleged saboteurs of food production were
executed without trial after the arrest of numerous technicians,
professors, scientists, statisticians and socialist or liberal
co-operators who had rallied to the regime and were employed in the
administration of the national economy. This helped to exculpate the
chiefs, while intimidating the intelligentsia, and making a parody of
justice before the credulous people. Next the existence was revealed of
the so-called "Industrial Party," said to include some 2,000 members.
Yet only eight of them were brought to trial, and the ringleader, to
judge by the evidence, was an _agent provocateur_. The most valuable
officials of the Gosplan among whom were Bazarov, Groman, Sukhanov,
Kondratiev, found themselves accused of counter-revolution and wrecking
(_vreditelstvo_). Terrorised by the execution of forty-eight of their
colleagues, and cowed by the G.P.U. methods of intimidation, they nearly
all signed the confessions that were demanded from them and admitted to
crimes that they could not possibly have committed. Others were
dismissed from office, like Riazanov, who remained indifferent to the
threats, and Kondratiev, who took shelter behind the Communist Right
with which he was in sympathy. In actual fact these criminals had in
private conversations exchanged pessimistic views on exaggerated
industrialisation and collectivisation, and had envisaged a possible
socialist government in the event of a crash raising the question of a
successor to Stalin. Two distinct and spectacular trials, conducted at
an interval of three months because of the practical impossibility of
contriving some connecting link, proved nothing simply because they
proved too much. But ardent in the pursuit of their own destruction, the
accused denounced themselves and exceeded to their very best ability the
imputations of the prosecution. Their counsel always pleaded guilty, and
there were never any witnesses but those for the prosecution. "It is a
common practice to terrorise and even to beat up a witness to make him
tell the truth," observed de Maistre when visiting Russia at the
beginning of the last century. Under Stalin this method has improved:
witnesses and accused are now terrorised so as to make them tell lies.
The hounded engineers, cowed by the threats of their clumsy persecutors,
through sheer ignorance denounced accomplices and implicated people who
had died abroad several years before, and involved in their charges
persons who could not possibly have been suspected of such crimes, for
example, Aristide Briand, accused of "preparing for war against the
U.S.S.R." The alleged Mensheviks, in reality deserters from that Party,
with the exception of one of them who subsequently retracted his
statements, gave evidence of secret meetings held at Moscow with
Abramovich, an exiled socialist leader, who had not crossed the frontier
for ten years. These were startling impostures, designed to eke out the
scantiness of the charges, which were a mixture of truth and falsehood
supplemented by the activities of police agents provocateurs. The result
of this tragi-comedy of pitiless condemnations and commutations of
sentences, both of them arranged beforehand, was to bring discredit on
the whole affair and to confuse public opinion.

On the other hand Stalin was scoring points every day with the
executions decided by the G.P.U. without any other form of trial. At
this period thousands of such cases were to be found in the press,
though it did not announce all of them; and the orgy of murders was to
continue further. This is borne out by the execution (March 1933) of
thirty-five functionaries of the Commissariat of Agriculture
accused of having "allowed weeds to grow in the fields" and other
charges of the same nature. Publicity was only given in certain cases
and where it might serve to set an example. It happened sometimes that
the reason given to the public did not coincide with the secret one, as
in the case of the thirty-five, who were shot in reality on suspicion of
espionage. The G.P.U. at times deemed it useful to exploit its
executions for several purposes. The mass arrests of 1930 included every
type of intellectual, even the historians (Platonov, Tarlé, etc.) who
could not possibly have done any harm to production or supplies, and the
last peaceable socialists who had cut themselves away from politics.
Finally, Stalin was not content to abuse his power of punishment -- he
also foresaw the need for reward: the order of "Lenin" for civilians,
the order of "The Red Star" for soldiers. These two new decorations,
created in 1930, carried with them a number of privileges, under the
pretext of "socialist edification" but, actually, of course, in defiance
of every principle of socialism.

The Party had not passed through the phase of tension of the Five Year
Plan without incidents. The conflicts, however, now affected only
isolated individuals, and were settled without any effect whatever on
the rank and file; as in the old days at the court of Russia under
Nicholas I, which F. Lacroix compared to "the movable floors in a
theatre in which invisible trapdoors open to swallow up the victims
consigned to the dungeon by the tyrant of the melodrama."

Syrtsov's fall in 1930, as precipitous as his sudden elevation a few
months previously, was incomprehensible to the public. It was known only
that the President of the Council of Commissars, worried about the
consequences of "the general line," shared his confidences and vague
hopes of reform, including a return to the N.E.P., with Lominadze and
other lesser figures. That was all that was needed to unmask a new
disaffection, almost a plot. Trotsky's informants attributed to Syrtsov
a disparaging judgment on Stalin, his protector: "A stupid man who is
leading the country to ruin." It all ended in the customary dismissals,
exclusions, repentance and humiliations. Once more Bukharin and his
fellows disavowed their comrades and confessed their mistakes. That same
year, Sokolnikov, compromised by his conversations with the imprisoned
ex-Mensheviks, assured his safety and his embassy in London by imploring
Stalin's pardon and swearing eternal obedience. Krizhanovsky lost his
post in the Gosplan for unknown reasons, shortly after Rykov's disgrace.
The generation of veterans, weakened by age and perverted by power, was
either giving up the struggle or being swept away.

At the beginning of 1931, Riazanov was suddenly made the target for the
thunderbolts of the dictator. He was reproached with keeping the
documents of the Russian Social-Democracy in the archives of the
Marx-Engels Institute, where they had been placed by a colleague.
Accused of treason, implicated quite arbitrarily in the so-called
"Menshevik affair," but excluded from the trial where he would doubtless
have vindicated instead of blackening his character, the old scholar was
ruined, expelled from the Party, arrested and deported; his works were
pilloried, his editions of Marx and Engels prohibited, and the Institute
he had created annulled by being absorbed into the Lenin Institute. The
previous year the official Communist world had covered Riazanov with
bouquets and compliments on his sixtieth birthday, hailing him as "the
most eminent Marxologist of our time," who had devoted "more than forty
years of active service to the workers' cause." But Stalin, obsessed
with the idea of winning at all costs the reputation of being a
theorist, was only waiting for a favourable opportunity to get rid of a
scrupulous scientist who hesitated to couple without justification the
name of the ignorant successor of Lenin with those of the authors of the
doctrine. With him went the last refuge of social science at Moscow.
Shortly after the deportation of Riazanov, hired encomiasts tried to
acclimatise the formula of Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism, but they did not
succeed in increasing the reputation of the man whom they thus sought to
honour.

An episode which at first sight seems more obscure was the sudden fate
which befell Yaroslavsky, one of the most servile agents of the
government. Because of a _History of the Party_ of which he was not even
the author but which was published under his responsibility, this
professional detractor of Trotsky and specialised tracker-down of
Trotskyists fell in 1931 under the fantastic accusation of Trotskyism.
The truth is that Stalin, warned of the excessive ambition of his
subaltern, invented some sort of pretext to force him to a public
apology so as to belittle him in the eyes of everybody. From the
denunciation to the confession the operation did not last three weeks.
At the same time, with a simple letter to the editorial staff of a
review, Stalin revolutionised the history of Bolshevism in a hand's turn
by shamelessly perverting the facts and by delivering into the hands of
his functionaries and clients a whole host of very orthodox historians
who had not yet learned sufficiently to depreciate Trotsky or glorify
Stalin. His threatening allusion to "rotten liberalism" and "Trotskyist
contraband" were too clear not to provoke an epidemic of loud denials,
at once lamentable and grotesque, which revealed only too well the
hopeless degradation of the revolutionary phalanx of October; Radek,
Shliapnikov and many others hastened to recognise all sorts of imaginary
errors in their old forgotten writings, and to recant the most innocent
and least deniable truths. A certain Deborin was induced to publish
abroad his philosophical deviations, whilst regretting that he had not
sufficiently criticised ... the idealism of Hegel! The panic was
designed to produce a more severe expurgation of books and libraries and
a more rigorous censorship of new publications in the spirit of
Stalinist conformity. Everyone ran the risk, through lack of zeal or
mere inadvertence, of losing his employment, lodging and breadcard and
falling into the condition of a pariah. Even the _Complete Works_ of
Lenin were tainted with suspicion because of documentary notes, the
relative probity of which contradicted the legends Stalin found useful
to himself. The letter of anathema entitled _Questions Concerning the
History of Bolshevism_ became a "document of the greatest international
significance, political and world-historical" to quote the careerist
"red professors." For years, hack writers and party pedants appealed to
its authority on every possible occasion and on every subject,
continually hunting out "rotten liberalism" even on questions of
philosophy, literature and music, with which the miserable document is
no more concerned than with historic fact.

A gloomy silence spread over the Party and oppressed the "socialist
fatherland," where the critical spirit scarcely dared venture abroad
except in the stifled murmur of anecdotes and spiteful epigrams as in
Rome under the Caesars. On the surface, unbroken unanimity reigned, and
a chorus of venal eulogies of Stalin took the place of political life in
a country plunged in toil, hardships and misery. One of the principal
renegades of the Left Opposition, Pyatakov, had led the way in
identifying the General Secretary first with the Central Committee, then
with the Party, and then with the State, giving him the personal homage
of a vassal to his lord. Falling easily into line with him, a chorus of
careerists and parvenus took care not to write or speak anything but
tributes of outward admiration for the man on whom their futures
depended. Every discourse, every article began and terminated
henceforward with a digression in Stalin's honour, and men rivalled each
other to invent new flatteries. Mention of his name was made everywhere;
it was sedition to omit it. A jesting pun on the "genial secretary" was
taken seriously and by a slight change of meaning, the word "genius"
became inseparable from his name, which the press printed in large
characters. At the end of 1932 an obscure quarrel with a certain Riutin,
allied with divers oppositionists of Left and Right, gave opportunity to
exclude and deport a handful of malcontents for the crime of not having
denounced anyone -- among them Zinoviev and Kamenev. But the two cronies
were to obtain pardon six months later when they pleaded for clemency,
and not only admitted their innumerable errors but prostrated themselves
before the might of Stalin. It was no longer enough to get down on your
knees, you had to grovel in the dirt on your belly. The moral suicide of
the survivors of the Old Guard, stubborn in claiming a political role
against the omnipotence of their conquerors, indicated the inevitable
fate of those who did not resort to physical suicide. In 1933, Skrypnik,
suspected rightly or wrongly of deviating from "the general line" and of
weakness or tolerance in regard to nationalism in the Ukraine, found the
only solution in his revolver.

Stalin alone had the right to express an opinion, which took on the
force of law, ipso facto, and the _boyars_ of the bureaucracy had the
privilege of repeating it, vulgarising it and commenting on it until
such time as the "genius" of the land should have changed his mind or
have contradicted himself. After his moderating intervention in the
excesses of collectivisation, he published a _Reply to Comrades on the
Collective Farms_ to cover his retreat with a good score of quotations
from Lenin, every one of which was a condemnation of his own practice,
but from which he thought to escape unscathed by turning them against
his subordinates. In a discourse pronounced in February 1931, he was not
afraid to postulate the realisation of the Plan, no longer in four but
in three years, "for all decisive branches of industry," and to
subscribe to equally puerile blustering with the final and peremptory
argument: "There exists no fortress impregnable to a Bolshevik." But his
boasting could not dissipate the difficulties of industrialisation, and
in another discourse in June 1931 he retreated noticeably. The low
quality of labour due to the permanent evasion of the workers prior to
"passportisation," which he had the audacity to explain as being caused
by the prosperity of the country districts, obliged him to turn his
attention to the material conditions of the proletariat. He found it
necessary to modify the allocation of salaries by accentuating the
inequality to the profit of qualified workers, giving them the stimulus
of better food and lodgings. In euphemistic and laboured terms he
declared the five-day week a fiasco. "In a series of enterprises we have
continuous work, in words or on paper," he said, and commanded that
"where conditions are not propitious to such an experiment we should
pass temporarily to the six-day week" whilst waiting to return to the
first arrangement. He canvassed the idea of "changing our policy" in
respect of the decimated technical cadres: "it would be stupid and
unreasonable to-day to consider every specialist and engineer of the old
school as a criminal or a saboteur." He acknowledged the statistical
bluffs of which he had been the first to avail himself: "In a series of
enterprises and economic undertakings we have ceased for a long time to
count and calculate or to establish real budgets of receipts and
expenditure." But he concluded nevertheless on the habitual optimistic
note.

That was his last speech before the expiration of the five-year term.
The incessant lie that facts gave to his words inspired him for a time
with the wise decision to keep quiet. He had given his enemies too many
weapons by announcing always the contrary of what was going to happen,
by dragging in the wake of the most easily predictable events, and by
displaying a rare misunderstanding of international and Soviet
realities, and of the economic and social theories of which he claimed
to be the interpreter. On one single point he was not mistaken, but he
took care not to make too much of it: he had prophesied in 1928 "a
certain artificially-organised famine" in the case of a too rapid tempo
of industrial development. He was saying nothing original and borrowing
from the "deviation of the Right" the only idea that future events were
to verify.

In fact, the famine made itself felt as early as 1931, in spite of the
coupon system, the parsimonious rations, and the rigorous discipline.
But this time the peasants had more to complain about than the workers,
who were provided for first after the bureaucracy, the police and the
army, in the order of urgency. The State took one-half of the gram crop
which had fallen to 695 million tons (against 96.6 in 1913) but which
was again reduced by a quarter on the average, by losses due to fraud.
But the population had increased by about 25 millions and bread was an
essential article of diet in a country where meat, milk, cheese, indeed
all provisions were almost unprocurable. The livestock which had
survived the mass-slaughter of collectivisation, deprived of proper care
and fodder in the _kolkhoz_, perished in enormous numbers. The soaring
prices in the market after the partial re-establishment of commerce
revealed a precipitous devaluation of the rouble. Powerless to cope with
the food-supply of the towns, the Government wanted the workers to raise
rabbits at home and even to cultivate the land around the factories and
camps. But "the offensive on the rabbit front" came to a lamentably
abrupt end, owing to the extermination of the subjects of the
experiment. The inexperienced breeders lacked suitable premises and
above all food. Stalin alone had failed to foresee all this in the very
beginning. One of the monstrosities of the regime dated from this
period: the Torgsin, an institution of shops reserved for clients with
foreign money and precious metals, an oasis of abundance in a socialist
desert. The State refused it the use of its own paper money, which it
also decreed should not cross the frontiers, and the wretched poor,
indignant but cowed with fear, dared not rummage for themselves. Even
more unbelievable was the expedient used to procure dollars. A veritable
slave-trade was inaugurated when Soviet "citizens" were authorised to
expatriate themselves, provided a ransom were paid by their friends and
relatives in foreign countries. Although in 1932 the shortage of
merchandise was becoming more acute and famine was rapidly gaining
ground, the imperturbable planomaniacs juggled with stunning masses of
figures and planned the second _piatiletka_, always promising their
mountains and marvels for the morrow. The press demonstrated by a
thousand graphic and photographic artifices the prodigious success of
national economy "on all fronts," and soothed popular distress by
stories of electric tillage, sowing by aeroplane, artificial rain
produced by the bombardment of the clouds, and other discoveries which,
judging by the level of Soviet technique at that time, must be regarded
in the same light as the fantasmagoria of Fourier on the transformation
of the sea into lemonade by the action of boreal citric acid. They even
proposed a grandiose plan for diverting the Gulf Stream so as to temper
the Arctic Ocean to the profit of Northern Siberia. A frantic propaganda
fed the starving masses with photographs of Dnieprostroy and
Magnitogorsk, the steel and cement "giants" risen on the steppe for the
future well-being of their posterity. The Soviet patriotism of the young
communists was warmly praised -- they were the heroes of the "working
front," desperately keen to beat records. The press quoted the cubic
metres of earth excavated, of coal extracted, of metal cast. But the
temporary exploits of the shock brigades did not console empty stomachs
or lessen the nightmare of famine and its attendant horrors, scurvy and
typhus. The generations which were sacrificed to the machine-god looked
in vain for a human word from the Kremlin where Stalin, immured in
silence, was turning socialism into the ideal caricatured by Flaubert
"under the double aspect of a farm-house and a textile-mill, a sort of
Americanised Sparta where the individual would only exist in order to
serve a society more omnipotent, absolute, infallible and divine than
the Great Lamas and the Nebuchadnezzars."

### 10.3

AFTER the fifteenth anniversary of October the prosaic and bloody
industrial epic came to an end. Between the years 1932 and 1933 the
Party could not dispense with a general review. In spite of so many
resolutions, orders and proclamations, each one more full of "historic
importance" or "international interest" than its predecessor, and
despite immeasurable sacrifices of every kind, the economic plans,
enlarged and several times recast, had still not been fulfilled from any
point of view. The U.S.S.R. had not caught up with or surpassed a single
civilised country. It threatened to eclipse neither Europe nor America
nor Switzerland nor Belgium. That did not prevent Stalin from crying
victory, when in January 1933 he at last broke the silence in order to
pass under review the accumulated evidence of his bureaux and
auxiliaries.

He succeeded in this only by concealing beneath his sophistries the
gaping wounds of planned economy and by drowning the tragic realities in
the verbiage of public meetings. He tortured statistics that had already
been falsified from day to day. He played tricks with quantities,
qualities, weights, and values. He himself was not sure of his
starting-point, for his data comprised fragmentary and uncontrollable
elements. The subordinate bodies always supplied satisfying results to
the centre through their fear of unmerited punishments. "Through the
habit of wanting to disguise the truth before the eyes of other people,
you end by being no longer able to see it yourself, except through a
veil which grows thicker every day." So wrote Custine; the same author
remarked, with judicious whimsicality: "Russia is the empire of
catalogues; it sounds superb when you read these lists of titles -- but
be careful not to go any further. If you open a book you will find
nothing of what is promised; the chapter-headings are there, but the
chapters have yet to be written." Trials with concealed motives,
continual scandals, acute crises in every branch of activity -- all are
habitually accompanied by "correctives" which justly merit the title
"comboasts."

In the elementary style which is so typical of him, Stalin summed up
before the Central Committee the general balance-sheet of
industrialisation carried out according to his methods:

>Formerly we did not have an iron and steel industry, the basis of the
>industrialisation of the country. Now we have such an industry.
>
>We did not have a tractor industry. Now we have one.
>
>We did not have an automobile industry. Now we have one.
>
>We did not have an engineering industry. Now we have one.
>
>We did not have an important and modern chemical industry. Now we have
>one.
>
>We did not have a real and important industry for the production of
>modern agricultural machinery. Now we have one.
>
>We did not have an aircraft industry. Now we have one.
>
>In the production of electric power, we were last in the list. Now we
>are among the first in the list.
>
>In the production of oil products and coal we were last in the list.
>Now we are among the first in the list.
>
>We had only one single coal and metallurgical base, the Ukraine, which
>we could hardly manage. We have not only succeeded in improving this
>base, but we have created a new coal and metallurgical base -- in the
>east, which is the pride of our country.
>
>We had only one single textile industry base-in the north of our
>country. In the very near future we will have two new bases of the
>textile industry, in Central Asia and Eastern Siberia.
>
>And we have not only created these new enormous branches of industry,
>but we have created them on such a scale and of such dimensions that
>they make the scale and dimensions of European industry pale into
>insignificance.

If Stalin's affirmations are taken one by one and examined individually,
it will be found that all is not absolutely false in this vague and high
flown statement, in which the orator avoids juxtaposing the passive with
the active. It goes without saying that a people numbering 160,000,000
and submitted to a military discipline, could not possibly work in mines
and on a soil of exceptional natural resources without producing
anything, above all when they work under the advice and direction of
10,000 foreign technicians and specialists. But that does not answer the
question whether the results are harmonious and durable and in just
proportion to the exhausting effort and fantastic expenditure, as well
as being in conformity with a true material and moral progress and with
the final aims of socialism. And even from Stalin's point of view,
nothing could justify a plan, a political system, a regime, which
because of its barbaric methods ended in a return to barbarism with a
superficial covering of American modernism which ill concealed its
essentially Asiatic structure.

It is inexact to say that the U.S.S.R. had to start building everything
from bedrock and may therefore justly boast of an unprecedented success.
In the thirteenth century, Russia held the first place in the world for
cast iron, for iron and copper and for the export of wood, leather and
sail-canvas, a place which she subsequently lost. At the end of the
nineteenth century, she surpassed the United States in the production of
petrol and had in six years more than doubled her supply of cast iron
and steel, and almost doubled her production of coal and naphtha. These
advances and recessions point to a lesson that still holds good. Russia
has always had feverish industrial booms followed by periods of torpor
or depression which pulled her back. Peter the Great left about 730
factories for the most part founded by himself. The number of factories
had more than tripled under Catherine II, more than doubled under
Alexander I, and almost doubled under Nicholas I, but with a still
greater increase of workers and an even greater sum total of trade.
Under Alexander II, railway construction had increased more than
twentyfold. Under Alexander III, industry had well-nigh doubled its
working forces, and tripled the average scope of its enterprises. Under
Nicholas II, indeed, the financial system of Witte made it possible to
double the length of the railways in ten years, and in consequence to
enlarge the coal and metal industries, and to inaugurate, notably at
Donetz, an acceleration comparable to the burst of industry in the
English mining districts at the beginning of the last century, and that
of the Rhino-Westphalian districts in the 'seventies or, more recently,
of the United States or Japan. In his _Development of Capitalism in
Russia_, which appeared in 1899, Lenin stated: "... The progress in the
mining industry is more rapid in Russia than in Western Europe and even
in North America.... In the last few years (1886-1896) the production of
cast metal has tripled.... The development of capitalism in the younger
countries is accelerated by the example and aid of the older." And the
industrial output of Russia was doubled between the Russo-Japanese War
and the World War. The periods of stagnation do not contradict the
general tendency, which is also compatible with barbarous customs.
Besides, since the liberation of the serfs, economic progress had been
accomplished along less abnormal lines than "mobilisation,"
"shock-brigades," "offensives on all fronts," mass deportations or
executions. Trotsky was able to say before the N.E.P., "if Russian
capitalism has developed not gradually but by leaps and bounds,
constructing American factories in the open steppe, that is all the more
reason why a similar 'forced march' should be possible to socialist
economy." Without the legacy of the past in the matter of industrial
concentration, with its imported machinery, technical cadres, and its
influx of foreign science and capital, the Plan would not even have been
conceivable.

The historic antecedents, then, must not be misunderstood. Sovietism,
like Tsarism, but in an extreme measure, tends to an artificial
industrialisation by the omnipresent and constant interference of the
State, sheltered behind a prohibitive customs duty, and at the expense
of the over-exploited working classes. And Stalin, like his predecessors
of the autocracy, owes much to the lucrative participation of the
"rotten West," as the Bolsheviks would say in the manner of the
reactionary Slavophiles. Ivan the Terrible could not have conquered the
Tartars without the help of the engineers and artisans from Germany,
Hungary and Italy. Michael Romanov, the first of the dynasty, enrolled a
number of Englishmen to organise his army in the European manner. Peter
the Great would have been less great if he had not recruited so many
instructors from Holland and elsewhere. And we know well enough the role
played by the French and Belgians in the contemporary organisation of
heavy industry. Stalin is only making use of an old tradition in
appealing to the competence and experience of "moribund capitalism"; of
the great firms of Europe and above all America, such as Ford, Austin,
MacKee, General Electric, Westinghouse, Harvester, Cleveland Tractor,
Freyn Engineering, etc., whose creative work the mouthpieces of the
Party shamelessly attribute to themselves. From Tsar Peter the Great to
Count Witte, all the industrialisers of Russia have wanted to make their
country independent, to make it an autarchy, without scrupling to profit
from the international division of labour. Their successor scarcely
changes anything but the words when he contrasts Soviet statism and the
imperialist capitalism that opens credits for him and sends him its
technical experts; and when he makes comparisons between the respective
curves of industry, for the short period of the Five Year Plan which ran
parallel with the greatest economic crisis the modern world has
experienced. It is undeniable that the high industrial coefficients of
the U.S.S.R. coincided with a contrary tendency in the countries of
excessive production. But here, where technique had already taken
enormous strides forward, there naturally remained less to be done.
Stalin unsuspectingly emphasised the backwardness of his empire when he
marvelled at certain rhythms of progress and forgot the point of
departure. The nearer to the zero line were the latest industries, the
easier was it for him to string together imposing and deceiving
percentages. He also confused economy with technique, the results of
which can be bought without assimilating its processes. In the same way,
he confuses industrialisation with socialism. The deception is closely
reminiscent of intoxication, the more profound as the illusions were
stronger.

Stalin insistently boasted of the cyclopean span of the work
accomplished, which is one of the favourite themes of his literary,
journalistic and photographic propaganda. In his simplicity he believes
that its magnitude is sufficient to mark the superiority of an
enterprise, and he copies and exaggerates the mania for "the greatest in
the world" without bothering about its reasonableness, and often to the
detriment of the interests in his charge. This motive of pride is not
less fragile. "The bourgeoisie," says the _Communist Manifesto_, "has
accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts
and Gothic cathedrals." A State covering one-sixth of the globe does not
in any way surpass its rivals by superb, costly and infirm "giants,"
which are produced at a loss and contribute nothing to the satisfaction
of immediate needs. The factories in which the equipment is obsolete
before it is paid off put heavy charges on the budget, to the detriment
of social obligations, and the gap is vast between the magnitude of the
undertaking and its doubtful utility. Besides, Tsarist Russia also had
to construct on the scale of its vast territory, without finding in this
an historic excuse, any more than the great works of art of the two
continents have spared the people economic crises, unemployment and
misery. The Trans-Siberian, the longest railway in the world, and a
legacy of Tsarism, could evidently not exist in Switzerland; but no Plan
will ever bring the transport system of Siberia or Russia up to the
level of the Confederation's railways, in the matter of regularity,
frequency and hygiene. Turksib, created partly under the old regime and
partly under the new, would do honour, according to Stalin's reasoning,
as much to the former as to the latter. There are many, however, who
would like to know the number of workmen who died from epidemics in the
process of laying the Soviet sleepers over the sands that are traversed
by a puffing and problematic train; the film of the enterprise is a poor
compensation for all the unfruitful exploitation. The titanic dam at
Dnieprostroy, the work of the American, Colonel Hugh L. Cooper, and
other foreign experts in the Union, measures 770 metres long by 40
metres at the base, but the Zuyderzee dyke is 30 kilometres by 94 metres
at sea level and is 134 metres wide at the bottom, yet Holland is one
six-hundredth the size of the U.S.S.R., and has one twenty-third of its
population, and claims no praise for this block of concrete. Each of
these two works represents in one way or another an economic heresy. The
American turbines at Dnieprostroy will turn uselessly for years for lack
of cables to carry the current, or motors to transform the energy, or
factories to use it. In France, the hydro-electric stations of Kembs and
La Truyière, established without any bluff or noisy plan, are scarcely
less formidable than the Dnieprostroy and have notable differences in
their favour. The Colorado Central takes the prize for audacity
and power, but is not worth to President Hoover, whose name it bears,
the consideration that Stalin would give it. The joint use of the
Magnitogorsk minerals and the Kuznetsk coal, more than 2,000 kilometres
apart, produces steel at an exorbitant manufacturing cost, raised by the
expense of transport and the cost of the high-pressure furnaces, forges
and leadrollers constructed by the Cleveland engineers. The Ford
factories of Nizhni-Novgorod will produce motor-cars destined to founder
in the quagmires, so lacking is the country in serviceable roads. The
model machines from the Tractor Factory at Stalingrad, of American
origin, deteriorate in a year's time in the inept hands of an improvised
working personnel. Not one of these industrial monsters can stand up to
the slightest impartial examination nor prove what Stalin implies in the
hopes of getting away with the deception. The bridges of Newport News,
of Sydney, of the Zambezi are "the biggest in the world" and do not
solve any social problem. No more than do the Eiffel Tower, the Empire
State Building, the Suez and Panama canals, the Saint-Gothard and the
Simplon, the underground canal of the Rove near Marseilles or the
tunnels under the Scheldt at Antwerp and so many other triumphs of
engineering. The U.S.S.R. has as yet nothing to be compared with these,
and it could for a long time to come get along much better without them
than without bread. The Rockefeller Centre was erected at an
unprecedented loss. If the canal from the Baltic to the White Sea, dug
at the command of the G.P.U., by a multitude of unfortunate deported
peasants (286,000 in June 1934, according to I. Solonevich) were to
justify Bolshevism, then the reclaiming of the Pontine marshes would be
an irrefutable justification of fascism. And no language would be enough
to celebrate proportionately the Great Wall of China. The idea has
sprung up spontaneously on many sides of comparing to the Pyramids,
_mutatis mutandis_, these palaces erected in Russia for the housing of
machines by the labour of coolies whose lodging is in wretched hovels.
Historians had already made use of the comparison in connection with
Peter the Great, and the Mensheviks had used it against the "labour
armies" of Trotsky. For grandiose as the "giants" born of the Five Year
Plan may appear in this "Empire of Facades," as Herzen would say, the
waste of funds, the squandering of energy, the losses of every
description are still more grandiose, and the sacrifices in human beings
seem to belong to another age.

Stalin has several times quoted Lenin's allusion to Peter the Great, and
many commentators have used it to suit their purpose. Though now a
commonplace, it is by no means favourable to the socialist principles of
the Bolsheviks. "An apostle of civilisation with a knout in his hands,
the knout in his hand being the persecution of all enlightenment," Peter
could only copy from the West, borrowing the forms without taking the
substance, seeking practical advantages without understanding the
premises, and batching ill-proportioned and fictitious works that were
Often useless, at times harmful and always precarious. Half of his
factories only existed on paper and only about twenty survived him. Of
the thousand vessels, frigates and galleys of his fleet, hardly more
than fifteen were sea-worthy ten years after his death. The senseless
construction of Petersburg at an outlying point of the Empire, and on a
swamp that became a cemetery for thousands of workmen, and the building
of the port of Taganrog under almost similar conditions do not redeem
the horror of his crimes. Quite the contrary. "But at last, the town
exists," wrote Voltaire, pensioned by the Court of Russia and a worthy
precursor of the "intellectuals" hired by Stalin to sing his praises.
Sylvain Maréchal replied in his _History of Russia:_ "To cement the
foundations of new city with the blood of a hundred thousand men is what
Voltaire calls creating a nation. Can one play more impudently with the
poor human species?" Rousseau showed his perspicacity in writing in the
_Social Contract:_ "Peter had imitative genius. He did not have the true
genius, which creates and makes everything out of nothing. A few of the
things he did were good, the greater part were misplaced. Diderot
discovered the truth during his stay in Russia as is proved by his
famous dictum on the "colossus with feet of clay" And Condillac was not
wrong to address himself to Peter in these terms: "You have erected an
immense edifice, but permit me to ask you what are its foundations.
Perhaps you have neglected them so as to occupy yourself only with the
exterior decoration. This magnificent grandeur, which is your creation,
will perhaps disappear with you." He was not the dupe of the "profound
calm -- forerunner of decadence." Another question of the intelligent
Abbé could also be addressed to Stalin: "What have you done to diminish
this overwhelming terror which has accompanied your power and which can
only create mercenaries and slaves?"

The sanguinary Tsar was not the only one to employ these methods. They
show through the more seductive decor put up by his descendants.
Questioned by M. de Ségur on the new buildings in Southern Russia that
were shown to Catherine the Great by Potemkin, the Emperor Joseph II,
who had visited them, replied: "I see in them more brilliance than
reality.... Everything seems easy when you are lavish with money and
men's lives. We could not do in Germany or in France what they risk
here. The master orders, the thousands of slaves work. They are paid
little or nothing, they are badly fed, they dare not let a murmur of
complaint escape them and I know that in three years ... fatigue and the
unhealthiness of the swamps have been responsible for the deaths of
fifty thousand men, without any complaint being made or without a word
having been spoken." His opinion was corroborated in the following
century in Custine's letters. "With the powers of action usurped by this
prince, a true creator would have achieved many quite different
miracles. But the Russian, having made an entrance on the great stage of
the world after everyone else, has only the genius of imitation"; thus
the French traveller speaking of Peter I. "It is only when his people
submit blindly that a master can order tremendous sacrifices to produce
very little" was his reflection at "the colossal childishness" of
Nicholas I, who represented for him, "not the force of a great country
but the uselessly wasted sweat of the wretched people." He defined
Russia thus: "It is a country where the greatest things are done with
the most meagre result." The commands of the master "put life into the
stones, but only by killing men."

There would be novelty in the "planning," if the Plan were not in a very
large measure a nebulous myth which it is impossible to take seriously,
since its sponsors flatter themselves with having transgressed its
fundamental principles under the pretext of speed. This means that they
have accentuated the errors, the lack of balance and the disorders which
they set out to remedy. A single irrefutable example demonstrates its
inanity. When Stalin, in the speech already quoted, congratulated
himself on a collectivisation three times that of the original Plan,
without having tripled the tools, fertilisers and buildings, and without
even having provided the minimum essentials originally scheduled, he
clearly discredited the principle, which he could not even conceive,
much less apply. Similar statements hold good for industry. With a
rolling stock inferior in quantity and quality to that of 1917, with
worn-out rails, rotten sleepers, and faulty signals, it was not logical
to burden the transport with a triple load, unless deliberately to
provoke catastrophe upon catastrophe and the ruin of the railways;
which, in effect, was what did happen. The Plan aimed in principle at an
economic harmony measured by indices of quantity and quality, of value
and price. From this limited point of view, and if one leaves out of
account the freedom of choice which had been suppressed, it was
necessary to produce a certain volume of raw materials and to transform
them into manufactured articles, but at the same time to reduce
manufacturing costs and to raise the value of money, the salaries and
the general standard of living. But the quantities aimed at were not
obtained; the quality of the products deteriorated, the manufacturing
costs increased, real wages fell, and the notion of comfort grew vague
in the memory of the workers. No matter from what angle it is examined,
the unrealisable Plan has not been carried out. The proof is easily
disentangled from the muddle of statistics deliberately confused by the
ever-changing standards of comparison. And without bothering to refute
in detail a pseudo-scientific charlatanism, which even goes as far as to
predict future crops and consequently meteorological prospects, it is
only necessary to emphasise certain fundamental data to be clear on the
issue.

Stalin estimated the realisation of the industrial programme at 93.7 per
cent, or a production three times that of before the War, and double
that of before the Plan. He did not say on what he based his
calculations, letting it be thought that it was a question of quantities
enumerated in weight or volume, whereas in fact his figures simply
translate an arbitrary value into more or less fictitious roubles. In
fact, if the key industries are examined, we have quite a different
picture. In 1932, 6.2 million tons of iron were cast instead of the 10
calculated in the Plan and the 17 predicted by Stalin at the Sixteenth
Congress. Forty-two million tons of coal were extracted instead of the
75 (according to the Plan), the 90 (control figures) and the 140 fixed
by the Central Committee (decision of the 15th August 1931); 22.2
million tons of naphtha instead of the 45 required by the Central
Committee (announcement of the 15th November 1930); the capacity of the
electrical power reached in theory 13.5 thousand millions of
kilowatt-hours, instead of 22 (according to plan), which says nothing of
the means of using it. The results are still lower for chemical
products, for copper and other coloured metals, for cement and building
materials. Thus the percentage of achievement in the principal branches
of work is very far from approaching Stalin's round figure, and a
certain percentage must still be deducted for faulty production. It must
be clear to every sane individual beyond the reach of the G.P.U., that
the factories have only been able to make machines within the limits of
the metal and fuel supplies, to say nothing of other restrictive
conditions. The same year, 844 locomotives instead of 1,641 (Plan) were
manufactured, 18,600 coaches instead of 37,000 (Plan), about 50,000
tractors instead of the promised 170,000, and 26,700 automobiles instead
of the 200,000 announced by Stalin at the Sixteenth Congress. No better,
indeed worse, is the actual balance-sheet for the production of spare
parts, minor tools, and articles of current consumption. Thus 2550
million metres of cotton textiles were manufactured against the 4,700
millions of the Plan. Although this was approximately up to pre-War
level, the population had increased and the internal market had been
starved for fifteen years. In vain did Stalin try to present a rise in
price as corresponding with an increase in production.

Almost 35 milliard roubles invested in industry and transport have
given, in quality as in quantity, nothing but deceptive results. Beneath
the whip of a deceitful emulation and an open repression, bad
workmanship ruined an enormous proportion of the goods, sometimes a
quarter, sometimes a half, according to the particular factories -- and
it was no rare case when the losses and throw-outs were three-quarters
the total, or even more. This goes to show again what trust can be put
in the varnished statistics of the Gosplan. So inferior were the
products, that in 1933 there was a decree to punish bad work -- this
"crime against the State" -- with five years of prison. Moreover, the
manufacturing costs, which should have been lowered by one-third in
industry, and by one-half in building, had further increased, according
to official statements, in spite of the subterfuges of accounting used
to confuse the calculations. And the output of the worker, instead of
having doubled according to schedule, persisted at the original level,
four or five times below the established productivity of America. It is
difficult not to be reminded of a bitter reflection of Herzen's, "It
must never be lost sight of that with us all change is only a change of
scenery: the walls are all cardboard, the palaces painted canvas." A
metaphor, certainly, but one which covers a profound truth.

In their ignorance or their audacity, the dictators of the Soviet State
made great play with the 118 milliard roubles sunk in the venture,
instead of the 86 scheduled. But here the fantasy of the figures goes
beyond all semblance of reality. Monetary circulation has increased by
about 6 milliards in four years, instead of 1,250 millions which was set
as the maximum, and this does not include the local money issued to
palliate the scarcity of cash by means of notes and certificates, etc.
(It increased again by two milliards in the two following years.) An
adviser of Peter the Great had persuaded himself that in Russia the
circulation of money depended exclusively on the will of the sovereign,
and very conservative Russian financiers had condemned the gold standard
long before Soviet economists. Stalin listened to experts of the same
school, for whom unlimited note issues did not imply financial
inflation. Nevertheless in four years the rouble had lost nine-tenths of
its value instead of regaining one-fifth of it. Even at this, its
purchasing power was due to administrative circulars and coercive
ordinances of an inexplicable complexity. Left to the mercy of the laws
of exchange the rouble would not have been worth a kopeck. By an
empirical and composite system of tariffs and reckonings, taxes and
rations, which ignored all common standards of value, the relation of
prices to wages varied infinitely, and money changed its value according
to whose hands it was in. Hence, no figure had any precise meaning,
neither the sum total of the national income, evaluated with
governmental despotism, nor the individual balance-sheet, made up of so
many different elements. The nominal salary did not indicate the
standard of living of the recipient, who had to put up with the caprices
of bureaucratic remuneration and with processes of assessment which
defied all stable definition. After stopping the publication of the
balance-sheets of the State Bank, the authorities had to give up
establishing commercial and budgetary indices. In the chaotic state of
finance was reflected the chaos of the whole planned economy,
characterised in its final analysis by an absence of or a contempt for
any plan.

The agricultural disaster, justly compared to the effects of a major
war, caught up and surpassed the financial catastrophe which followed
upon industrialisation. Contrary to the Plan, which specifically
required the encouragement of individual production, 15 million peasant
homes out of 25 million were forcibly collectivised into some 211,000
_kolkhoz_. But the crop of 1932 was only 7 hundredweight to the hectare
and 69.9 million tons in all (against 96.6 in 1913), which was
sufficient, with the abnormal losses and the normal birth-rate, to cause
a famine. And that was in spite of the 10 milliard roubles expended, in
spite of the use of perfected implements, in spite of the periodical
mobilisation of the communists, the frantic agitation led by the press
at each new season, and the "offensives on all fronts," of tillage and
pasture, sowing and harvesting, housing, threshing and stock-rearing and
all the work that is executed peacefully everywhere else in the world.
Stalin admitted that the _kolkhoz_ as a whole worked at a loss, like the
great socialised industry. Other admissions revealed that the 5,383
_sovkhoz_, burdened with endowments and machines, were not yet
productive of revenue. In an array of 147,000 tractors, 137,000 were in
need of major repairs. In the "depots for tractors and machines,"
petrol, oil and spare parts were lacking as well as professional
attention. But the nightmare of collectivisation had been fatal above
all to the livestock, reduced in five years to 160 millions from 276
millions. Statistical fictions only give a feeble idea of the truth as
another admission that Voroshilov allowed to escape him bore witness.
"Not only the horse but the ox, which has become a rare phenomenon in
our Ukraine, aids and will aid the tractor." From this it is easy to
draw conclusions relative to meat, leather and wool. If you add to this
the fact that the productivity per hectare of technical culture (flax,
cotton, beetroot) decreased by half in a population of 165,000,000, the
acute scarcity of cloth and sugar is explained without further
investigation. Thus the main reason for the interminable shortage of
merchandise, and the great famine, which reached its culminating point
in the spring of 1933, are sufficiently clear. The _Sozialisticheski
Vestnik_ rated at 5,000,000 at the least the number of victims of "a
sort of famine artificially-organised" by Stalin, and all reliable
information tends to confirm this figure. It is also the estimate of an
extremely sagacious observer, Mr. W. H. Chamberlin, who is well
qualified to speak on account of the length of his stay in the U.S.S.R.,
and his sympathy for the Russian people.

Whilst outwardly denying the evidences of famine, as he denied the
failure of his rash plans, even though the falsified statistics of his
own bureaux pointed to it, Stalin was nevertheless forced to take some
notice and to check the presumptuous march forward -- to ruin. His
shouts of triumph covered practical instructions which became more and
more modest. It was a question henceforward of concentrating effort, not
on the extension and intensity of production, but on the assimilation of
the technique so dearly paid for, on the improvement of quality, on
productivity of labour and on the lowering of manufacturing costs. By an
apparent paradox, which betrays a lot, the "Bolshevik rhythm" had to
lessen its speed instead of increasing it as mechanisation progressed.
It was no longer a question of L. Sabsovich's book, _The U.S.S.R. in
Fifteen Years_, the textbook of a perfect Bolshevik, in which the author
tabulated a great mass of absurd hypotheses on fifty per cent annual
increase in industrial production from 1933. Stalin was content with
thirteen to fifteen per cent on an average in the course of the second
Five Year Plan embarked upon. And as it is always a long way from the
programme to its realisation, the inevitable halt seems obvious enough.
There was less and less talk of surpassing western capitalism. And with
good cause. With a population two-thirds that of the U.S.S.R., and in a
country already filled with abundance, the United States produced in
1929 about 36 million tons of iron, 546 of coal, 133 of naphtha, 120
milliard kilowatt-hours, 5,651,000 motor-cars, 229,000 tractors, and the
comparison with "one-sixth of the globe" is even more conclusive for
copper -- 1,069,814 against the U.S.S.R.'s 46,694 in the best
year, 1932. Even by falsifying parallels, by the astute choice of a
Soviet maximum and an American minimum, the "corn-boasting" could not
produce results. So much so that no one breathed another word of the
second _piatiletka_, of which Molotov and Kuibyshev had sketched the
main lines a year earlier at the Seventeenth Party Conference,
indicating astronomical figures. The year 1933 went by without a Plan in
the country of Plans.

On the other hand, modifications in the "general line" increased to the
relative, but scarcely perceptible, advantage of private rural economy,
by the restitution of horses and cattle to the cultivators so as to save
the remainder of the stock from total loss, and by the increase of free
trading among the _kolkhoz_ and their members, reductions in taxes and
dues, restrictions in the programme of sowing and stores, etc. The
scarcity of manufactured goods even encouraged giving leases of premises
to the _artels_ of artisans, and providing them with tools. These
precarious expedients did not prevent Stalin from introducing new
coercive measures against the peasants, the chief of which was to instal
near the 2,245 "tractor and machine stations," branches of Party police
under the name of Political Sections. Stalin, of course, could only
conceive of consolidating collectivised agriculture by increasing the
police and bureaucracy.

The famine, whose black blot spread from the Ukraine and the Kouban
district to the lower and middle Volga, to the Caucasus and the Crimea,
over the most fertile lands of Southern Russia, and whose scope was
proportional to the degree of collectivisation, still pursued its
ravages until the 1933 harvest, which was exceptional both for climatic
conditions and for results: 89.9 million tons, calculated on paper by
multiplying the sown area by a supposed yield per hectare, and including
the grain which rotted in the fields, was lost in transport or otherwise
ruined. For the Plan had made provision for everything except barns to
store it in, vehicles to transport it, scales to weigh it and mills to
grind it. If one takes into account the losses, estimated at a quarter,
and the extra mouths to feed, as well as allowing for the insignificance
of exports and the excess of forage left over by the extermination of
horses and cattle, the miserable pre-War level was even then not
attained. Nevertheless, after the horrible period that had been endured,
a certain improvement was felt in food supplies, as is the case in all
backward countries where economic activity depends almost entirely on
the harvest. The price of rationed bread suddenly doubled in August,
which signified a general fall in real wages. But money had depreciated
still more, as prices obtained in the free market proved, where wheat
was sold at two hundred times the official price. Judging by the
extraordinary procedure employed to preserve cereals from pillage,
Stalin was not mistaken as to the real situation of supplies in the
country, nor as to the conversion of the peasants to his singular form
of "socialism." Precautions unheard of in the annals of agriculture were
instituted: day and night watch was kept over the immense plains by
sentinels and mounted guards. Watch-towers had to be erected above the
sea of rye in which to place armed spies. The Communist youth were
mobilised, and even the children, to spy on marauders. It was necessary
to forbid access to the roads and by-paths except to those who had the
password. The press congratulated urchins who had denounced their own
parents, "barbers" guilty of having "shaved" a few handfuls of ears of
corn, hidden them in the bottom of a pail and covered them with herbs or
fruit. Will it ever be known how many starving mouths have paid for such
an attempt on the "socialist property" with their liberty or even their
lives?

In short, the Plan had been fulfilled only in the restricted measure
predicted by those serious and prudent economists, technicians and
specialists who were accused in 1930 of wanting to minimise working
speeds, and were imprisoned and deported for sabotage -- that is to say,
for the crime of clearsightedness. Moreover, it is necessary to write
off a considerable amount for spoiled production, and to add to the
liabilities frozen capital, unfinished production, deteriorated
machinery, wasted resources and unused new material. In a manner exactly
the reverse of true economic progress, the acquirement of technique led
to a destruction of wealth, to an increase in costs and to the
dissipation of energy.

Without the foreign bourgeoisie, with its industrialists and bankers,
its architects and engineers, its advances and credits, its patents of
invention, processes of manufacture and implements of every kind, Stalin
would never have obtained the minimum of what it was possible to obtain
by better and more rational, cheaper and more fruitful, and more human
methods. He had sacrificed consumption to production, agriculture to
industry, the disinherited country to the parasitic towns, light
industry to heavy industry, the working classes to the bureaucratic
patriciate, and, in short, the man to the machine; only to end in
anomalies, disproportions, and uncoordinated results which were never
worth the expense.

By its dictatorship over prices, the State had been able to sell very
dearly what it bought very cheaply, and thus, with other too well-known
methods of despoliation, it robbed the whole population to the exclusive
profit of a new parasitic class. When State-controlled agriculture and
industry worked at a loss, the deficiencies dragged in their wake an
excess of privation and suffering, crowned by a "sort of
artificially-organised famine." Certainly the collective effort has laid
the costly foundations of new metallurgical and chemical industries, and
created armament factories which strengthened the military power. But to
offset this, there had been an accumulation of failures in finance,
transport, agriculture and animal breeding, which forbade incurring an
armed conflict at the risk of complete breakdown. I order to give the
people of the U.S.S.R. the means of fighting, Stalin had taken from them
every reason for defending themselves. Far from having freed his country
from dependence on other countries, and isolating it from the world
market as an autarchy, he had made its economy more than ever dependent
on more developed and better equipped nations, as much for repairs and
spare parts as for the replacement of imported implements. On the other
hand, he fired the imagination of the young generation with works of
imposing grandeur, awakened in them a utilitarian mysticism towards
mechanisation and technique, stirred up a Soviet chauvinism, blessed
with a revolutionary terminology, but directed to purely national ends.
He had, besides, gone beyond the ephemeral and burdensome successes of
outward display, by masterfully exploiting, in the tradition of Tsarism,
the ignorance of the public, the credulity of the working class, the
vanity of the intellectuals, the venality of the press and the
corruption of the politicians.

Imitating Peter I, who paid the press of the day to spread throughout
Europe the rumours of his imaginary victories over Charles XII long
before Poltava, he went to great expense to broadcast recitals of his
political triumphs and descriptions of his majestic works. But the
Russians have brought their powers of persuasion to a fine art, and
delight in making visitors take mole-hills for mountains and the
statistical exercises of the bureaucrats for palpable realities.
Vladimir Monomach, Grand Prince of Kiev, used to recommend that
strangers should be cordially welcomed "because," he said, according to
Rambaud, "your good or bad reputation depends on the accounts they will
give in their own country." The advice has been followed by his
successors. Even under Peter, one reads in Kliuchevsky, "economic
enterprises produced a strong impression on superficial foreign
observers. Russia appeared to them as a great factory."

Under Nicholas I, to quote again from Custine's inexhaustible collection
of letters, "Moscow prides itself on the progress of its factories....
The Russians are proud of possessing such a great number of fine
buildings to show to foreigners." Stalin has introduced nothing new in
this respect either, except to exaggerate beyond the bounds of all
decency. This is demonstrated by a plethora of eulogistic literature in
which the inexactitude of the facts vies with the inanity of the
commentaries. Tenacious adversary of industrialisation before making
himself its champion in the wrong sense, he became for the New York
_Business Week_ the "Mussolini of Mechanics." But the prestige gained by
such stratagems is of no avail in important matters where the truth
demands its rights. However, the Plan has had as a result the formation
of numerous bodies of mediocre technicians who are not without the
capacity to improve, in the long run, and the education of millions of
adolescents in the needs of industrial production, hastily inculcating
in them the rudiments of general and professional culture, indispensable
to the economic and technical transformation in progress. Education,
restored to some of the discipline of classical pedagogy, had been made
more widely available, although it must not be forgotten that the Party,
in deciding anew in 1934 to introduce universal compulsory education,
showed how much value could be placed on its great "historical"
resolutions of "world" significance. But there again the negative
elements outweigh the positive in a "totalitarian" state, where liberty
of conscience and freedom of expression do not exist, where the
standardised press is only permitted to express the authorised opinion
of the day, where critical thought and scientific objection as well as
political doubt are repressed with more severity than common crimes, and
where the unlettered have a better chance of conserving their
intellectual faculties and their moral health than the dishonest
intellectuals depraved by official mendacity and their subjection to
fear. It only remains to discover the original correlation of production
relations and property forms to the social structure, after fifteen
years of Bolshevik evolution, and to find out if the transitory nature
of the regime tends, as the communist programme claims, to substitute
the administration of things for the government of men.

### 10.4

LENIN exercised power for scarcely more than five years, during which
many contradictions between his theories and his practice had corrected
the bookish concept of an intermediary phase between capitalism and
socialism. Stalin's reign had lasted some ten years when the Party, in
1933, announced the proximity of the golden age of classless society.
But a State no more than an individual can be judged by the ideal which
it glorifies. In actuality, the case is complicated by insoluble
contradictions between the concrete and the abstract, in an extreme
disorder of ideas and values, wherein are confounded the Russian past,
the Soviet present and the immutable traits of despotism, common to all
periods and all climates. Discrimination is necessary to see whether
Stalin really justifies Spencer, who saw in socialism "a future
slavery." Liberal economy whole-heartedly denounced as socialist all
tendencies in the State direction of production, exchange and labour. In
this respect, the edicts of Diocletian on maximum prices and minimum
wages, on agricultural colonies and on trade corporations, could
justifiably find a place in an anthology of socialist legislation -- an
absurd hypothesis.

Stalin has had precursors in antiquity and in the middle ages, both in
the East and West, but there can be no legitimate authority for calling
them socialists in the exact meaning of the term. The most remarkable,
Wang An-shih, lived in China under the Sung dynasty. Assured of the
Emperor's confidence, this bold minister thought he could regenerate his
mediaeval country by so regulating economic life as to make the State
the sole owner of the soil, and the sole buyer and seller of grain. By a
series of laws, which demanded for their application a whole host of
functionaries and a new mandarinate to replace the old, he decreed from
on high a veritable agrarian revolution (equalitarian revision of
valuation and rent, loans of seed against takings in kind, taxation of
commodities, etc.). This was completed by a series of radical reforms,
establishment of a salt tax and recasting of the monetary system, the
creation of a popular militia besides the permanent army, bureaucratic
conscription for the civil service and compulsory education. Of this
"extraordinary experiment in 'statism'" to use the expression of G.
Soulié de Morant, there remained nothing after the death of the "Chinese
socialist of the year one thousand," an inexact expression of an eminent
historian and orientalist, René Grousset, who is not mindful of the
exact terms of sociology. Modern socialism implies, in effect, certain
conditions of historic maturity, namely, the exhaustion of capitalist
resources, the conscious will of the active population, the material
possibilities for the workers to acquire "comfort and liberty." Between
Wang and Stalin there are many similarities of conception and method, at
more than ten centuries' distance, and the analogy holds good in the
final results of the two attempts, i.e. famine and misery. But the
differences are all to the advantage of the great Chinese reformer, too
little appreciated by Abeé Rémusat, Father de Mailla, the Abbé Huc and
other missionaries who have studied from the same sources. In their
_Empire du Milieu_ the brothers Reclus have been less severe. Wang had
read only Confucius and was ahead of his epoch, whilst the theorists of
socialism in a single country pretend to have read Marx, and with no
excuse lag behind the Utopians. If Stalin's dictatorship merits the name
of socialist, the theocratic domination of the Jesuits in Paraguay would
figure strikingly amongst the enterprises of the pioneers of socialism,
side by side with the less famous communities of the monastic
colonisers. The part, albeit subsidiary, played by the workers in the
Bolshevik movement does not alter the matter. Among the African
Bambaras, the blacksmiths crown their chief, but their caste is none the
less despised, beneath all the ritual honours, and there has never been
any attempt to cite these tribes of the Sudan and Senegal as an example
of proletarian democracy.

Russian history throws a better light on the Soviet regime devoid of
soviets, than the arbitrary references to Marxism, of which Stalin
actually represents the antithesis. In particular, it unites the old and
the new modes of mysticism. In the same way as pagan customs persisted
under other forms in Christianity after the baptism of the slave tribes
in the principality of Kiev, many age-old traditions have been
transmitted, under other colours, to Sovietism from Tsarism, both in
spirit and in custom as well as in economic, political and social
organisation. T. G. Masaryk says rightly of the Bolsheviks, "children of
Tsarism" like other Russians: "They have succeeded in suppressing the
Tsar, but they have not suppressed Tsarism. They still wear the Tsarist
uniform, albeit inside out...."

In the fifteenth century, after the capture of Constantinople by the
Turks, Muscovite monks saw in Moscow the third Rome, excluding for ever
the eventuality of a fourth; the doctors and apologists of the Leninist
religion have a similar aim in claiming Moscow as the capital of
universal Communism. At the same period Joseph, "hegoumenos" of the
Volokolamsk monastery, elaborated a doctrine which M. Kizevetter sums up
thus: "Joseph defends a social order founded on a rigorous discipline
which denies the individual the right of doing as he pleases. In the
religious domain he affirms that salvation depends on the punctual
observation of ritual and the literal acceptance of every word of the
Holy Scriptures without any discussion whatever; he approves of the
suppression by the ecclesiastical power of every manifestation of free
thought in religious matters, as well as of the execution of heretics
practised in Moscow...." Dogmatic Bolshevism is more akin to such
conceptions than to socialism, which is inseparable from the idea of
free enquiry and judgment, and which has as its final aim the integral
freedom of the individual. Stalin invokes Lenin on every corner of the
battlefield and makes orthodox pronouncements whilst deporting to icy
temperatures the little children of the so-called kulaks. But Ivan the
Terrible was not lacking, either, in exterior signs of devotion, while
he committed his appalling atrocities. And the murderous rivalry
encouraged among certain young-communists, exhausted by the useless task
of shock-brigading, recalls at times those fanatical disciples of the
Archpriest Avvakum who burned themselves alive to escape the fiery river
of the last Judgment.

It is not subjection to the State which stamps knouto-Soviet Russia with
an original imprint. Under the early Romanovs, the whole population was
made to submit to the State, and in various ways subjected to strict
economic obligations. It had already sought to escape by flight from the
Tsarist and manorial repressions, and the central control could secure
it only by such rudely enforced measures as those later employed under
the Five Year Plan. As early as the seventeenth century Russians were
forbidden to go abroad -- an undoubted precedent for the general
sequestration brought about by Stalin; and books sent from Europe were
not allowed to enter by virtue of a special ukase that still guides the
Glavlit or Soviet censorship. The Tear, sole owner of the country and
the people, made himself the "principal merchant" and the "principal
producer" in the Empire, to use the words of the English doctor, Samuel
Collins. Peter the Great introduced State monopoly in the trade of
articles of immediate necessity and all foreign commerce. Under his
reign, a sort of State capitalism developed, and multiplied the number
of officials by ten. Serfdom grew on a large scale and was introduced
into industry at its inception, apart from the employment of penal
labour. The institution of the internal passports adds one more
resemblance to the sombre Stalin period, when the workers and peasants
within a few years lost their last remaining liberties, like their
predecessors, the free cultivators, who became serfs within the course
of a few centuries, thus reversing the social evolution of the west.
Peter's successors followed in his footsteps -- trade with China became
a monopoly of the Treasury, and under Elizabeth the State took charge of
every possible transaction. And even when capitalism regained its
rights, and re-established competition, from Catherine's time, the
initiative of the Crown remained decisive for the progress of industry
and transport. The military colonies of Alexander I foreshadowed future
agricultural collectivisation on a small scale. The Soviet State, with
more powerful material means, reproduces, condenses and generalises all
these phenomena in a knot of historical conditions incompatible with
intermediate solutions.

That the savage precedents of Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great are
to be recognised in Stalin's outstanding acts is not contested among
observers of Russia. But in each of the principal representatives of the
autocracy, gestures and acts may be found which have their parallels
with contemporary Russia. Catherine used to correspond with Voltaire and
Diderot, but she imprisoned Novikov and banished Radishchev. She took
ideas from Montesquieu and borrowed from Beccaria, but she extended and
consolidated serfdom. She avowed herself an "apostle of light," but she
dared to boast of the mujik's well-being in the midst of a famine. She
rewarded the self-interested praise of the encyclopaedists and employed
the most despicable mercenaries. Stalin, as well, acts quite against his
maxims, encouraging without what he dare not tolerate within. He
supports strikes and promotes subversive acts of which he would crush
the least glimmerings in the U.S.S.R. He buys the favour of well-known
foreign men of letters and gags or banishes Russian writers. He keeps a
whole string of hired adulators in foreign countries. Alexander I, like
his father, posed as a freemason, posed as a Jacobin, quoted Rousseau,
and protested against the Negro slave-trade at the Congress of the Holy
Alliance, while admitting the traffic of souls in his own Empire. Stalin
in the same way calls himself the defender of the workers in the
capitalist countries and is himself their worst oppressor in the
"socialist fatherland." Of Nicholas I, who loved to class himself as an
engineer in order not to be recognised as a policeman, historians draw a
portrait in which one may distinguish many of the features of Stalin's
physiognomy. Between the two absolutisms, the similarities are so strong
that the collection of Custine's century-old letters is worth consulting
again, as one of the best works on the eternal Russia, "where you must
go to see the result of this terrible combination of European science
with Asiatic genius," where "the Government dominates everything and
encourages nothing," where "everybody thinks what nobody says," where
"the absurdities of the parvenu can exist everywhere and become the
appendage of a whole nation," where "boundless evil is inflicted as a
remedy," where the "force of despotism lies solely in the mask of the
despot," where "the reciprocal mistrust of the Government and the
subjects banishes all joy in life," where "the inhabitants, inured to
resignation, counterfeit for themselves an astonishing kind of happiness
composed of privations and sacrifices." Stalin has made more true than
ever the profoundly just reflections of the author whom we have so
frequently quoted: "_in this country an avowed tyranny would be a mark
of progress_."

Whether of divine right or popular origin, all dictators and
dictatorships offer analogies in their methods and _raison d'être_. The
bureaucratic absolutism incarnate in Stalin is no exception to the rule,
with the ancestral Russian tradition that inspires him in spite of the
Soviet novelty in which he decks himself. The combination of ruse and
violence propounded by Machiavelli for the use of the Prince is
practised daily by the General Secretary. But identity of means does not
always presuppose similarity of aims. Bolsheviks from Lenin to Stalin at
first believed that they could arrive at socialist liberty by the evil
means of police constraint. This was before they had made a virtue of
necessity and codified the cruel expedients of civil war for times of
peace, until in the end dictatorial habit became their second nature.
Without the dictators being aware of it, a metamorphosis of the regime
took place, which Stalin, aided by his faults even more than by his
qualities, has been able to consummate and perfect in the sense of
personal power without meeting insurmountable obstacles, still
preserving the revolutionary vocabulary shorn of its initial meaning.
The result is a political architecture of bastard appearance, which at
least two great examples will help us to understand. In Rome, the Empire
"slid" into the Republic to use Seneca's phrase, while it preserved the
exterior symbols. In France, the coinage struck at the beginning of the
Empire bore the legend: "_République Francaise, Napoléon Empereur_."
Caesar gave himself out as the successor of the Gracchi, and Bonaparte
as the successor of the Jacobins. Stalin's Caesarism proceeds from the
same causes and grows on favourable ground: in Tsarist Russia, after the
October manifesto of 1905, there had been quite as bizarre a system,
which the _Almanach de Gotha_ called "constitutional monarchy under an
autocratic Tsar." The Federation of Socialist Soviet Republics, the very
name a fourfold contradiction of the reality, has long ago ceased to
exist to the full knowledge of everyone; only well-meaning but very
young Leninists still hope for its spontaneous resurrection at the end
of the "general line"; the dominating Party has lost all illusions in
this respect and forgotten its socialist programme.

So-called Soviet society rests on its own method of exploitation of man
by man, of the producer by the bureaucracy, of the technician by the
political power. For the individual appropriation of surplus value is
substituted a collective appropriation by the State, a deduction made
for the parasitic consumption of functionaries. Stalin reckoned for 1933
about 8,000,000 functionaries and employees, whose precise income it is
impossible to estimate. But official documentation leaves us no doubt:
the bureaucracy takes an undue part of the produce, corresponding more
or less to the old capitalist profit, of the subjugated classes, which
it submits to an inexorable sweating system. There has thus been formed
around the Party a new social category, interested in maintaining the
established order, and perpetuating the State of which Lenin predicted
the extinction with the disappearance of classes. If the Bolsheviks have
not the legal ownership of the instruments of production and the means
of exchange, they retain the State machinery which allows them all the
spoils by varied circuitous means. The mere freedom from restriction in
imposing retail costs several times higher than manufacturing costs,
contains the true secret of bureaucracies -- technical exploitation,
characterised moreover by administrative and military oppression.

It is of little importance that the small minority, thus privileged at
the expense of the great majority, is not a class like the bourgeoisie,
or a caste like the Brahmans. In the sixteenth century, the Cossacks
also constituted a kind of class, with its economic and political
prerogatives unknown in any other country except in Russia. From
Siberia, Rakovsky and his deported friends wrote as early as 1930: "From
a workers' State with bureaucratic deformations, as Lenin defined the
form of our Government, we are developing into a bureaucratic State with
proletarian-communist survivals. Under our very eyes has formed and is
being formed a great class of directors, which has its internal
subdivisions and which increases through calculated co-option and direct
or indirect nominations (bureaucratic advancement or fictitious
electoral system). The element which unites this original class is a
form, also original, of private property, to wit, the State-power." And
they took their stand very pertinently on a phrase of Marx, "The
bureaucracy possesses the State as private property." Just as the
Consulate was neither a republic nor a monarchy, the Secretariat is
neither a democracy nor Tsarism, the consequence of a revolution which
was neither socialist nor bourgeois.

According to Bogdanov, whose works on the subject go back to just after
the first revolution, a proletariat deprived of real encyclopaedic
culture, and general knowledge of organisation, will never be capable of
seizing the power or keeping it in order to transform society along
communist lines. And the Bolshevik regime, in spite of the intentions of
its founders, engenders a dominant class of politicians, administrators,
intellectuals and technicians, under which exploitation and oppression
by a State of an original type persists under new forms. This last
observation, _post factum_, may be found again, less strongly argued as
an intuitive premonition, in one of the theses of the _Intellectual
Worker_, a work published under the name of Volsky at the beginning of
the century by a Polish revolutionary, Makhaisky, well known then but
since forgotten. A number of communists have arrived at the same ideas
by practice and not theory, but have been unable to express them in the
country of official communism. Others have reconsidered, within
themselves, the idealist notion of the "historic mission of the
proletariat," in order to tackle the fundamental revision of doctrines
which make too much of an abstraction of the real man, whether bourgeois
or proletarian. It remains to be seen whether such conceptions, whatever
they are worth, will regain force, wide currency and vitality for the
generations destined to take their lesson from the revolution, above
all, from the phase which we may call, in Herzen's word,
_retrovolution_.

This revolution has passed through three principal stages, each one of
some five years' duration. After War Communism, the vain attempt at a
complete economic nationalisation, Lenin's N.E.P. was an attempt to
control a composite economy, tolerating a sane competition between the
State sector and capitalist initiative so as to realise by degrees a
national socialisation. But Stalin, incapable of following this
political heritage of harmonising industry and agriculture, and
balancing production and consumption, preferred the security of an
integral statism to the risks of a special test which the N.E.P.
implied. His "great turn" was only possible at the price of mass
slaughter at its inception and of absolute mass servitude in the present
and future. To take this course, a great contempt for human life and
dignity was necessary and also an entire misunderstanding of the
spiritual postulates of socialism. Stalin had the singular courage of
taking upon himself the most atrocious responsibilities, whilst still
continuing to make use of a worn-out language. But the edifice built in
fifteen years of Bolshevism will endure only under an unlimited
pretorian dictatorship, and could not resist an upheaval of any
importance. The Russian people have always benefited by wars which shook
the ruling power -- unveiled its weaknesses and excited general
discontent. The Crimean War hastened the liberation of the serfs, the
Russo-Japanese War unleashed the first revolution, the World War
precipitated the fall of Tsarism. There is every evidence that Stalin's
regime, if it had to rely on its own strength, could not withstand the
supreme test any better.

It is easy for a State which monopolises armaments, along with
everything else, to break strikes and to crush peasant revolts,
distributed over an immense area. The hesitant military intervention of
the Allies after Brest-Litovsk was only a mockery, as Lenin recognised
without any pretence. But a war of long duration would demand other
national and moral resources than interior repression or the first
campaign of the Red Army. Neither industry nor agriculture, and still
less transport, is ready in the U.S.S.R. to endure the high tension of a
modern war. A report of Kaganovich admits 62,000 railway accidents for
the year 1934 alone, 7,000 locomotives put out of action, 4,500 trucks
destroyed and more than 60,000 damaged. These figures increased in the
first months of 1935, and there were "hundreds of dead, thousands of
wounded." After, just as before, the Five Year Plan, the inhabitants had
to undergo hours and hours of waiting and interminable formalities to
get a needle in Moscow, or a nail in the provinces, or a little salt
practically anywhere, a railway ticket, a box of matches, a gramme of
quinine. Stalin allows himself the frequent spectacle of imposing
parades with defiles of tanks and aeroplanes, but he does not realise
that in war-time his engines will lack oil or petrol, his artillery will
lack munitions, and he will be unable to repair them as soon as they are
put out of commission. He may condemn to death for culpable negligence
the mechanics and drivers who have escaped from accidents, but that
cannot improve the railways or the rolling stock. Whether in regard to
equipment, re-stocking, "management," or sanitary services, nothing
encourages the rulers to optimism regarding organisation and technique.

The reports of the G.P.U., on the state of mind of the population, gives
them no more assurance. The peasants hope for any sort of change, and
are only waiting for arms to settle their arrears of accounts with their
oppressors. The workers feel scarcely less aversion to the hierarchy of
secretaries, in spite of all the propaganda employed to convince them of
their advantageous position. The youth alone, which knows nothing of the
recent past or of life in foreign countries, accepts with elation the
ideology of Soviet chauvinism and would defend the frontiers without
reservation if not with enthusiasm. But its warlike impulses, so
vigorous in expeditions without peril and without glory against the
unarmed peasants, will lose vigour under cannon and machine-gun fire.
The Red Army, reinforced by a partial mobilisation, would suffice for
the protection of the U.S.S.R. in a conflict limited to neighbouring
countries, but not in a conflagration world-wide in scope, entailing
general mobilisation. Stalin is aware of this, as is proved by the
pliant manoeuvres of his diplomacy whose flexibility borders on
resignation and betrays a significant anxiety.

For fifteen years, and above all since Lenin's death, the Bolsheviks
have vociferously announced an approaching and even imminent general
conflict. They have denounced the aggressive intentions of every country
against themselves and accused specifically France, England and the
United States of fomenting a new armed intervention in Russia. According
to them, the League of Nations was only a "League of Brigands," a war
machine erected against their socialist fatherland, and every European
and international agreement, from the Locarno Treaty to the Kellogg
Pact, concealed "a sword directed against the Soviet Union." Under the
most futile pretexts, they discovered menacing preparations of hostility
everywhere and in every country and sounded the alarm at home and, with
less reverberation, in the working-class centres of other countries.
They never found enough sarcasm or insults to hurl at pacifism, wherein
they detected the most treacherous enemy of the revolution. But Stalin
operated a complete volte-face after the victorious exploits of Japan in
Manchuria. It was in the same place where the Red Army under Blücher had
three years previously inflicted a military "lesson" on the Chinese to
safeguard Russian "rights" in a railway, that the love of peace now
counselled a retreat before the Japanese. From 1932 onwards, the
U.S.S.R. concluded a series of non-aggression pacts or friendly
ententes, first with Romania and Poland and later with France and the
United States, those very States whose anti-Soviet machinations and
"war-like designs" the rulers of Russia were incessantly unmasking and
branding.

Already Litvinov, at Stalin's orders, had proposed universal disarmament
with striking insistency, but in the tradition of the famous rescript of
Nicholas II, which was the forerunner of the Hague Conference. In 1933,
the advent of Hitler in Germany accentuated the pacific tendencies of
Bolshevism. Everything that had been detestable became excellent and
vice-versa. Stalin and Molotov had no scruples in singing the praises of
the "League of Brigands." They opposed the revision of the territorial
clauses of the Versailles Treaty, which had been the objects of their
incessant vituperation. They hastened to seek the support of the
"imperialist diplomacy" of France, "the most aggressive and militaristic
country in the world," as Stalin had said at the last Party Congress, a
country which, according to Leninist orthodoxy, "had not ceased to
provoke war against the U.S.S.R." In 1934, they honoured as an "eminent
foreign _savant_" the very Marshal d'Espérey whom their press had always
considered the "executioner" of the Hungarian Soviet Republic. They
ordered their pseudo-communist stipendiaries in every country to make a
rapprochement with those whom they had branded the day before as
"social-traitors" and "social-fascists," meanwhile dictating a new
demagogy under the form of moderation. At home they made patriotism the
order of the day. Not even the cult of the "socialist fatherland," but
of the "fatherland" without trimmings. However, their policy -- peace at
any price -- was clarified by an unusual decree exempting the peasants
of Eastern Siberia -- from the Baikal Lake to the Maritime Province-from
all or a part of the taxes and dues -- the _kolkhoz_ for ten years and
the other farms for five. By restoring agricultural liberty in a vast
region in danger of invasion, they attempted, somewhat tardily, to
instil a little patriotism into farmers ready to welcome the invaders.
It would be difficult to imagine an implicit confession more conclusive.
But there are others, such as the new terrorist decree of June 1934,
which gave warning of the death penalty for "treason to the fatherland"
(the simple "flight" into other countries of a Soviet subject, civil or
military, was thus classified); and the decree designated the whole
adult family of a deserter as hostages to be imprisoned from five to ten
years if they did not denounce their relative and for five years if they
were unaware of the "crime." Such preventive measures tell a long story
and show the extent of solidarity between rulers and ruled.

The defeat so longed for by an enslaved people, with the exception of
the privileged Party members, the bureaucracy, the social cadres and the
young loyalist generation, would be, for the Stalin of legend, the
beginning of the end. The dictator would have no alternative but to put
himself at the head of a frank social reaction and re-establish private
ownership of the means of production or else fall beneath the debris of
his own system. The Soviet State capitalism, formulated by Lenin and
once debated by Trotsky and Bukharin, who preferred to speak of State
socialism, would then evolve in a direction diametrically opposed to the
inconsistent view of the few Bolsheviks who have remained faithful to
their principles. There exists no bourgeoisie to seize power in the
Soviet Union. The proletariat, demoralised by the secret spying and the
repression exercised in its own name, bureaucratised to its core, and
composed of ignorant mujiks, has for a long time been powerless to take
its own destinies in hand. The disintegrated and paralysed peasant
population always has an influence on events, but indirectly and
indistinctly. Functionaries, intellectuals and technicians, anxious for
security, will rally round the new masters in advance, being unable even
to intervene as autonomous elements if the upheaval goes beyond the
limits of an internal palace revolution. The police and the army are the
only organic forces capable of revising the political statute in a
crisis of the regime. But it is otherwise with respect to the economic
basis, determined by a combination of national conditions, historic
causes and general characteristics inherent in the twilight of
capitalist civilisation. The greater part of nationalised industry in
Russia has no individual owners nor any who could lay claim to it
according to the old laws, and a return to petty agricultural
exploitation seems less and less practicable. Any future order will have
to face up to the burden and management of a collective property unique
in the world. Whatever judgment one may make on the transformations
accomplished, some of them are ineffaceable. Economic liberalism will
not find a rebirth in Russia at a time when it is declining everywhere
else. Nor will there arise in the predictable future any true political
democracy, inconceivable on the scale of such a large State even on the
hypothesis of dismemberment. The exposure of its realities can indicate
far better than theoretical definitions the probable perspective and the
aftermath of a political disaster, if these contradictory data are borne
in mind.

All objective observations are agreed in asserting the absence of any
communist orientation in the industrialised U.S.S.R. Against the grey
background of common poverty, privation and want, social injustice and
inequality can be easily seen. Wages vary enormously, and the advantages
accorded to the most favoured aggravate contrasts that are more odious
than in any capitalist country. Stalin had been an unconscious leveller
until the day he became aware of the inconvenience of equalitarianism,
depersonalisation and irresponsibility. In 1934 he insisted on his
latest discovery. "Tastes and needs are not, and cannot be identical and
equal in quality and quantity, either in a socialist period or in a
communist period." To the excessive levelling of the unprivileged
majority, for whom collectivisation meant a complete turning of the
tables, succeeds a systematically inverse process. But there persists,
as a symbol, the construction of dismal, comfortless and unattractive
barracks to house the mass of the workers, considered as numbers on a
register. In copying capitalism, the bureaucracy takes the worst as its
model, apart from founding a few exemplary houses and institutions for
the seduction of benevolent foreign tourists. Millions of women are
employed in the most distasteful and strenuous work in heavy industry
under the hypocritical pretext of emancipation. In addition to the
so-called seven-hour day, supplementary odd jobs, obligatory attendance
at the sad comedy of meetings, anxious seeking after the necessary
provisions, depressing queueing at shop-entrances, etc., absorb all
leisure and degrade the individual, already obsessed with the problem of
feeding himself, dragging him down to a semi-animal existence. The
knouto-Soviet State is the only one where the proletariat is forced, not
only by means of periodic pretences of voluntary loans, to deprive
itself of the meanest possible remuneration, but to put up a show of
being happy about it. It is also the only place wherein the defenceless
workers are shot in punishment for accidents due to worn-out material or
administrative carelessness and where the poverty-stricken risk the
death sentence for harmless transgressions like theft or petty pillage
of crops.

Such things would be impossible without the ruthless restraint of a
police and army privileged in every respect -- better fed, clothed,
housed and with better opportunities of recreation than the other
categories of "citizens." Under Menzhinsky's nominal and Yagoda's
effective presidency, the G.P.U. constitutes a veritable State within a
State, with its civil and military staff, its own productive
enterprises, its better supplied and better served eating places, its
property, its workshops, its _sovkhoz_, with even bureaux for technical
studies and labour service, well supplied with imprisoned engineers and
deported workmen, whose forced labour is duly exploited. In practice its
power is limited only by the Will of Stalin. Protective legality for the
Soviet subjects is sometimes a trap, sometimes a fiction. Not that there
is any lack of texts -- chancelleries and archives abound in them, as
under Tsarism. "No country in the world has a greater abundance of laws
than Russia," Lenin wrote at the beginning of the century. But Michelet
had stressed: "There is no law in Russia. The sixty volumes of laws that
the Emperor has had compiled are a vast mockery." And Custine had noted
even earlier: "After a few months' stay in Russia you no longer believe
in laws." Here again Sovietism does not advance over the past -- quite
the contrary. To save the revolution, especially if nobody is
threatening it, the G.P.U. arrogates to itself every possible law, from
the most terrible to the most ridiculous.

Inquisitorial and penal despotism carried to this extreme kills all
interest in work, all spirit of initiative, all sense of responsibility.
Thus he benefits most who shirks his duties and obligations and blames
his subordinates. The bureaucracy imagines it can supplement individual
or collective zeal by millions of bits of paper, and draws up an
abundance of futile circulars and unlimited questionnaires that nobody
knows anything about, whether received or returned. Meantime, from the
highest to the lowest, everybody looks to a superior command before
carrying out the meanest current task. This obliges the Secretariat or
the Politbureau to think of everything and to regulate everyday life in
its minutest details. Almost every day the press publishes under
Stalin's and Molotov's signatures, a long, solemn and circumstantial
decree relative to some banal task necessitating not the slightest
governmental intervention.

For example, on the 11th February 1933, the public, whether interested
or otherwise, received minute instructions on the treatment of horses,
bulls and camels, on the rest to be accorded to pregnant mares, the
quality of hay, straw and bran to reserve for beasts of burden, the way
to curry and shoe them, to harness and yoke them, arrange their stables,
couple males and females, etc., the whole interlarded with menacing
injunctions, and punctuated with warnings of the rigours of the law.
Other orders in the same style dictate minutely the conditions of
furnishing the State with sunflower oil or potatoes, or the manner in
which to gather cotton, or beetroot. In place of the tutelary and
simplified administration -- the cheap government promised by the
socialist programme -- there is a complicated, expensive, vexatious and
sterile regime.

Its repulsive effect may be seen in literature as well as in social
life. State Bolshevism has produced neither a man nor an idea nor a book
nor a great work. Nobody could think of holding the regime responsible
for this, if it did not stifle original talent and creative genius,
irreconcilable with narrow terrorist discipline. The renown of the best
contemporary Russian writers will not enhance the greatness of the Steel
Secretary, any more than the glory of Pushkin, Gogol or Lermontov gave
lustre to the Iron Tsar. In arts and sciences as in philosophy and
history, merit, intelligence and knowledge date from a period before
Stalin, and owe nothing to this new autocracy, which tends to level
character downwards, determines the duty of consciences and annihilates
everything so as to have nothing to fear, contributing nothing or less
than nothing to the treasury of culture. Even in the domain of
cinematographic art, to which the Russian innovators have brought their
splendid gifts, so well-known in the theatre, and whose purely national
qualities must not be imagined as specifically Soviet, the very fine
promise has been retarded, initiative choked. Rare communist writers
worthy of attention among the younger group, like M. Sholokov or F.
Gladkov, would have emerged and matured far better under Tsarism, like
their elders Gorky or Mayakovsky whose principal works date from before
the revolution. We know that their only choice was between the official
ideology and nothing.

From 1925, Stalin brought to art and literature the disciplinary methods
in force in the Party and the State. He aimed only at combating the
preponderant influence of Trotsky and Trotskyists like Voronsky and
Polonsky, literary critics and directors of the principal reviews. In
the _Federation of Soviet Writers_, the _Pan-Russian Union of Writers_
group, the most important through the quality and prestige of its
members, was suspected of some independence of spirit and sympathy for
Trotsky's personality. To gain a point, Stalin did not hesitate to
confer a fictitious authority on the _Association of Proletarian
Writers_, nine-tenths composed of incompetents or simple scribblers. It
was the beginning of an era of humiliations, denunciations,
provocations, and persecutions which obliged true writers to take refuge
in subjects with no reference to the present, childhood memoirs or
historical novels, and which reduced to silence or retraction the
"travelling companions" Of the communists, as Trotsky called I. Babel,
E. Zamiatin, B. Pilnyak, A. Tolstoy, L. Leonov, C. Fedin, V. Ivanov, V.
Katayev, M. Zoshchenko, L. Seifulina, G. Oliesha, M. Bulgakov,
Veressayev and others. The sycophants of the _Association_, domesticated
by the Party, were licenced to impose their unreadable productions on
the public, and to censure the most eminent authors. Drawn up in shock
brigades to perpetrate their extravagances, some decided to "conquer
power in literature," to raise "shock-brigades in poetry," to trace "the
Bolshevik line in artistic creation," to assure "a class vigilance on
the edition front"; other alleged champions of the "proletarian hegemony
in art" proclaimed the necessity of a "Five Year Plan for poetry" and a
"Magnitogorsk of Literature." The slogan was raised to "outstrip
Shakespeare and Tolstoy." A veritable carnival of folly triumphed along
with the intellectual prostitution.

After Stalin's intervention regarding "Trotskyist contraband" in the
historical works of the Party, the proletarian musicians declared: "In
the light of Comrade Stalin's letter, new and great tasks arise on the
musical front. Down with rotten liberalism with its bourgeois resonances
and inimical class theories." And they undertook to "revise the scoring
of the composers of the past, beginning with Beethoven and Moussorgsky."
Stalin's letter was to make of "each Soviet orchestra a collective
struggle for authentic Marxist-Leninism." The communist cell of the
Conservatory was accused of a "right deviation" by reason of its liking
for a "conductor of doubtful political opinions." After music --
painting. Such and such an art critic denounced a "counter-revolutionary
landscape," another obscure and ponderous nobody proscribed Rembrandt
and Reubens. On the other hand, awards and medals went to the dullest
reproductions, to recompense legends such as "Mauser, the War-Horse of
Comrade Voroshilov" or "Grandmother of a Communist Girl." The Moscow
museums were enriched with explanatory placards, according to which
Renoir and Degas represent "rotten capitalism," Gustav Moreau "the art
of the plutocracy," Cézanne "the epoch of heavy industry," and Gauguin
"colonial policy."

To the same category of inanities belong "the struggle for the dialectic
on the front of mathematics," and the "offensive on the philosophy
front," whilst others extol Leninist physics, Soviet chemistry, or
Marxist mathematics. To this may be added manifestations of delirium
such as Krylenko's at the congress of chess players in 1932. "We must
finish once and for all with the neutrality of chess. We must condemn
once and for all the formula 'chess for the sake of chess,' like the
formula 'art for art's sake.' We must organise shock-brigades of
chess-players, and begin the immediate realisation of a Five Near Plan
for chess." These clownish monstrosities extracted from the Soviet
circus as typical examples of the collective insanity let loose by
Stalin in an intolerable atmosphere, would have raised a burst of
hilarity, were it not for the agonising presence of the G.P.U. behind
the actions of the execrated _Association_ and behind various communist
factions of demoralised intellectuals, immoral and uncultured, and more
capable of doing harm to an elite than producing anything themselves.
Certain men of letters were able to escape the cruelty thanks to
Stalin's capricious protection, others expatriated themselves with great
difficulty, but the exceptions do not alter the rule. A revolutionary of
the quality of Mayakovsky was not able to escape in 1930 except by
suicide, as did Essenin, another great mal-adjusted poet, in 1926;
likewise the proletarian poet, Kusnietzov, the symbolist poet, Vladimir
Pyast, and the revolutionary writer Andrew Sobol. This gives some
conception of the tragic situation of artists as well as workers and
peasants. The favour accorded to B. Pasternak would have allowed him to
survive under no matter what despotism and indicates even more clearly
the inhuman conditions in which the majority of his confreres are
stagnating. And one can well understand the conversions, prostrations,
and contritions obtained from the Soviet intelligentsia, to the shame of
the parvenus of the dictatorship. In 1932, with his usual abruptness and
brutality to the weak, Stalin suppressed by a stroke of his pen the
_Association_, producer of so much evil, which had served him as an
instrument. He ordered the fusion of all writers' groups. He affects in
aesthetic matters a very liberal breadth of view. But there has remained
the evil of an arid conformism in Soviet art and literature, absolutely
incompatible with any sort of socialism or communism.

The same contradiction finds definite confirmation in the plebiscite,
contrived by every possible means of corruption and intimidation for the
purpose of perching Stalin at the top of an incredible scaffolding of
lies and impostures, and of forging for him the renown of a great man,
of a hero, "_sans peur, et sans reproche_" of a protean and universal
genius. The hagiography composed in honour of the dead Lenin is nothing
besides the canonisation of the living Stalin. Followed up with a spirit
of consecutiveness rare in the U.S.S.R., the enterprise reveals a
continued tendency towards the crystallisation of a personal power that
has the characteristics at once of Tsarism, Bonapartism and Fascism,
with Oriental methods and American pretensions.

### 10.5

NO INK can transcribe the systematic stimulation inaugurated on the
occasion of Stalin's fiftieth birthday, and prolonged since in a
crescendo of adulation, artificial veneration and adoration. Quotations
can give only a very poor idea of it, since a few lines cannot sum up
whole drifts of apologetic literature or reproduce typographic
variations and illustrate the assorted iconography. It is incessant
repetition of various processes which goes to fashion minds and which is
able to determine an effective current among the crowds.

After enlivening a slightly drab biography by attributing to Stalin
everything that should have been laid to the account of Lenin, Trotsky
and others, the bureaucratic _camarilla_, guided by experience, soon
learned to forestall the desires of its master, to anticipate his
intentions and stimulate his greeds. From 1930 onwards there began a
contagious outbidding among courtiers of every category, bent on
outdoing the most obsequious or the cleverest. Scarcely had it passed
into circulation than the word "genius" became obligatory, and he who
neglected to write it for any reason, or without a reason, rendered
himself liable to suspicion, and exposed himself to grievous
vicissitudes. Shameless and sordid servility suggested a thousand ways
of advancement in a career by glorifying the tyrant. He was painted, he
was sculptured in Napoleonic attitudes. There already existed a
Stalingrad, a Stalino, a Stalin, a Stalinabad, Stalinsk, and
Stalin-Aoul, but ingenious functionaries continue to bestow his name on
new towns in so far as appropriate geographical terminations can be
found: Stalinissi and Stalinir in Georgia, Stalinogorsk in Russia. The
public is wondering what is restraining Stalin from bequeathing his name
to Moscow, since the highest peak of the Pamirs already bears it. You
can no longer count the innumerable institutions and establishments
already under the same ensign. Careerist engineers call an extra-hard
steel "stalinite." The Soviet executive responded to a unanimous and
unforced desire by conferring on Stalin the second order of the "Red
Flag." He later decided to recompense services rendered to industry with
a medal struck with his inevitable effigy, which is scattered throughout
newspapers, is pasted all over walls, and, by an involuntary but all the
more admirable symbol, reigns in the empty windows of shops denuded of
goods.

The men of letters, above all, vie with each other in dithyrambic
servility, hoping to gain some favour, a better paid post or a more
copious ration, or-a passport for foreign countries. They know that
Stalin is racked by a most painful sentiment of intellectual inferiority
-- Bukharin had been able to discern it long since -- and is
particularly avid of praise for his erudition and culture which are
sadly limited. Here the truth loses all semblance of fact. Stalin "has
always been distinguished by his profound understanding of literature,"
said someone in the review, _At the Literary Post_. He ranks amongst the
"profound connoisseurs and critics of Hegel," according to a contributor
to _Revolution and Culture_. He is one of "the most authoritative
specialists in contemporary philosophic problems," says a third. "In
reality, certain pronouncements of Aristotle have only been fully
deciphered and expressed by Stalin," wrote a fourth in the _Cultural
Front_, its outlandish gibberish penetrated with a pungent mockery. Rut
this presumptuous daring is no more than a very cheap compliment, and
you will find presently from a fifth encomiast that Socrates and Stalin
are the highest peaks of human intelligence. One pedagogue announced in
the most casual manner at the Communist Academy, "the full significance
of Kantian theories can be finally embodied in contemporary science only
in the light of Comrade Stalin's last letter" -- that same scurrilous
letter on "putrid liberalism" and "Trotskyist contraband." "Every
section, every line of Stalin's reasoning provides the most fertile
theme for artistic works," asserts a manifesto from the _Association_ in
commenting on a confused and interminable speech about the Plan, and it
invites all writers and critics to meditate long and seriously on the
text in question. In Soviet Land, a prose poem magnifies "the great
face, the great eyes, the great and incomparable brow" of Stalin, whose
appearance produces the effect of "a ray of summer sunshine." The
_Literary Gazette_ is not afraid to extol him as a stylist: "It is up to
linguistics and criticism to study Stalin's style." This time the insult
is obvious, the satire certain, and one might expect pitiless reprisals;
but the eulogy is allowed to pass like the others. The editor of
_Izvestia_ declares in Congress: "On the threshold of the new age stand
two unequalled titans of thought, Lenin and Stalin," and he concludes,
"Can anyone really write on anything unless he knows his Stalin? Never!
Without Stalin no one can understand anything or write anything of
interest." Demian Biedny, fallen into disgrace, tries to purchase pardon
by exclaiming at a meeting, "Learn to write as Stalin writes." The same
poetaster has lavished praise on others in the same vein. A literary
woman sees Stalin quite simply as the direct successor of Goethe. One of
Kalinin's essays ends with the words, "Ask me who best understands the
Russian language and I reply -- Stalin." At the time of the tercentenary
of Spinoza's birth, _Pravda_ sees its way to insert in large letters
among various philosophic extracts from Marx, Engels and Lenin, several
quotations from Stalin which had nothing to do with either Spinoza or
philosophy. Yet Stalin accepts this clumsy rubbish without raising an
eyelid. After Aristotle, Socrates, Kant and Hegel, one Spinoza more or
less is nothing to worry about. "There is no flattery too outrageous to
offer this power which compares itself to the gods," wrote Juvenal in
other times but in similar circumstances.

An indescribable apotheosis took place in 1934, when Stalin was pleased
to call the Seventeenth Party Congress, three and a half years after the
sixteenth, followed next day by a purge which lasted over a year and
"cleaned up" about 300,000 unworthy members. Everything gravitated then
around the celebrations of the most hated man in the Soviet Union.
Elaborate preparation created the atmosphere, companies of sycophants
and individual champions zealously outdoing each other in panegyric.
Everyone busily collected and analysed the most banal platitudes of
their idol and called them "world-historical" maxims. With the slightest
pretext and on the flimsiest motives, orators and journalists vied in
reiterating: "Stalin was right..." or "As Stalin said ..." and everyone
was at pains to invent new epithets of praise, for "shock-brigadier,"
"legendary figure," "beloved commander," "genial thinker," and "adored
Stalin" lose their force by dint of repetition. At the opening of the
Congress, the repertory swelled with new hyperboles, like that of
Bukharin who styled Stalin "the field-marshal of the revolutionary
army." The formula went as far as congratulating the "chief of the world
proletariat," co-responsible for all the defeats of the Third
International since Lenin's death, more personally responsible for the
rout of 1927 in China, and directly responsible, in 1933, for the blind
policy which brought communism in Germany from shameful bankruptcy to
helter-skelter disorder and irreparable retreat without striking a blow.
During the Congress a continuous hosanna went up from dawn to dusk on
the "steel colossus," the "great engineer," the "great pilot," the
"great master," the "great architect," the "great disciple of the great
master," the "greatest of the theorists," the "finest of the Leninists,"
and finally the "greatest of the great...." Stalin is genial, very
genial, most genial: he is wise, very wise, most wise; he is great, very
great, the greatest.... Superlative declension became the rule, and it
was printed every day in every column and page of each newspaper, with a
fawning subservience and ecstasy quite untranslatable. In the Congress,
modestly styled "the Congress of conquerors," the record was beaten by
one of the favourites, Kirov, who hailed "the greatest leader of all
times and all nations." The speeches opened and ended with a profession
of faith in the superman's glory, amid highly spontaneous ovations and
irrepressible acclamations. It is impossible to describe the reception
accorded to Stalin himself when he read the report of the Central
Committee. After the Congress, there was an endless echo in local
assemblies, press columns, resolutions and telegrams.

That is only one panel of the diptych. The other represents the
inexpressible ruin of the vanquished. For at the moment of supreme
exaltation, Stalin yet wished to feast himself with "sweet vengeance."
He made his unfortunate adversaries lash themselves in public, confess
their abjection to the tribunal, and cringe under the shouts of his
minions, rabid enough to trample them underfoot. Once more capitulators
of the Right and of the Left admitted their errors, and some were
cowardly enough to make accusations against each other. We need not have
any doubt that they exhausted the utmost resources of their vocabulary
in order to pour forth a feigned enthusiasm about the victor whom they
were cursing in their hearts. A dirty business this, that defies
description and comment alike, in which neither cheater nor cheated was
taken in by the falsity of the situation. Yet nothing could convince the
Bolsheviks in their frenzy of the shame of false repentance and
ignominious persecution. "Among us, it is as easy to acquit as to
condemn," wrote Gorky; but in this mentality "you can see a solicitude
to acquit one's self of one's own failings in advance." In making his
report Stalin had stated: "At this Congress there is nothing else to
expose, no one else to attack." In spite of this, blows were not spared
against Trotskyism already retracted and annihilated many times, against
supposed heresies rebutted and liquidated, against time-honoured
opponents already rolled out flat and won over to the integral Stalinist
orthodoxy. It is certain that the inflexible police and prison methods
of Stalin are appropriate to the system, for they ensure him results in
advance. At the close of the Congress, Sosnovsky, one of the last
well-known partisans of the Opposition, sent his submission from
Siberia, followed shortly by that of Rakovsky. Both disavowed their
discomfited faction, renounced their impious ideas, repudiated Trotsky
and paid homage to Stalin. In the prisons and isolation camps and
convict settlements there remained only some courageous political
opponents, devoid of influence, their names destined to oblivion. The
majority of Trotskyists were disgraced by their recantations; the
remainder, like Koté Tsintsadze, had died in exile. The millions of
prisoners and banished, cut off from the national life, could not hope
for any amnesty save by some catastrophic war. The person of Stalin was
henceforth embodied in a dictatorial majesty, without equal in the world
and without precedent in history.

From the course of events, the tracing of history and the unravelling of
texts, there emerges in sufficiently clear relief this repulsive
character whose prodigious destiny it is so difficult to explain outside
of the Soviet Union. We know now the abilities and the weaknesses of
Stalin, the excessive disproportion between his intellect and his will,
between his knowledge and his _savoir-faire_, and the reasons for his
personal success gained over the ruins of the socialist programme of his
Party. We have seen him patient, meticulous, wary of illusions as of
words, and strong above all in his contempt for the individual and in
his lack of principles and scruples. He is a product of circumstances,
he owes his political fortune to his antagonists, though one can say as
much of all his dictator contemporaries. He has not succeeded in
establishing himself without a certain flair, without natural faculties
for intrigue and an effective alloy of coolness and energy. Clever at
putting off disadvantageous solutions, at dividing his enemies and
getting round obstacles, he shrinks before nothing if he can but attack,
strike and crush. He had the dexterity to avoid in the Party the
shedding of blood spilt so often in the country, to exhaust opposition
by dilatory tactics combined with the gag, the pillory and the whole
gamut of sanctions. We recognise him as cunning, crafty, treacherous,
but also brutal, violent, implacable, and set always on the exclusive
aim of holding the power he has confiscated by an accumulation of petty
means. As Bakunin wrote of Nechayev: "Bit by bit he has come to convince
himself that to establish a serious, indestructible society you must
base yourself on the policy of Machiavelli and adopt completely the
Jesuit system, with violence for the body and lies for the mind." In the
hardest struggle between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks the latter often
taxed the former with Nechayevism and Jesuitism, to the indignation of
Lenin and his disciples. But a posthumous revenge was reserved for
Martov with the rehabilitation of Nechayev attempted by various
communist historians under Stalin, and it is not mere chance that one of
them, A. Gambarov, ended his work with the statement that Nechayev's
anticipations "have become embodied in full in the methods and practice
of the Communist Party of Russia in the course of its twenty-five years
of history."

Stalin has obviously not read Machiavelli, still less the astounding
_Dialogue in Hell between Machiavelli and Montesquieu_, an anonymous
book published in exile by a proscribed republican of the Second Empire,
Maurice Joly. But he has followed by instinct the line of conduct traced
in this ironical manual of cheating and duplicity whose precepts can be
summed up in these almost literal lines:

>Separate morality from politics, substitute force and astuteness for
>law, paralyse the individual intelligence, mislead the people with
>appearances, consent to liberty only under the weight of terror, pander
>to national prejudices, keep concealed from the country what is
>happening in the world and likewise from the capital what is happening
>in the provinces, transform the instruments of thought into instruments
>of power, remorselessly inflict executions without trials and
>administrative deportations, exact a perpetual apology for every act,
>teach the history of your reign yourself, employ the police as the
>keystone of the regime, create faithful followers by means of ribbons
>and baubles, build up the cult of the usurper into a kind of religion,
>create a void around you thus making yourself indispensable, weaken
>public opinion until it subsides in apathy, impress your name
>everywhere as drops of water hollow out granite, profit by the ease
>with which men turn informers, manipulate society by means of its
>vices, speak as little as possible, say the opposite of what you think,
>and change the very meaning of words....

All this appears to have been written for Stalin, and resolves the
oft-discussed problem of the traits common to Lenin and his heir. In the
latter we can find no trace of the founder of the Soviet State.
Ostensible differences apart, what was large and disinterested in Lenin,
is shabby and mean in the epigone. On the other hand, there is between
Stalin and Trotsky at least an essential psychological resemblance which
sets them very much below Lenin: their claim to be infallible. Neither
of them has ever sincerely admitted an error, whilst the first of the
Bolsheviks had often set the example of an honest self-criticism in his
examination of himself. Like Napoleon who said "I was the master, it is
on me that all blame lies," even when his incapable lieutenants had done
disservice to his plans, Lenin took the entire responsibility of his
Party's actions upon himself. "The greatest chief of all times and all
peoples" gives his measure by always throwing on other people -- on
inferiors and humble individuals -- the burden of his own incidental or
permanent aberrations.

Not only has he modified the meaning of words, as if under the
inspiration of the apocryphal Machiavelli, but he changes the values of
numbers, and accommodates them to the requirements of his personal
political calculations, under cover of reasons of State. It is the same
with his arithmetic as with his ethics and aesthetics -- all are
subordinated to the conservation of power. The fewer communists the
Party contains, the more members he counts. The total bordered on three
million in 1934, including candidates, and more than five million of the
youth, and could double at the Secretary's fancy. Statistics string
together all sorts of numbers that are without interest or reality, but
not those of the suicides, capital punishments, victims of the Plan,
deaths due to famine and typhus. We cannot easily find out how many
imprisoned and deported keep up the maintenance expenses of the
Stalinist order -- a number oscillating between 5,000,000 and
10,000,000. The G.P.U. itself would be incapable of giving exact
estimates.

A brochure of B. Shirvindt, director of prisons, reveals the number of
condemnations pronounced by the tribunals in 1929, for the Russian
Republic alone, without the Ukraine and Caucasus, etc.: 1,216,000
against 955,000 the previous year, not including the sentences inflicted
by the G.P.U. The death sentences had increased in this one year by
2,000 per cent. These partial investigations throw a terrible light on
the repression carried out in the whole of the U.S.S.R. by the two
jurisdictions even before the peak was reached at the time of
collectivisation. It is easy to understand why the pamphlet of the
imprudent official was withdrawn from circulation and the information it
contained prohibited. But since 1935, there has been no less conclusive
information about the situation in the country as a whole, thanks to
Solonevich, who was in a position to verify his calculations. He counts
a minimum of 5,000,000 detained in the concentration camps, without
including those in the prisons and "isolators" or the various categories
of those banished or exiled; and he estimates the total number of
condemned at one-tenth the number of adult male inhabitants. It would be
fairly near the truth, therefore, to envisage a figure approaching
10,000,000 -- to speak only of the living.

As far as ribbons and baubles are concerned, Stalin had inherited a
military insignia, but he afterwards created two civil decorations,
then, in 1934, the new distinction of "Hero of the Soviet Union" --
apart from any recompense in money. On all points an intuitive
Machiavellism guides him, often in its lowest form. The art of
disguising his thoughts has no more secrets for him, his power of
dissimulation equals his knowledge of provocation. For a few months in
1932 he absented himself and let rumours spread of his approaching
resignation, so as to disorientate his enemies and incite them to vent
their satisfaction, to keep his spies supplied with work and to chastise
the prattlers on his return. He is undoubtedly the origin of the rumours
from which he draws profit. In truth, none of his predecessors has dared
to falsify history with so much indecency, to play tricks with the
truth, attribute to himself imaginary superiorities and make himself a
divine Augustus without the least title to distinction. He even
stretches ambition to the point of seconding his flatterers when, as in
1934, they give him credit for -- an arctic expedition with which, of
course, he had no more connection than with the rhetoric of Aristotle,
the "midwifery" of Socrates, the ethics of Spinoza, the metaphysics of
Kant or the dialectic of Hegel. His misfortune is that tribute is always
paid him by colleagues bound up with his fate, unconvinced underlings,
self-interested flatterers or the conquered who are tied hand and foot;
never by a man who is in the slightest degree free. He succeeds,
however, in mystifying the perverted youth by the _credo quia absurdum_,
taught in the name of Leninism. Brought up from a tender age to ape
adults, brigaded in bands of pioneers, spoilt by a parrot-like education
and the evil example of their elders, poisoned with careerism and
egotism, the younger generation is to him an inexhaustible source for
renewing cadres in his own way and completing the servile clientele. The
greatest defeat that socialism has ever known is precisely this
collective depravity which consists in inculcating into children and
adolescents the very opposite of a doctrine while still preserving its
vocabulary.

It was not enough for Stalin to vitiate the so-called Soviet youth in
this respect. The Third International has grown beneath his hands into a
despicable and sterile sect, has been transformed everywhere into an
unconscious but active auxiliary of the counter-revolution. Just as the
Polish communists had supported the military _coup d'état_ of Pilsudski,
before burning their fingers with it, so those in Germany had several
times made common cause with Hitler, only to expiate soon after in
concentration camps and on the scaffold the insane policy of their bad
shepherds. "_The Communist International represents nothing and only
exists by our support_," Stalin said one day before witnesses, and
Lominadze took note of the remark; but the cynical "chief of the world
proletariat" none the less persists in maintaining the parasitic
sections of his fictitious International. However, since 1925, he had
decided in common accord with Tomsky to liquidate the affiliated "Red
Trade Unions," and accordingly took measures to do so. It would have
been but the first step in preparing for a second, according to the
logic of his views, bounded as they are by national horizons; what is
more it would have been, in spite of himself, in the interest of the
workers' movement. The cries of the doctrinaire Left made him abandon
his project, and at a later date, when he had overcome all opposition
and there was no one to hold him back, he apparently no longer
considered the matter urgent. He is, however, quite capable of striking
from his budget a puppet International, just as he decreed in the
winking of an eye the disappearance of the _Association of Proletarian
Writers_, however small the advantage. He knows that the Comintern will
never effect a revolution -- "not even in ninety years" as he ironically
remarked at the Politbureau in Trotsky's presence. But nothing decisive
obliges him yet to get rid of such a tractable instrument, which he
believes to be of use to his costly personal renown and to the
manoeuvres of his double-faced foreign policy. He will keep it as long
as possible at the price of the irremediable discredit of communism in
the two worlds.

Stalin has had the talent to endure, but only by disavowing his actions
under a presumptuous phraseology. In 1934, the Bolshevik Congress
ratified a second Five Year Plan, the relative prudence of which
scarcely justified the victorious songs in honour of the first. At the
preceding Party Conference, the official blusterers had calculated in
advance for 1937 a production of a 100 milliard kilowatt-hours, 250
million tons of coal, 80 of naphtha, 22 of cast iron, etc., but the
predictions fell to 38 for electricity, 152 for coal, 47 for naphtha and
16 for iron. Again it is only a matter of hypothesis, of which
experience has proved the inanity. In other words, if by achieving the
impossible, the second plan were better realised than the first, the
U.S.S.R. after ten years of planification and twenty of revolution,
would only produce about half the cast iron, a third the electricity and
coal, and scarcely more than a third of the naphtha obtained in the
U.S.A. for 1929 and that for a population more than a third greater. In
respect of manufactured articles the comparison would be still more
overwhelming. In 1933, at the International Economic Conference in
London, Litvinov advanced the proposal of buying a milliard dollars'
worth of merchandise, so acute was the lack of goods in the country of
records. His country meanwhile has the effrontery to affect a complete
disdain for foreign provisions. The very paper which the Bolsheviks use
to deceive the public belies their fables of technical progress by its
greyish dirty yellow colour and inferior quality. The conditions
accepted to obtain _de jure_ recognition from the United States, namely
renunciation of subversive propaganda, admission of the clergy to the
U.S.S.R., etc., indicated that Stalin was disposed to every type of
concession to immortalise his autocracy. He made admiring speeches on
President Roosevelt, kept to exclusively Russian problems in his
conversations with Americans, predicted in 1933 the end of the world
economic crisis, and made bantering jests about Trotsky's
internationalism and the "permanent revolution." He was ready on
conditions and concessions to adhere to the League of Nations, which, he
had lately said, "is rotting while still alive"; and the volte-face was
complete in 1934 when he dared to present as a triumph the admittance of
the U.S.S.R. into the League of Brigands. But the more external
agreements he concluded, the more he concentrated the power at home.
Always haunted by the desire to keep a sharper watch on the details of
his apparatus, he reformed the police-direction by the interposition of
a "procuratorship" between the Politbureau and the G.P.U.; after that he
altered the administration, by recastings and transformations, of which
he alone had the secret, the Congress which decided knowing only the
pretexts. In 1934, he suppressed the Workers' and Peasants' Inspection,
so dear to Lenin, and replaced it by a Soviet Control Commission,
modelled on that of the Party. He reshuffled the staff of the "summits,"
dismissing some of the People's Commissars; at the base, he multiplied
the "political sections," which more directly transmitted the
Secretariat's orders; and he placed over all the bureaucracies in the
provinces another more authoritative bureaucracy. In the same year, he
pretended to diminish the powers of the G.P.U., by transmitting them to
the Commissariat of the Interior, but he effaced the name only to retain
the system and the personnel, with Yagoda as chief, seconded by Agranov
and Prokofiev, so that there was no definite change for the people.

His rare interviews, accorded for diplomatic ends, when he utters the
most outworn truisms of elementary socialism, which exclude frankness
almost by definition, contain no matter of new or useful consideration
but for one exception. In an interview with a German writer, Emil
Ludwig, who obtained an entree by classing him amongst the eminent
historical personalities worthy of his studies, the inevitable evocation
of Peter the Great incited him to reply by a turn of phrase concealed by
a metaphor: "In whatever concerns Peter the Great, he was a drop of
water in the sea, and Lenin a whole ocean." He, Stalin, had no other aim
than to be a worthy pupil of Lenin, that is to say, comparable to the
ocean rather than the drop. He does not understand, among other things,
that the worker-Tsar was in his time a leveller like himself, while
forming with his "men of service" _(sluzhilye liudi)_ the kernel of a
future nobility. In Soviet Russia, levelling has gone on side by side
with the formation of a privileged bureaucracy, whose hierarchy conceals
the embryo of a class or a dominant caste. The first Emperor of China,
Tsin Shih Huang Ti, a great organiser and deporter, who built the Great
Wall, created an aristocracy of his own functionaries. In the same way
Diocletian gave them titles that were not hereditary. It is not fatal
that the Soviet bureaucracy should enlarge and consolidate its
distinctive features, for its future will depend on international
contingencies, not on the "clairvoyance" of its "genius." A reference by
Ludwig to the three hundred years' reign of the Romanovs permitted
Stalin to abuse the innocence or courtesy of his questioner, by denying
all recourse to intimidation or terror, and alleging the unanimity of
the worker and peasant nation. Uprisings have been as frequent under
Sovietism as under Tsarism. The insurrections in the Caucasus and in
Turkestan after collectivisation indicate that latent exasperation is
only waiting for an opportunity to burst out. This is not the place to
linger on all the conversations held by Stalin with a journalist in
quest of the sensational whom he laughs at shamelessly in ineffably
serious tones. Nevertheless, an incidental reflection is still worth
examining: "In what concerns our conscientious workers, they remember
Trotsky with resentment, even with hatred." Ludwig pretends not to know
that in the Soviet Union no worker is allowed the right to a favourable
opinion of Trotsky, or to the expression of it. But Stalin's tenacious
animosity is an interesting revelation of his basically vindictive
character, without generosity or grandeur. Even against the defeated
adversary, whom he pretends to fear no longer, and to a visitor doubly
strange to Bolshevism, he proffers in security his spiteful and violent
words. In the zenith of his power he employs the weapons of the
powerless, and at the thought of the "Man of October" he emerges from
his false impassivity and in spite of himself ceases to simulate
"indifference with a marble pulse."

One is always tempted to try to seize the meaning of a remote historic
individuality by comparing it with others that are better known, to
establish relations between the great revolutions and their
protagonists. But whoever tries to find a figure approximating to Stalin
in the French Revolution, where several figures have certain
resemblances to Lenin and Trotsky, will not meet him there except by
borrowing several types to compose a synthesis. Without losing sight of
the difference of place and time, or being too carried away by
analogies, one must imagine a Fouché, a man in the middle-distance of
the revolution, and in the foreground of the counter-revolution, one who
has a few objective characteristics of a Bonaparte without victories.
Stalin has not only the principal characteristics of Fouché, virtuosity
in intrigue and police methods, but there may be noticed in them both
very curious psychological and temperamental concordances, apart from
the common origin of their education and the striking similarities in
their careers. Fouché also came from a seminary, renounced the
sacerdotal calling, and later distinguished himself in
"dechristianisation." Pro consul of the Convention in the provinces, he
gave proof of exceptional terrorist energy which Stalin was to attain in
an identical role -- the requisitioning of supplies and the suppression
of resistance. He passed through successive stages of revolutionary and
counter revolutionary evolution, and adapted himself to each of them. In
the year when the Consulate became the Empire, he expurgated the
archives of Nantes, his native town, of all papers concerning him.
Stalin was one day to do the same, with the same arrière-pensée. If one
is careful to observe due proportion, Bonaparte also can be taken as a
comparison, for a reason which Jaurès indicates by pointing out that the
man of Brumaire struggled against an obsolete form of
counter-revolution, but at the same time introduced a new one, "the
Caesarian counterrevolution, all the more to be feared because it
retained on the surface some of the traits of the revolution which had
been perverted." It goes without saying that no analogies can be drawn
between the General Secretary and the First Consul in regard to
individual dualities -- it is their objective role which relates them.
If Stalin had followed his inclination to favour private property, he
would have become a sort of bureaucratic Bonaparte -- less like the
uncle than the nephew, the inheritor of a power conquered by others, and
endowed with the sole genius of long patience. His schematic and limited
socialism restrained him at a moment when the Left Opposition believed
in the existence of Thermidor; and he turned against the rural districts
after mastering the towns. But even in his war against the mujiks, he
remained a peasant in his turn of mind, his manner and natural
capacities; and this gives him some affinity with another dictator of a
different rural extraction and a different intellectual class, but
likewise a peasant -- the Iron Chancellor, whose characteristics, as
sketched by Engels, are typical of the Steel Secretary:

>Bismarck is a man of great practical sense, great cleverness, a born
>and accomplished man of affairs.... But very often an intelligence so
>developed in the arena of practical life cannot be separated from a
>corresponding narrowness of view.... Bismarck has never conceived even
>a trace of an original political idea. But he assimilated the ideas
>elaborated by others. This narrowness was fortunate for him. Without it
>he would never have been able to consider universal history from a
>point of view specifically Prussian.

You need only change the last word to recognise certain traits of
Stalin, who has them to a greater degree.

Soviet subjects do not have to go so far to find the complete model of
their despot. They may find it in the national and classical history of
their country, notably in the caricatured image of a hero of Shchedrin
in the _Story of a Town_, a work unknown in the west but very much
prized in Russia, which owes a renewed vogue to the antipathy which
Stalin inspires. In a town, or rather an allegorical region, where each
house, each social unit, has its "commander and spy," and where the
inhabitants, constrained to a barrack-like discipline, have on fête-days
"the freedom of making forced parades instead of working," a brute of a
governor, Ugrium-Burcheyev, wields his savage rule, a symbol beyond all
doubt of bureaucracy in uniform. In these pages, which cannot be
condensed, Shchedrin gives an unforgettable silhouette of the
"hermetically sealed personage" whose visage is stamped with "a military
and tranquil certainty that all questions have long ago been solved,"
and who, having drawn a line, "believes he has enclosed the whole
visible and invisible world within it." The contemporary Russian reader
does not weary of seeing Stalin in this parodied reincarnation of the
Minister Arakcheyev, only too well known by his colonies of
soldier-peasants. Informed of this by the G.P.U., Stalin has taken upon
himself in his turn to read the _Story of a Town_ and to make the best
of a bad bargain by risking a placid allusion to the author. But nobody
is deceived, and the bitter Shchedrin satire is propagated to the great
prejudice of the invincible "field-marshal." Stalinist functionaries
have exerted their zeal in editing a Soviet fairy-tale for children in
which Lenin, a prisoner on a desert island, flies away on a black swan
in the company of a faithful Stalin, who proves his devotion and
friendship by cutting off a finger to feed the carnivorous bird on the
journey. But, Ugrium-Burcheyev also cut off his finger as a pledge of
love and abnegation for his chief.... Whether the coincidence be
voluntary or fortuitous, the effect produced is the same in
ridiculousness.

Any portrait of Stalin would be premature before his fall or his death.
The most necessary documentation has disappeared through the care of the
party most interested. Of his former comrades of the Caucasus, some are
languishing in exile, others have their mouths sealed. The coffers of
the Party, the G.P.U., and the Lenin Institute will not give up their
secrets until after a veritable historical upheaval -- if indeed there
still remain any secrets in the dossiers. The dictatorial entourage will
remain silent so long as it fears the dictator or his creatures. Till
then the bringing to light of new material, correspondence buried in the
_cachettes_, and memoirs of contemporaries who have had the good luck to
survive him, will have to be awaited. Stalin has no friend, no
confidant. He loves nobody, as far as anyone knows, and nobody loves
him. Among his partners he can count only acolytes whose company he
avoids frequenting, so much is he bored by their intellectual
mediocrity. The only man whose contact he has sought was Gorky, a
captivating conversationalist as well as a great writer, and since his
return to Russia Stalin's guilty conscience. Perhaps later in Gorky's
papers, precious notes on his conversations with Stalin will be found.
But the future Suetonius of this short-coated Caesar could only be one
of his close police-auxiliaries -- Yagoda for example. Biographers
inclined to study his private life, his family, his customs, will be
interested through professional duty in his first wife, Catherine
Svanidze, sister of a third-rate Bolshevik, and in James Djugashvili,
the son she left on her death. They will seek the truth of the suicide
of his second wife, the only daughter of Serge Alliluyev. According to a
laconic communique published in the press, Nadiejda Alliluyeva died
suddenly in the night of the 9th of November, 1932. She left two young
children, Basil and Svatlana. The next day the rumour spread in Moscow
of a suicide. There are still no written proofs nor public testimony,
but to appreciate the knouto-Soviet State, the incontestable truth of
the fact is less important than the general immediate conviction,
suicide being the only possible manifestation of a sincere opinion under
Stalin.

This is not all, however, for the assassination of Kirov by a Bolshevik
in December 1934, shows that the arm of despair may still serve, and for
tyrannicide as well. Stalin's immunity in the classic field of
terrorism, in the country of Karakozov, Zasulich, Khalturin, Jeliabov,
Perovskaya, Sazonov, and Kalyayev, seemed for a long time inexplicable.
Nevertheless in intimate discussions among communists, it was explained
by various circumstances. Some considered as responsible the monstrous
hypertrophy achieved by the police, the perfection of its preventive
technique, the elaborate mass of precautions taken to guard the Supreme
Secretary, the pitiless system of hostages and the terrifying zeal in
reprisals. (Under Tsarism, political assassins sacrificed their own
lives without the responsibility of risking that of their relatives and
children.) Others maintained that individuals holding power have too
little time to serve as targets -- the apparent responsibility shared by
dictatorial institutions preserves each dictator in particular.
Moreover, they added, modern methods of deceiving opinion and spreading
myths count a lot in the security of the rulers. These explanations
contain some truth, but none of them demonstrates it completely. It is
important not to forget that the people, although dissatisfied with the
present, definitely do not desire a return to past conditions but can
conceive of no better future. In this impasse, reformative goodwill
loses its edge, and long years pass before a new revolutionary ideology
is elaborated, susceptible of awakening pioneering abnegation in its
militants. But it is not surprising that terrorism in high places
awakens a terrorism below. Nothing is known of the activities of
Nikolayev, Kirov's assassin, nor of the circumstances of his act, nor of
the subversive group to which he belonged, nor of a so-called plot
against Stalin. Stalin was able to execute fourteen communists in order
to silence them, after having ordered 103 prisoners to be put to death
without involving them in the least suspicion of culpability or
complicity, not to speak of proof. He was able to re-arrest and cast in
prison the pitiable Zinoviev and Kamenev, whose retractions,
humiliations and abasements can no longer be counted. With them were
condemned 17 other ultra-Leninists, such as Yevdokimov, who had gone
over to the Opposition, and then many times repented, and 78 of their
deported comrades including Zalutsky, Safarov and Vardin. He was able to
forge an extravagant tale of preparations for assassination in order to
throw mud upon gaged rebels, to overwhelm defenceless penitents, to
attempt to compromise the inevitable Trotsky, in exile in a French
province, and to present members of his "monolithic" and permanently
purified Party as "class enemies" seeking to provoke heaven knows what
"armed foreign intervention" by the murder of one Russian by another
Russian, one communist by another. No sincere person gives any credence
to such fables, which have no more truth in them than the alleged
confessions, dragged out under pain of death, or the repentance that
follows, or immediately precedes. All that we know is that Stalin, in a
panic, sacrificed 117 victims, not so much to the shades of Kirov as to
his personal anxiety.

Before attempting to investigate whether Nikolayev represented a
superior ideal, or whether this family massacre of Bolsheviks announced
any turn, we must recall to the "terrorised terrorists" who continuously
quote Marx and Engels, the phrase where the one stresses the
specifically Russian _modus operdandi_ of the _narodovoltsy:_ "They can
be as little moralised upon, one way or another, as the catastrophe of
Chios"; and also that phrase of the other apropos of the terror, the
result of "the useless cruelties committed for self-reassurance by
people who are afraid themselves." Stalin's hand does not tremble to
deliver innocent prisoners to the executioner, but both of them
trembled, Rykov says, the day the Right sent him in a triple
resignation. This man, who is supposed to be physically brave, has no
moral courage whatsoever. He is not capable of looking a contradiction
in the face, accepting the responsibility for his actions, hearing
friendly criticism or asserting himself before an objector, and there is
no meanness he will not stoop to if it is a question of conserving his
power. One hundred and seventeen corpses are the ransom he exacts when a
young militant, a son of the Bolshevik revolution, and brought up in the
ranks of the Communist Party, resolves to translate a collective opinion
in terms of revolver shots, through lack of being able to express it by
legal and normal means. But he has created a state of affairs in which
all serious antagonism must result sooner or later in suicide, like
Skrypnik's, or assassination, like Kirov's. Between differentiated
bureaucratic fractions with their Stalins of every description and their
Molotovs of every calibre, between their clans and their cliques, life
and death are permanently burning questions.

In the famous article, _Better less, but better_, that shone with the
last brilliance of his mind, Lenin glimpsed a final clash between the
East and the West -- between the revolution and imperialism. "The issue
of the struggle will depend in the end on the fact that Russia, India,
China, etc., constitute the gigantic majority of the population. But the
certainty of a definite socialist victory for all time does not
guarantee our immediate perspectives. To assure our existence until the
approaching armed conflagration between the counter-revolutionary and
imperialist West and the nationalist revolutionary East, that is,
between the most civilised states in the world and the revolutionary
States, backward as are all Oriental States, but which nevertheless
constitute the majority, this majority must have the time to civilise
itself." And he underlined "_We are not yet civilised enough to pass
directly to socialism_." For quarter of a century, he dilated on an idea
that Stalin has never been able to understand: "Socialism is impossible
without democracy." And when speaking of electricity, he explicitly
envisaged the whole of culture. For him, as for his masters in doctrine,
civilisation, democracy, and socialism are inseparable. And if Lenin's
last words have the least value, they foretell no glory for Leninists
like Stalin who have too consistently misunderstood one of the essential
springs of history -- what the two initiators of modern communism knew
in their time as "the power of expansion of democratic ideas, and
humanity's innate thirst for liberty."

## Postscript

### PS.1

WE MUST distinguish a varied significance in the dates which we agree to
consider important in this history: starting points and finishing
points, sometimes mere sign-posts in the infinite chain of cause and
effect. The counter-revolution, which had been taking place in Russia
since the illness of Lenin -- some would trace it back to the sinister
episode at Kronstadt -- can be arranged in the chronological order of
more or less significant events, all of which are undeniably connected
despite their diversity.

Some of these may escape exact precision in time, but they stand out
very clear in character. The political defeats of Trotsky in 1923, of
Zinoviev in 1925, of their coalition in 1927, of Bukharin in 1929 were
landmarks in the rise of Stalin before his "genius" was proclaimed, and
strengthened his dictatorship; but these defeats were followed by harsh
penal reprisals inflicted on the most resolute opponents, and were
essentially the culmination of earlier developments. The inauguration of
the first Five Year Plan in 1928, and the universal enforcement of the
agrarian collectivisation will be judged of greater consequence from
their effects than from their causes. The assassination of Kirov at
Leningrad in 1934 was an event of symptomatic significance, despite the
insignificance of Kirov himself, who had unblushingly extolled Stalin as
"the greatest leader of all times and all nations," and it acquired an
increasing interest by reason of its subsequent developments. Finally,
the year 1937 will be less held in honour as the twentieth anniversary
of October and the conclusion of the second Five Year Plan, than in
dishonour as the culminating phase of an autocratic terror unprecedented
in human memory.

With the lapse of time the Kirov murder has assumed the significance of
an event of the greatest importance. Despite the obscure and persistent
reasons for deception by the "genial" Stalin on this violent death,
there was little doubt from the outset that the G.P.U. had contrived the
crime -- the murderer served only as an instrument, and the major
responsibility fell on the all-powerful General Secretary. From all
evidence, this business was an accident in the internal struggles of
high Soviet society, a rivalry between two cliques, one of which had
been able to arm or guide the hand of a young and fanatical communist.
The 117 executions ordered by the "great and beloved leader" after the
crime, the imprisonment of 97 former representatives of the old
Bolshevik opposition of Leningrad -- which had been dissolved -- with
Zinoviev and Kamenev at their head, the condemnation of the twelve
Stalinist chiefs of the local police, and finally the deportation to
Asia of some 100,000 innocent inhabitants of Leningrad could deceive
nobody. Stalin did not have the courage to make known the exact
circumstances of the murder, or the real motives of the murderer, any
more than the charges brought against the so-called instigators or
accomplices. (The verdict was only pronounced after proceedings _in
camera_.) Then again, the barbaric measures taken to reduce the
population of Leningrad gave clear proof of a determination to root out
some inimical trend, to nip in the bud some latent state of feeling
after the failure to discover a real culprit. Three years later, Stalin,
"the adored," was to astonish the world by proclaiming to all and sundry
that the principal assassin was none other than Yagoda, his closest
colleague, the Chief of the G.P.U. in person, the man whom he had
promoted to be Commissar for the Interior, the "sword-bearer" of the
regime.

But during the interval "the greatest man of our planet," as he is
pleased to hear himself called, had brought accusations against too many
of his own followers hitherto above suspicion, and had piled up
indictments of too many contradictory wrongs, too many untenable
imputations and demonstrably impossible crimes. His assertions were made
through the agency of a prosecutor under his orders and of menial
judges: they were confirmed by defendants who were at once too unanimous
and too simple-minded to be honest, too eager to blacken rather than to
clear their own reputations, and who could only strengthen the general
incredulity towards the official version. Under such totalitarian
conditions one certainly cannot trust the word of an autocrat so
absolute, so lacking in moral sense, so contemptuous of the truth that a
single mysterious assassination can serve him for many years as
justification for the massacre of his companions in arms. For from the
time of the Kirov murder, it is clear that he deliberately -- in cold
blood and after minute preparation -- undertook the annihilation of many
generations of Bolsheviks and disclosed his firm determination
henceforward to leave nothing to chance. The chronology of the period is
very revealing. Owing to the dull daily round of business there is often
no time to assess the value of incidents, which pass unnoticed; but they
are later thrown into relief, and assume, perhaps, their full
significance. Stains of blood become letters of fire, and dark places
are illuminated by a sinister glow.

### PS.2

STALIN, as his biography proves, has never been farseeing, except on the
vulgar plane of personal relationship when the preservation of his power
was at stake. In this respect the comparison of his writings and his
speeches, both with one another and with his actions, is conclusive.
Even when he exiled Trotsky, he did not in any way envisage his future,
when, as an obsessed despot, his constant preoccupation would be to
crush the indomitable adversary he himself had placed beyond the power
of his clutches. Since Lenin's death he has been compelled to adopt a
day-to-day policy by borrowing from right and left. He speculated on the
power of a State system at the mercy of his will, by forcing fresh
horrors or abrupt changes of front on the people sunk in poverty and
Ignorance, terror-stricken, stupefied and apathetic. A so-called soviet
system was created by Lenin and Trotsky, in which, under the effective
dictatorship of the Communist Party, the soviets had only a nominal
existence, and which very rapidly degenerated into the omnimpotence of
an oligarchy. This system intercepted, destroyed, and repressed all
initiative or complaints from below, through six intermediary bodies
interposed between the top and the bottom, and it still permits Stalin
to govern without foresight.

The following is the unimpeachable testimony of the American communist
worker, Andrew Smith, after his return from Russia disillusioned in
Bolshevism: "When Kirov was killed, the workers of the Electrozavod (the
factory in which the witness worked in Moscow) beamed with joy. They
hoped that Stalin would meet the same fate. And yet they unanimously
voted for the Bolshevik resolutions...." With the power of life and
death over Soviet subjects and, furthermore, with the monopoly of the
press which he uses to deceive others when he is not deceiving himself,
Stalin can easily obtain such results. But the tragedy of Smolny, the
first terrorist reply to his policy of terror, gave him food for
thought. He felt the warning bullet whistle past and, after burying
Kirov, he prepared at one and the same time supplementary precautions,
preventive measures and terrible reprisals.

He was sufficiently well informed of the state of public feeling by the
_svodki_ (summarised reports) of innumerable police agents, not to
cherish illusions as to the sentiments he inspired, even in the most
vehement of his professional apologists. He could not in any sense have
been the dupe of the adulation and the extravagant praise bestowed upon
him by his known enemies, with rage in their hearts, vying with
treacherous friends whose fortunes were linked with his, but who were
ready to betray him at the first favourable opportunity. He knew that he
was hated on all sides, that his downfall was prayed for, that a
thousand deaths were wished upon him and he was aware of the current
stories which expressed the secret opinion of the masses. The whole
terrorised population spoke aloud the opposite of what was in the minds
of all, daily glorifying the "country's best son," the "master of
wisdom," the "great mechanic of the locomotive of the revolution,
Comrade Stalin." He could never reconcile the Bolsheviks of the "Old
Guard," nor those of the younger generation, who despised and cursed him
while paying him the obligatory daily homage. He had nothing to fear
from the communist veterans nor their unworthy successors -- the former
relegated to honorary posts, the latter to ordinary jobs. His
uncompromising adversaries were in prison, in isolation cells or in
exile; those who had "given in" -- the "capitulators" -- were
humiliated, outcast, discredited, or had already exhausted themselves in
sterile historical exegeses and confessed themselves incapable of
conscientious or energetic attack. But it was not without fear that he
saw growing up a young, censorious generation, which had still to make a
name for itself, but had already asserted itself by the resounding
action at Leningrad, despite the numerous pitiless purges carried out by
the G.P.U., in the Universities as well as in the factories.

His dictatorial prefect at Leningrad, Zhdanov, Kirov's successor, one
day went so far as to let slip a significant admission: "Why should our
youth learn about Jeliabov, Ryssakov, Perovskaya, any more than about
the heroes who sprang from the Bolshevik Party?" In other words, Kirov's
murderer, compared to the legendary _narodovoltsy_, of glorious memory
in the tradition common to all socialist schools, is thus justified by
those who identify themselves with oppressors. In the eyes of Stalin,
however, the danger began to take concrete form. The widespread
information of the police _svodki_ combined to attract his attention, to
awaken his uneasiness and to stimulate his vigilance. It was then, no
doubt, that two complementary designs were born in his mind and began to
assume shape. After careful consideration of the feelings of the country
and of the circumstances, he could make use of the classical expedients
of throwing out ballast and tightening the screw, thus inaugurating at
one and the same time, a vast diversion and an atrocious repression.

The great diversion was to be the "genial project" of the Constitution
of the "genial leader," announcing to the peoples of the U.S.S.R. all
the desirable liberties -- but always in the future: liberty of speech,
of the press and of worship, with equal universal suffrage, direct and
secret; the right of assembly, of coalition and of demonstration; the
inviolability of correspondence and of the home; the security of the
person. Thus Stalin discovered in 1935 what has long existed and been
more or less carried into effect in Europe and America. This opening of
an era of democratic felicity was indeed unique, for apparently no
demand had preceded it, since Soviet society was reputed to enjoy
perfect democracy and unmixed happiness in the "socialist fatherland."
But after the warning of Leningrad and the executions that followed it,
Stalin, ever anxious to increase the well-being of his subjects,
determined to bestow out of the generosity of his soul, and in spite of
everything and everyone, a new Constitution, "the most democratic in the
world," which had been the exact definition of the previous
Constitution. Thus, says the press under his orders, he replies to
Hitler, he strikes "a blow at the heart of fascism," he shows an
astonished universe the ideal regime -- on paper -- in contrast to
fascist Italy, and above all, to national-socialist Germany.

Now was not this democracy of the future supposed to exist in its
fullness and entirety at that very time? And if it was a question of
replying to Hitler, would not the promised democracy owe its origin to
him rather than to Stalin? Objections, which no one in the U.S.S.R. was
allowed to formulate under pain of death, were of little importance to
the "Father of the peoples." Thus Stalin, even before Zhdanov and in
emulation of Lenin, who justified the insurrection of Kronstadt by
hastening to decree the N.E.P., seemed to justify Kirov's assassination
by hastening to decide on constitutional reform. (It should be noted
that the sailors of Kronstadt were butchered for having demanded, among
other things, respect for the Soviet Constitution.) In January 1935,
immediately after the condemnation of the 97 Left Communists known as
"Zinovievists," who were charged only, and _in camera_, with vague moral
responsibility for the Kirov murder, Stalin secured in the Central
Committee of the Party the adoption of his first draft, which Molotov
unexpectedly brought to the Seventh Congress of the Soviets, then in
session, to the utter stupefaction of everyone. There followed the
inevitable explosion of gratitude and love addressed to "our father"
Stalin. At the same Congress, Molotov proclaimed: "The Russia of the
N.E.P. has become Socialist Russia." The Stalinist Constitution was to
consecrate the advent of the first classless society.

The great repression was undertaken in 1935 by Stalin, the "engineer of
souls," as he styles some of his fellows. It went hand in hand with
democratic, or to use the fashionable word of the period, "humanist"
professions of faith. It was aimed especially at all communists
suspected of still taking seriously the least vestige of original
Bolshevism. It also included the last survivors of the old socialist and
reformist groups of parties still attached to the memory of traditional
ideals. It was inaugurated directly after the Kirov murder and it formed
an extension of the permanent civil war waged by the G.P.U. on the
supposedly intractable population, who were, in reality, perfectly
submissive, but had been provoked by insupportable conditions of life
and work and tormented by an exacting, incapable and brutal bureaucracy.

The mass deportations from Leningrad corresponded to analogous measures
in all the Russias. There was a "clean-up" of the so-called soviet
institutions and above all of the communist organisations. In
conjunction with the G.P.U., Control Commissions everywhere made
ceaseless investigations, tracked down heresy and hunted down heretics.
A formal purge of the Party had taken place in 1934, and another
followed in 1935, under the pretext of "the verification of political
identification papers." This latter purge was barely over, when it was
followed by a third in 1936 "at the time of the renewal of the papers."
Each one ended in some 300,000 expulsions, about a million in three
years, or one third of the total effectives, estimated at almost three
million in 1934 (to be precise: 1,872,000 plus 935,000 probationers). A
large number of those expelled since 1935 were hounded down by virtue of
Article 168 of the Code, for abuse of confidence, and severe punishments
were secretly imposed; very often entire families, wholly innocent,
suffered the same fate; the latest exiles to Siberia and elsewhere are
counted by hundreds of thousands. Thousands of foreign communists who
had come from Germany, Austria, Italy, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland,
to seek refuge in the "socialist fatherland" were in their turn run to
earth by the G.P.U., and soon joined the others in the concentration
camps and convict prisons. All this did not prevent Stalin from saying
to the American journalist, Roy W. Howard: "According to our
Constitution, political émigrés have the right to reside in our
territory. We grant them the right of asylum, just as the United States
grants it to political émigrés." An interpretation of the right of
asylum which gives an idea of the prospects to be opened up by the
future Constitution.

Over and above the work, great or small, carried out by his
multitudinous police on general instructions, the "giant of thought," as
his encomiasts call him, settles many special cases and operates himself
in this, his own, sphere. Stalin has a special method, already familiar,
of ensuring his preservation of power: ceaselessly he alters, one by
one, the camarilla which surrounds him, by substituting for worn-out
servants new men eager to get on; in order to govern, he tirelessly
appoints, replaces and alters his staff. With his frequent purges, his
repeated rearrangements of the staff of every rank in the various
spheres of public activity, he obviously never ceases to disorganise the
personnel and to paralyse work; such confusion causes incalculable loss,
especially in the national economy; in the Soviet administration the
result is chronic chaos through lack of continuity, responsibility and
general competence. But the revolutionaries of yesterday offend the
great Conservative of today, and Lenin's party is henceforth a dead
weight for him, and often an intolerable obstacle. He first defeated
Trotsky in the name of the "Old Guard," depository of sacred principles,
of sacrosanct routine. He drew all possible profit from it to maintain
himself at the summit of the bureaucratic pyramid, and won for himself a
semblance of prestige from a section of the untutored youth. Now he
needed men with no political past whom he could teach in his own way and
who would constitute a more stable clientele, bound to his personal
destiny. As a contemporary Russian writer, who is also a good
psychologist, expresses it: "He does not like men with a stainless
past"; for the deficiencies of his henchmen give him a hold on their
souls. The instruments of his domination over his direct auxiliaries are
at once and in turn the rifle and the dossier, the prison cell and the
police chit. He holds his Politbureau and his Central Committee not only
by the constant threat of the death sentence and a perpetual
surveillance, but by his knowledge of the misfortunes, the corruption
and the short-comings of their private lives; at need, he invents them;
he lays snares for the imprudent by means of his double-crossing agents;
he corrupts, demoralises, incites and provokes in order to enrich his
filing cabinets and his revolting arsenal. When a henchman hesitates
before an impossible task, Stalin can compel him by fear of dishonour or
break him without resistance. If he judges it necessary to sacrifice a
gifted individual but one too tired or too unmanageable, he supplants
him by pushing forward either a "man with no political past" or someone
little worthy of commendation, and thereafter no consideration holds him
back. It is when we know this, that we can truly appreciate his
memorable words, spoken at the height of the terror: "You must reach the
understanding that of all the precious assets existing in the world, the
most precious and decisive are the cadres."

### PS.3

IN AN atmosphere of tense emotion, still heavy with the prolonged
vengeance of Kirov's murder, the concert of dithyrambic praise rose to a
crescendo in honour of "our sun" (sic), broken by vague threats
addressed to the invisible "enemies of the people." But the enthusiasm
to order concealed undecipherable political realities: In February-March
1935, after the sudden death of Kuibyshev, -- to all appearance a
natural one, for the Vice-President of the Council of Commissars was
addicted to drink, -- Stalin proceeded to enact one of those
administrative shuffles of which he alone has the secret. An official
"with no political past," although already fourth secretary of the
Central Committee for barely a month, Nicholas Yezhov became President
of the Control Commission of the Party in place of L. Kaganovich,
appointed Commissar of Transport in which post he succeeded Andreyev,
the latter replacing Yezhov at the Secretariat. The rearrangement of
personnel interested no one outside the Dictator's immediate circle. But
Yenukidze, for 15 years the immovable secretary of the Executive
Committee of the Soviets of the U.S.S.R., was liberated from his duties,
since the Soviet Executive of Transcaucasia desired to have him as its
president. The Attorney-General, Akulov, replaced him, and Vyshinsky,
Assistant Attorney, became Attorney-General. Experienced observers were
in no doubt; Yenukidze was lost, his so-called liberation preceding his
disgrace; in exchanging the post of secretary at Moscow for the title of
president at Tiflis, he took the path to the cemetery. In fact, three
months later he was dismissed for degeneracy, laxity of morals, and
frivolity; some days later he was expelled from the Party, that is to
say, he was handed over to the G.P.U. But no one could flatter himself
that he had grasped at the time the precise significance of the decrees
relating to Yezhov and to Vyshinsky. In these appointments, however, was
expressed the premeditation of the wisest of the wise.

At this time Yezhov was a "man with no political past," but not without
a career. Little is known of him, except that he was the best
incarnation of Stalin's bureaucratic school. A former soldier in the Red
Army, promoted Military Commissar, he had climbed all the rungs of the
Bolshevik hierarchy; as secretary of committees of increasing importance
up to the Central Committee, he had directed for four years one of the
essential services of the Party, that of the cadres. Having reached this
stage, he knew the personnel, and was thoroughly conversant with his
profession of "engineer of souls." Stalin must have noticed him early,
inculcated in him his own methods and assured him so rapid a promotion.
As president of the Control Commission, a sort of G.P.U. reserved for
communists, he was soon to justify his master's confidence.

The Control Commission had ceased to be the commission of former years.
In 1934, Stalin "liquidated" the old Commission, a body of 187 members
consisting of old militants with a reputable past; at the same time he
liquidated also the Workers' and Peasants' Inspection. For these he
substituted two smaller commissions, the first of 61 members for the
Party, the second of 70 for the Soviets, both for the most part composed
of new members. By this reshuffle he rid himself of some 150 undesirable
veterans. Not that they would have dared to permit themselves the least
opposition, overt or covert; they realised too late the mistake they had
made ten years earlier in supporting their future grave-digger in his
struggle with an imaginary Trotskyism; but their contempt for Stalin
equalled the hatred with which he repaid them. It was against them and
their generation that he gave proof of his enmity, at the same time
settling a personal account, when he transferred Yenukidze, in order the
better to get rid of him. But he did not stop there. In May 1935, he
suppressed the Society of Old Bolsheviks, pre-eminently the Old Guard,
which silently irritated him. The following month he dissolved the
Association of Former Political Prisoners, where a vestige of free
speech still existed in the stifled tones of confidential intercourse.
In February 1936, he finally liquidated the Communist Academy, also
composed of veterans, and for similar reasons. No one guessed then at
what goal the man, whom Radek called the great architect of socialism,
was aiming.

In liquidating these institutions, considered in his circle as the most
venerable, Stalin freed himself of many scruples and visibly cleared the
ground for liquidating much else. In any case he renounced a heritage of
which he had once asserted that he was the faithful guardian. That he
wished to break with Lenin's party was implied in May 1935, in a toast
to the Red Army, in which he effaced the customary distinction between
the Party and the rest of the world: "To the health of all Bolsheviks,
members of the Party and those outside the Party. Yes, those outside the
Party. Those who belong to the Party form only a minority. Those outside
the Party form the majority. But among those outside the Party, are
there not real Bolsheviks?" This was the repudiation of the notion of
the Party "above everything," in spite of a somewhat shabby explanation:
"... They have not joined the Party, either because they have not had
the time, or because they hold the Party in such high esteem, they see
in it such a sanctuary, that they wish to prepare themselves further
before entering it...." Two days later he was not afraid to declare in a
speech to the Military Academy: "... We speak too much of the merits of
the leaders, of the merits of the directors. To them are attributed all,
or almost all, our achievements. That, clearly, is incorrect and false."
Such remarks, issuing from such a mouth, do not appear credible. They
must be interpreted as a prohibition of the praising of more than one
man; we shall see the proof of this later. When all the Russias, under
the Stalino-Chekist knout, say the opposite of what they mean, Stalin
owes it to himself to practise what he preaches. On the morrow of this
invitation to lower the tone of the eulogies of the leaders, this is how
Bukharin, partially restored to favour, observed instructions under pain
of final disgrace, the equivalent of death: "We all wish to touch him,
to feel the force of that powerful mind, of that will which radiates in
every direction, of that astonishing and beloved man. Human waves carry
him along. What a demonstration of unity! What an unforgettable scene of
indestructible union!" But all this was about Stalin. Enough can never
be said of the "genial pilot."

The Stalinist liquidation of the old Bolshevism and the old dignitaries,
to which Yezhov, aided by Yagoda, the famous "sword-bearer," especially
devoted his attention, did not forestall the evil, but the very relative
good, which the U.S.S.R. might still expect from the twilight of a
socialist tradition. It was in strict correlation with the abandonment
of a cumbersome and inharmonious past, where the best of the now
superannuated intentions mingled with the worst of the recent
innovations. The martyred country would not have suffered so greatly if
the recrudescence of counter-revolutionary terror had not fallen on a
population divorced from politics, if the reaction had seemed frank,
logical, conscientious, with all its consequences, instead of being
carried out by new tactical zigzags, by empirical experiments and
implicit, but none the less cynical, disavowals. It would have been too
much to expect Stalin openly to dispense with theories condemned by
facts and by history. However, among the reforms introduced during this
period under the irresistible pressure of circumstances, both in the
sphere of economics and in that of social customs, there are some which
register decisive failures, in the absence of spiritual and political
progress. This is the revenge of natural laws, the protest of the vital
forces of every society, against an inhuman and useless "experiment."

In contrast to Lenin, who called an error an error, a defeat a defeat,
who always shouldered the responsibility for his actions and was able to
revise invalid and worn-out notions, Stalin's system is to lay the blame
upon his subordinates, whom he makes his expiatory victims in order to
appear infallible. He alternates between violence and promises, in order
to conceal his failures, and issues bulletins of victory at each
decision to sound a retreat. Under the goad of imperative and changing
necessities, and since he lacks the power of comprehensive vision as
well as of generalisation, he must have recourse to palliatives, to
half-measures, to empirical correctives, sometimes to a complete
volte-face in order to rebuild from the ruins, where the day before he
claimed he would make a clean sweep. Besides, it is his habit to take
away with the left hand, on the first propitious occasion, what he is
compelled to grant with the right. One can understand that the people,
satisfied with the return to many normal customs, but always oppressed
and exploited, are not in the least grateful to him for the slight
palliatives of their misery, and regard them merely as inadequate
instalments on their just due. But since the great retreat -- whether
provisional or definitive -- is a startling reality extending all along
the line, except in the matter of internal policy where the democratic
concessions remain purely on the surface, it is Important to follow the
stages which promised immediate or future repercussions. Alexander
Herzen has said of Tsarist Russia: "The most impossible things are
achieved among us with incredible speed; changes, which in their
importance are equivalent to revolutions, are carried out without being
noticed in Europe." In addition to the terrific agrarian
collectivisation which has overthrown the Russian peasantry and the
ancestral mode of cultivation, Stalin's counter-revolution verifies the
full significance of this reflection three quarters of a century later.

### PS.4

THE year 1935 had begun with the withdrawal of the bread cards, the
first step toward the withdrawal of the other food cards in September.
This implied the unification of prices and consequently the end of
rationing and of unceasing regulation. An impulse was then given to the
partial restoration of trade and of free markets. A year later the
Torgsin, shops which sold in exchange for the precious metals or for
foreign currency, were closed down, and simultaneously the rouble was
stabilised, sanctioning officially a devaluation of 77.5 per cent. This
marked the end of the fictitious parity of the rouble, of the boasts
about "Soviet money, the most stable in the world"; it was the collapse
of the theory and practice of State distribution substituted for supply
and demand. The Bolsheviks have thus failed, after as before the N.E.P.,
in their attempts to create an economy without commodities and without
money, in which the State plan would regulate the exchange of products,
and money would have only a nominal value. The high rate of the new
rouble at this period was still artificial, for the real depreciation
appeared in the enormous divergence between domestic prices and those in
the world market. But there was a clear tendency toward a more healthy
fiduciary circulation of the classical type, based upon bullion reserves
and better adjusted to the volume of trade. The Bolsheviks, wrote T. G.
Masaryk in his _Memoires_, "sought for and found things which had long
existed and were well known"; there is hardly any sphere "in which the
alphabet will not be rediscovered." This observation is particularly
applicable to Stalin and his discoveries in almost every direction.

In agriculture, the new statute of the _kolkhoz_ confirmed and
accentuated in 1935 Stalin's previous retreat if not before the peasants
at least in face of the famine. Henceforth the inhabitants of the
_kolkhoz_ would have the right, over and above their _isba_, to a small
individual or family holding of half a hectare on an average, sometimes
of one hectare, and to the personal possession of livestock: a cow, two
young horned animals, two sows and their farrow, ten she-goats or ewes,
rabbits, poultry, and twenty beehives. In the pasture lands, two or
three cows and ten to twenty-five ewes, and even eight to ten cows and a
hundred to a hundred and fifty sheep according to the locality. The
reopening of the markets, the permission granted to the collective
farmers to sell their surplus there, the remission of the debts owed by
the _kolkhoz_ to the State, the definite delimitation of their territory
-- these various measures, and others of fuller detail, to some extent
relieved the population of the countryside. Thanks to them the
threatened food-supply was ensured through private initiative. This was
the flagrant defeat of the integral collectivisation predicted to the
blare of trumpets at the time of Stalin's "dizziness" in 1930, and the
failure of collectivisation imposed by the violence of the Party.
Meantime, private cultivation developed by sheer force of circumstances.

A stronger reaction still, alternately ridiculous or dishonest, appeared
in the changed attitude toward the new prejudices, the external
appearance of austerity, the very style of Soviet life. Stalin
authorised and decreed pell-mell one after the other, high spirits,
obligatory love, family happiness, paternal duty, filial respect,
feminine coquetry, masculine elegance, regulated pleasure and gaiety to
order, stereotyped laughter, poetry and humanism, rouge and finery,
neckties and detachable collars. After providing dear bread that was
available at last without cards, he bestowed or conceded games and
spectacles, song and dance, crackers and Bengal lights. Daily he
"rediscovered the alphabet." After an initial Thermidor, prolonged by
interminable serialisation, there followed, like an avalanche, a very
banal Directory. There were discussions about what Karl Marx wore round
his neck, hidden by his beard, but the sailor-knot of Lenin was the
dênouement of the controversy. Fashion magazines, formerly forbidden as
subversive, were imported or printed; invitations were extended to
Parisian dress-makers; Comrade Molotova interested herself in perfumes,
lotions and creams. After Leninism with nitric acid, Stalinism with
rosewater and Socialism with eau de Cologne. Manicurists were installed
in the factories -- the only factories in the world where there existed
prisons and guard rooms. The reform of the Civil Code put barriers in
the way of divorce, sanctioned paternity investigations, condemned
abortion, restored the family to honour. The State encouraged the
birth-rate by minute grants, beginning with the ... _seventh child_!
Regular marriages were encouraged, as also conjugal fidelity, love of
the fatherland and desire for offspring, thrift, and seven percent
interest. Love was no longer a bourgeois conception, nor jealousy a
proprietary sentiment. But the parvenu militants deserted their
working-class wives, hardened in the struggle, and married young
actresses, in the absence of daughters of bourgeois or aristocrat. The
capitalists, who were anathema only shortly before, were
indiscriminately imitated; people vied with one another in aping the
"rotten West," especially its faults, which they copied to excess. At
the Kremlin -- banquets, receptions and champagne. The Party organised
balls, feasts, festivals, and carnivals. They put flowers on the
balconies, but they did not put them on the tombs of the millions of
victims. One fine day Stalin visited Tiflis and spent a few minutes with
his mother, forgotten for years, thus illustrating that very new truth
that children must honour their parents. He had himself photographed
with his children and with other children. He was the centre of
admiration, he was extolled, he was imitated. No one might so much as
mention the millions of abandoned orphans. In the midst of this "command
performance," a decree extended the application of the death penalty for
delinquents and criminals as from the age of twelve.

The mass of the population might stand aloof from such anachronistic and
pretentious rejoicings, but a large part of the youth took delight in
abandoning themselves to these novelties. The authorities sought for and
found "things which had long existed and were well known": for the young
who were disillusioned with the machine age, saturated with the black
broth of theories, worn out with politics, theses and slogans. They
provided sport in all its forms, parachutism, gliding, arctic
explorations, expeditions to Central Asia. It goes without saying that
everything seemed good to young and old which served as an escape, or
outlet, or diversion; everything which took them further from the
centres where they were in constant terror of the G.P.U., the Parry and
military service. The press gave first place to the heroes of the North
Pole, to aeronautical exploits, to every kind of prowess. At the expense
of the hard-working country, Stalin distributed dolls to some, to others
watches, not to mention roubles, accordions, phonographs -- here to
clever children, there to deserving workmen, and most often to
timeserving officials.

He hastened to register the results of this "offensive on the cultural
front," to use the Bolshevik jargon, by declaring: "Life has become
better, comrades. Life has become more joyful." As a result, the ten
thousand newspapers of the U.S.S.R., through a hundred thousand slavish
pens, daily paraphrased the profound speech of the "thrice great master"
on the happy life. The millions of members of the Party and the
Communist Youth vied with one another in repeating it, conjugating it,
declining it. Some days after this pronouncement, Stalin appointed
Yagoda, his closest colleague, Commissar-General for National Safety.
Who knew what was being prepared? As it was, the year 1935 ended with an
apparent miracle: a Christmas Tree, baptised for the occasion, the New
Year Tree. Only holly and other accessories were lacking to obtain the
full value of the permission, but everyone declared that they would have
them ready for next year.

Pursuing his alphabetical discoveries, Stalin succeeded in conceiving an
original method for increasing the output of work: it consisted in
paying the producers in proportion to their production. Piece-work wages
were reintroduced: they were the object of hate under the capitalist
regime, yet excellent under the emblem of the hammer and sickle. But the
system of maximum payments limited the earnings of the best workmen, who
lacked every inducement to apply themselves to their work. There was no
personal interest, in the absence of adequate wages and available goods,
and no higher, collective stimulus, since social solidarity was
non-existent under the yoke of a hateful bureaucracy. Besides, the
"norms" or minima of production were very low in comparison with the
results obtained in every other country, because of the unskilled labour
and the low level of life. In 1935, the withdrawal of the system of
cards, rations and reserved shops changed the conditions of supply;
remuneration in proportion to work modified the behaviour of the
workers. "Norms" that remained too low had to be raised. They sought for
and found "things which had long existed and were well known" elsewhere
-- under the names of Taylorism and the sweating system -- but only too
well known already in the U.S.S.R. as "socialist emulation" and "shock
labour." Once more rationalisation, economy of movement, and division of
labour were rediscovered. The result was _stakhanovism_, so called after
the miner, Stakhanov, who first put into practice the new gospel under
special conditions. The _udarniki_ (shock volunteers) became
stakhanovists, but were paid in proportion to their labour, with the
result that wages could now vary from the normal to ten times the normal
rate. To accelerate the tempo, to stimulate the champions and break
records, all the honours and advantages were conferred on the foreman,
thus defrauding his comrades by a strange combination of injustice and
imposture. Various methods of deception and quackery were employed, in
order to increase the propaganda. Stalin thought he could deceive all
Russia and the whole world by trying to make it believe that the work of
a gang of ten to twelve men on an average was that of a single record
breaker. He has only succeeded in dividing the working class more
profoundly against itself, in aggravating the social differentiation by
the excessive inequality of wages, in obtaining some intensification of
work and the raising of the norms. But a quantitative increase of
production was only achieved to the detriment of the quality of the
products, at the cost of a disastrous increase in waste, in a heavy wear
and tear of machinery, and of a premature exhaustion of man-power. If by
this means some thousands of future foremen and managers have sprung
from the ranks to become to some degree privileged, the selection could
have been accomplished more soundly and beneficially and with less
ostentation. The numerous assassinations of stakhanovists by their
companions in bondage, the antagonisms in the factories and workshops,
which were already reported in the days of the _udarniki_, testified to
a state of mind among the workers quite other than the enthusiasm
prescribed by "our great beloved hero," Stalin. In short, stakhanovism
served only to introduce into the so-called "socialist fatherland," in
an aggravated form, methods in use in capitalist countries where the
communists ceaselessly demand their abolition. To attain such an end it
was more than useless to cause the shedding of so much blood and the
flowing of so many tears.

### PS.5

ONE Of the most remarkable phenomena of the period, the discovery of a
Fatherland in the U.S.S.R., some time after the triumph of
national-socialism in Germany, was the result of a great miscalculation
of Stalin. He hoped at first to come to an agreement with Hitler, as he
had formerly done with Mussolini, in spite of the verbal differences in
doctrine, and on the basis of the similarity in method between parties
of the mailed fist. Since the reception of the Duce at the Soviet
Embassy in Rome, on the morrow of the murder of Matteotti, and later,
under the pretext of courtesy, the dispatch of congratulations to
Mussolini by Rykov after his stay at Sorrento, where Gorky spent most of
his time, the relations between the U.S.S.R. and Italy became
increasingly intimate and cordial. Mussolini did not conceal a discreet
admiration for Lenin, and the reciprocal borrowings increased between
the two totalitarian regimes, hand in hand with the progress of their
economic relations. In 1933, the year of Hitler's advent to power, an
Italo-Soviet commercial agreement was concluded in May, followed in
September by a pact of friendship, non-aggression and neutrality. A
Soviet squadron anchored in October off Naples, and the following year
an Italian military delegation proceeded to Moscow. Russia even placed
orders for warships in Italy. Cordial telegrams from Litvinov testify
for posterity to this mutual understanding.... Mussolini flattered
himself that he had established a model entente with the Bolsheviks,
suppressing communism at home whilst negotiating advantageously with the
so-called Soviet State. Thus Stalin thought that he would conclude a
similar pact with Hitler, on the ruins of the communist movement in
Germany. The renewal of the agreement of Rapallo confirmed him in this
hope, as did the new credit facilities granted to the U.S.S.R. by German
industry. But he had to sing a different tune when the Third Reich
assumed an attitude of determined hostility toward the Bolshevism of the
Russo-Soviet State as towards export communism. Hitler's intuition
finally prevailed over the contrary view; a view fairly widespread both
in the Reichswehr and in diplomatic circles, which opposed to a new
_Drang nach Oesten_ the Bismarckian conception of an alliance with
Russia. In vain the Caucasian, D. Kandelaki, appointed as commercial
envoy to Berlin with a secret mission from Stalin, multiplied advances,
invitations and soundings. The Fuehrer turned a deaf ear and persevered
in his attack on Russia through the Communist International. In the end
the disappointed Stalin had no choice but to turn toward France and
England, toward the League of Nations, to play a different game, and to
awaken in the peoples of the U.S.S.R. the consciousness of patriotic
duty and of the fascist danger.

The official theme of patriotism then entered into the daily propaganda.
The mechanical insistence with which it was emphasised indicated a
rather artificial creation, conceived as a substitute for revolutionary
ideology in distress. _Pravda_ even published an editorial entitled
Sacred _Love of the Fatherland_, which bore not the slightest
resemblance to the vocabulary of two days before. As usual, the
Bolsheviks passed from one extreme to the other, from the most
elementary internationalism to the least respectable type of patriotism.
There already existed, in contempt of cherished equalitarian principles,
a whole series of decorations: the Orders of Lenin, of the Red Star, of
the Red Flag, of the Red Flag of Work. Stalin further devised the Order
of the Heroes of the Union, and the Badge of Honour. To these were added
the distinctions of Artist of Merit, National Artist, and Scholar of
Merit. Promotion to honours succeeded each other in long columns in the
newspapers. Those decorated benefited by material advantages in money
and in kind, which increased the privileges of the new dominant class,
the profiteers of the Stalinist manna. In the Army the former hierarchy
of ranks and stripes was reestablished, including at the same time the
rank of marshal, suppressed under Tsarism after Kutuzov. Voroshilov,
Tukhachevsky, Yegorov, Budyonny, and Blücher were promoted marshals, not
for their services in war, but for the political support which they
brought to Stalin. All that was formerly adored, was burnt; all that was
formerly burnt, was adored. Distinctive uniforms and insignia granted to
the People's Commissariat of the Interior, which some persist in calling
the G.P.U., rewarded leaders and agents, whom some persist in calling
Chekists, and assimilated them into the military hierarchy. With the
absence of restraint, which characterises them, the Bolsheviks did not
fail to carry to excess the reaction against their former sobriety of
dress. They flaunted shining insignia, stripes and braid. The most
striking revenge of the Imperial past was perhaps the resurrection of
the Cossack corps, abolished by the revolution and reestablished by
Stalin in several cavalry divisions with all their traditions and their
ornamental equipment, not even forgetting the _nagaika_, so familiar to
workers on strike and mujiks in revolt. It seems that in their very
renunciation, the Bolsheviks of the decadence experienced a sort of
morbid satisfaction which, in spite of themselves, urged them to
eloquent demonstration.

This neo-Bolshevik neo-patriotism reverberated with great noise in the
educational sphere, where, perhaps more obviously than in others, the
bankruptcy of the regime was already complete. All the pedagogic
innovations of the revolution were annulled and old ideas restored. The
statute of the "Single School of Labour" provided free school materials
and a free meal; the suppression of home-work, of text books, of
diplomas; the repudiation of the so-called bourgeois survivals; the
administration by a "school collective" and a "school soviet"; the
substitution of "combinations" (subjects for combined study) in place of
classical subjects. Later there was compulsory manual labour,
pseudo-polytechnic education and student-brigades. Nothing is left of
all this but ruins. The nonsense of Lunacharsky, the dogmatic teachings
of Pokrovsky, the laborious efforts of Krupskaya were dismissed as
Trotskyism. A series of decrees reestablished the broken traditions and
even the routine, the authority of directors and teachers, rules and
regulations, classes and time-tables, punishments and rewards, marks and
examinations, certificates and diplomas, university grades and titles.
The Bolsheviks rediscovered History and Geography, as well as the
Alphabet. As usual, they exaggerated the new orientation and even went
so far as to bestow a uniform on the pupils of the higher institutions,
then on the scholars of all the Russias; only the shortage of cloth
delayed the application of this measure. Finally, revising from top to
bottom the State ideology prescribed for the whole population, young and
old alike, they put on the index the greater part of the historical
works they had edited, refused to admit the ideas and interpretations
then in force, and, revising the history of Russia as they had before
revised all the histories of the Party, they strove to rehabilitate the
national glories and then to inculcate in the people a nationalist
mentality suited to the occasion.

With the zeal and ardour of converts, they have, since 1935,
rediscovered, recognised and acclaimed, one after the other, the great
men of the past, authentic or debatable, going back beyond Muscovite
Russia to the period of the Teuton and Mongol invasions: Saint Alexander
Nevsky, vanquisher of the Sword-Bearers; the Ataman Ermak, conqueror of
Siberia; the butcher Minin and Prince Pojorsky, gallant adversaries of
the Poles; Field-Marshals Suvorov and Kutuzov. The conversion to
Christianity, after baptism, of Russia in the Kiev period, becomes "a
positive stage in the history of the Russian people." Not less
"positive" is the role of the great Prince Ivan Kalita, who gathered
together the Muscovite nation; of Ivan the Great, liberator of the
Russian soil; of Ivan the Terrible, that precursor of Stalinist
humanism; of Peter the Great, that worthy Bolshevik before the
literature of Bolshevism. The late Pokrovsky, appointed head of the
chapel of "Marxist historians," and his living disciples are discredited
from one day to the next for having belittled, underestimated, and
falsified the history of their mother country; not so long ago the
authors who broke away so very little from the rut of that coterie were
punished as heretics. The roles are reversed; exiled historians return
to favour and their subservient persecutors will soon be persecuted in
their turn. S. Platonov, cruelly treated, died in exile, but E. Tarlé,
recalled from Turkestan, takes the rank of official historian, while the
Marxist historians and other red professors are, as a beginning, thrown
out of employment; and always in the name of the same idols, Marx and
Lenin. This is what is called, in Bolshevik terminology, "taking the
offensive on the historical front."

Once a start was made, the _Song of the Company of Igor_, an epic poem
of the 12th century was loudly acclaimed; the anniversary of Lomonossov,
Russian writer and universal scholar of his age, was overwhelmingly
celebrated; the centenary of Pushkin, true literary ancestor of Stalin,
was observed with the greatest ceremony.... When the prosaic bard Demian
Biedny, librettist in his spare time, held up to ridicule the
_bogatyrs_, the valiant knights of legend, persuaded that he would
thereby enrich the orthodoxy of strict observance, his play earned for
him the wrath of the Kremlin, and carried in its wake misfortune and
loss of position for the producer, A. Tairov, founder and director of
the Kamerny theatre, who had previously been in high favour. This was
the opportunity for the recognised critics to extol the heroes of the
old _bylins_, the marvellous songs or tales of the spoken epic poetry of
the Middle Ages: the peasant Ilia Murometz, the merchant Sadko, the
giant Sviatogor. Nationalism became the most jingoistic patriotism, with
the publication of the new "sterilised" text-books, among others the
_Short Course of History_ by Shestakov, drawn up by a brigade controlled
by a State Commission, in which figured Bukharin, Radek, Bubnov,
Zatonsky, F. Khodjayev, with Stalin as patron. In this nothing can be
found save Russian victories throughout the ages.

The hasty resurrection of patriotism corresponded directly to
considerations of foreign policy. Stalin then feared a military alliance
between Germany and Japan, he sought alliances in Europe and in Asia, he
attempted to give Russia spiritual reasons for fighting in case of war;
one by one he sacrificed the principles and dogmas to which he owed his
power, with the sole object of preserving it. For him everything is a
question of the relation of forces. The official Bolshevik vain glory
conceals an intrinsic weakness, manifest in every action taken in the
international arena.

Stalin and his Party had defined pacifism as a Utopia, as imposture,
deception or treason; later he proclaimed himself a pacifist. He had
branded the League of Nations as a League of Brigands; he joined it
without shame. He had anathematised the Versailles Treaty; he became the
champion of the status quo. He had denounced France as the "most
aggressive and most militaristic country in the world"; he concluded
with France a pact of mutual assistance. He had asserted that fascists
and socialists were "twin brothers"; he ordered his foreign mercenaries
to come to an understanding with the socialists against the fascists at
all costs, while he himself was persecuting the social-democrats in
Russia. He had made war on the defenceless Chinese in order to guard the
Manchurian railway; he ceded it cheaply to the Japanese as soon as they
showed their teeth. When a French Minister of Foreign Affairs, following
the example of his English colleague and the first United States
Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., paid a visit to Stalin, thus destroying the
fiction of the irresponsibility of the General Secretary of the Party
for the foreign policy of the State, he hastened to make a declaration
of good-will: "M. Stalin fully understands and approves the policy of
national defence pursued by France, to maintain its armed forces at the
level of security." This was a startling repudiation, insincere as it
was, of all the activity of the Communist International since its
foundation, and particularly of its French section; but to them he gave
orders to suit, and soon his servitors in France, imitating their
fellows in Russia, succumbed after many physical turnings and twistings.
In the same way as the Chinese Communists, following much the same
instructions, made a point of invoking Confucius, so the French
Communists rediscovered, recognised and acclaimed Joan of Arc, Rouget de
l'Isle, and Napoleon; they appropriated the _Marseillaise_, and passed
straight from the most trivial anti-patriotism to the most bellicose
chauvinism. For the interests of the U.S.S.R. -- i.e., of Stalin --
required a France which was preparing with the union sacrée for war with
Germany.

In an interview with an American journalist, Stalin went still further:
the League of Nations was no longer an instrument for imperialist war,
according to the traditional Bolshevik terminology, but rather "an
advantage for the friends of peace," in other words, the states opposed
to Germany; "working for world revolution!" he said, "-- we never had
such plans and intentions"; if a "different impression" had sometimes
been given, it was the "result of a misunderstanding" -- and not of a
tragic misunderstanding: "No. A comic misunderstanding. Or perhaps
rather tragi-comic" for "the export of revolution is nonsense." After
this, it remains only to tear to bits the works of Lenin, the books and
the pamphlets, the collections of newspapers and reviews, all the
publications of the Parties, of the International and of the Communist
Youth issued before this Supreme denial. Stalin is not ready to say so,
but he is the man to do it.

The essentials of this literature are in fact withdrawn from circulation
or relegated to the libraries. Apart from some inoffensive scholar or
curious person, no one for some length of time will seek to exhume these
yellowing sheets and documents, from which, be it said, there emanates a
consummate boredom. The publications of the Marx-Engels Institute were
proscribed and destroyed, even before the burnings took place in
Germany. The works of Lenin still figure prominently, but they are
gradually pushed into the background by those of Stalin; but the public
takes care not to read them, unless they are positively commanded to do
so; and besides, words have lost their meaning. It would be difficult to
find in the U.S.S.R. such important documents, for instance, as the
decree constituting the Red Army, which is defined as "the support of
the approaching socialist revolution in Europe." The only things that
matter are the latest writings of Stalin, the most recent speeches of
his spokesmen, the newspaper articles setting forth the perishable truth
of the day, up-to-the-minute texts which render seditious and obsolete
the orthodox publications of the day before, finally the current sources
of information such as the Soviet Encyclopaedias, large and small, which
must be thrown on the scrap-heap volume airer volume, despite the many
expurgations repeated by the many successive censorships, despite the
many falsifications introduced in the very course of printing. Every
unexpected disgrace, each "turn" implies an automatic censoring and
arouses intense panic in the bookshops and libraries. No sooner has an
individual high in the Kremlin's favour ceased for mysterious reason to
be _persona grata_, than his unfailing loyalty appears to be the double
game of a man with a double face. He is immediately denounced as a
"Trotskyist" and an "enemy of the people"; the most flattering
credentials are transformed into an indictment or disappear from the
dictionary, and there is mortal danger in being in possession of one of
his works. Who knows what will be done tomorrow, at the next discovery
of another letter of the alphabet? Each thinks only of keeping out of an
infernal game of which no one knows the rules, in which traps are
everywhere dreaded, and chance meetings shunned. Silence itself is
dangerous, for it may be interpreted as a silent censure; each must sing
his part in the choir of unanimous thanksgiving daily offered to "our
wise leader and master."

When Stalin, speaking of the future Constitution, declared to Roy W.
Howard: "... We have constructed the Socialist Society ... not to
shackle individual liberty, but that human personality may feel itself
really free"; when he predicted "a very keen electoral struggle," for,
as he said more precisely, "it is evident that the lists of candidates
will be presented not only by the Communist Party but also by social
organisations of all sorts outside the Party," everyone knew what to
think, but no one knew whither the dictator was bound. The draft
Constitution, adopted by the Central Committee in June 1936, provided
for elections in the western fashion and a parliament called the Supreme
Council; but article 126 reserved the monopoly of politics for the
Communist Party alone, and rendered illusory all the promised civil
liberties. It was in any case the end of the pretended power of the
soviets, even on paper. Twenty years after October, it was the admission
of the bankruptcy of the system which the Bolsheviks presented as a
superior expression of complete democracy, as a new type of State.
Moreover, the new Constitution, formally submitted for the ratification
of an extraordinary Congress of the Soviets, consolidated the right of
private property within the already established limits and, without
limitation, the right of inheritance in direct succession. Once again
Stalin has found "things which have long existed and are well known."
Nor did he make any innovation when he effaced the last traces of the
former soviet Federalism, when he abrogated the rights of nationalities,
of which he voluntarily appointed himself protector. The constitutional
change consecrated the most extreme form of centralisation, the organs
of the so-called federative republics being placed in strict
subordination to the central power; this, however, did no more than
codify the actual situation and make it more definite. The
Transcaucasian Federation, as if creating a precedent, disappeared. Soon
the Cyrillic alphabet itself was to he imposed on the national
minorities, contrary to the recent respect accorded, in theory, to the
regional or national manners and customs. Count can no longer be kept of
the recantations and contradictions; they pass almost unnoticed in the
collapse of the ideals of October. Under the new Constitution, as under
the old, the truth is that above the apparent and fallacious revision of
the standard of values, above the expedients and improvisations which
take the place of policy and principle, "when all is said and done" --
to quote a prophecy even then thirty-five years old -- "everything will
revolve around a single man who, _ex providentia_, will unite in himself
all power."

### PS.6

So LONG and impressive a series of recantations and repudiations,
inflicted by the Bolsheviks upon themselves, so many insincere
retractions and cynical denials, could not but arouse bitter reflections
in many minds. Moreover, words remain powerless against facts,
especially the facts of economics and technology in which Bolshevism has
registered bankruptcy after bankruptcy. It may be presumed that in the
choking atmosphere of the "happy life" under the terror, doubt among
some, despair among others gave way to subtle allusions, to
imperceptible implications. It goes without saying that behind the
unanimity on the surface, all thinking heads are full of contradictory
reservations when so many changes are taking place. But the G.P.U.
exists everywhere to collect the smallest scraps, to magnify them, to
falsify them, to note, when required, abstentions or absences, sighs or
silences. In the offices of Yagoda and Yezhov reports abound,
denunciations accumulate. Around Stalin, who exercises his tyranny from
on high, and delegates powers to his favourites, the _boyars_ of the
bureaucracy are mutually jealous and detest each other; their respective
clients lie in wait for every pretext to start unseemly quarrels. The
permanent purge takes its course and the rival clans destroy each other;
thousands of individuals singled out for persecution by the system of
suppression, despite the pledges given by Stalin, succumb in internal
intrigues and disappear with their families without leaving a trace. In
the assertions of some, the denials of others, and the contradictions of
all, the Bolsheviks always remain unanimous.

If one is to believe certain allusions in the Soviet press or the
indiscretions of officials, many victims apparently suffer for their
former relationship with some nonconformist or other. And in this
respect, no one is invulnerable. In truth, the worst pretexts become
excellent for the purpose of ruining a rival in the zoological struggle
permanently waged for coveted posts between factions and generations,
between individuals and shifting groups. Old half-forgotten "affairs"
still bear mortal consequences even after a long interval. Such for
example is the case of Riutin, once a bitter adversary of Trotsky, who
had gone into opposition in his turn and in his own way, author of a
"platform" hostile to the policy as well as to the personality of
Stalin. With this we may connect, after the event, the case of Syrtsov,
president of the Council of Commissars for Russia, who was abruptly
dismissed and expelled and is now missing; that of Lominadze, Stalin's
confidential man, his agent in China at the time of the Canton
insurrection, who went into opposition and into exile, repented and was
reinstated; Eismont and Tolmachev, Assistant People's Commissars,
disappeared just as mysteriously. There are rumours of madness, suicide,
executions. One thing only is certain: Lominadze, following the example
of Skrypnik, took his life. In the middle of June 1936, it was learned
that Maxim Gorky was dead; this was not unexpected, for the writer was
old and ill; his death was followed by the inevitable spectacular
funeral. In the middle of July, the secretary of the Party in Armenia,
A. Khandjian, one of Stalin's creatures, committed suicide in his turn,
and this time the news was, for some incomprehensible reason, divulged.
Finally, in the middle of August, while on all sides inexplicable
arrests increased in the higher ranks of the unanimous Party, the
announcement was suddenly made of a public trial instituted against
sixteen communists of a so-called "Trotskyite-Zinovievite Terrorist
Centre." Stalin's intentions were revealed, the fruits of his long
meditations and premeditations were apparent. And yet his worst enemies
did not dare to anticipate the kind of surprise he was preparing.

Involved in this trial were the two closest, and also the most
discredited, companions of Lenin, the unfortunate Zinoviev and Kamenev,
many times routed and repenting as often, veritable political corpses
dragged from the isolation-cell of Vekhnie-Uralsk to serve as puppets
before the tribunal; also their followers Yevdokimov, Bakayev, Reingold;
several former Trotskyists who had rallied to Stalin, the
"capitulators," as Trotsky called them, Ivan Smirnov, Mrachkovsky,
Dreitzer, Ter-Vaganian; finally a few confederates of rather shady
character. Their record of service would normally have made them
directors of the Party and the State, in which, indeed, they had lately
held the highest posts. They, too, were found guilty of the murder of
Kirov, and of aiming at the assassination of Stalin and his acolytes,
Molotov excepted. In spite of the manifest material and psychological
impossibilities involved, an attempt was even made to tax them with
being under the orders of Trotsky -- vanquished, exiled, disarmed,
isolated, separated from them in every way. They were accused of
treason, of espionage, of terrorist intrigues, of intelligence with the
enemy, of collusion with the fascists, of monstrous, unintelligible and
impossible crimes. They confessed everything; they accused instead of
defending themselves; they denounced each other and ardently vindicated
Stalin. A veritable witchcraft trial, as Friedrich Adler justly calls
it. The press overwhelmed them, calling them wild beasts, singling out
"dog" and "viper," and loaded them with ignominious insults before
knowing anything of the facts of the case, and the party machine
unloosed a thousand meetings of indignation to order, from which there
rose a cheerless, artificial storm of ritual curses. The Public
Prosecutor, Vyshinsky, obscured to the best of his ability questions
which were meant to elucidate, and insulted in security the victims
promised to the executioner. It was now clear why Stalin had ventured on
this course. Without awaiting the result, Tomsky, another old companion
of Lenin, committed suicide. In four days, the Sixteen were judged
without proof, condemned by order, and executed. And from Stalin to
Zinoviev, everyone, not forgetting Tomsky, was unanimous.

It was the Dictator who had dictated all these horrors, and it became
clear that he had resolved to finish with the men of the past in order
the better to finish with the things of the past, to destroy them
morally and physically. He must, therefore, have decided at the time of
the Kirov murder to make new human sacrifices; but he waited for the
death of Gorky before beginning. And he evidently hoped to produce some
effect on sceptical opinion by the insensate accumulation of charges,
however untenable they were in themselves and incompatible with one
another. Three months later at Novosibirsk, a trial, similar to the
former but restricted to nine obscure culprits, ended in nine death
sentences and six executions. In this instance, the obvious aims of the
Chekist machination were to explain the failure of local industry by
alleged "Trotskyist" sabotage and malevolence, to involve the Gestapo, a
sort of German G.P.U., and finally to implicate various persons in the
demonstrative repressions that were to follow. In fact, at the end of
January 1937, the trial began of the so-called "Anti-Soviet Trotskyite
Centre," or "parallel centre," both labels of police manufacture.

Among the seventeen were old Trotskyists who had long ago repented,
"capitulators" who had rallied to Stalin, men like Pyatakov, Radek,
Serebriakov, Drobnis, Boguslavsky, and one whose rupture with the
opposition was quite recent, Muralov; with them were an old
Right-Winger, Sokolnikov, opposed to Trotsky's ideas, and a few very
suspicious unknowns. Again, as always, the charge was the wearisome
assassination of the eternal Kirov. Once more were served up the
delirious ravings about Trotskyism, fascism, terrorism, treason,
espionage, Packed up with charges of industrial sabotage and incredible
intrigues aiming to provoke a war and the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.
Still there was no proof, no plausible presumption even, no tangible
evidence, no witness for the defence, and no possible defence. Those
accused of this new witchcraft admitted, as if with pleasure, the worst
villainies and the least probable crimes. Their foreheads in the dust,
they did not even spare their praises of the most genial Stalin. What
passes for press and public opinion played their appointed parts in the
funereal chant, keeping perfect time, even before the opening hearing.
The usual unanimity was maintained, including both executioners and
victims. There were seventeen death sentences, thirteen executions:
Radek and Sokolnikov saved their skins by disclosures obliquely aimed at
the General Staff of the Red Army.

But behind the scenes, a secret and ferocious rivalry divided the
oligarchs of Stalin's entourage, all the more implacable because it was
limited to the closed field of the bureaucratic "summits." Whether
because of disagreement between the master and his servants, or because
of disputes for priority between rival cliques, Yagoda finally fell into
disgrace; he was dismissed from the People's Commissariat of the
Interior and from all his police functions. Yezhov succeeded him: an
example of Stalin's foresight. Yagoda was relegated to the Commissariat
of Posts and Telegraphs, and as in the case of Yenukidze, there could be
no possible doubt: the days of the "sword bearer" were numbered, and so
were those of his personal clients. Two weeks after the execution of
Pyatakov, Assistant Commissar for Industry, but the real head of his
department, his immediate superior, Ordjonikidze, nominal Commissar,
suddenly died. This time no one believed it to be a natural death.
Stalin's old Georgian accomplice had been "liquidated" by the "beloved
father"; on the least risky assumption, that he could not survive the
man who had been his closest colleague. Six weeks later, amid the
discreet jubilation of all, Yagoda, exposed as an "enemy of the people,"
was thrown into prison, charged with offences against the common law:
venality, debauchery, exactions, immorality. He would soon know by
experience the painful fate of so many of his victims.

During the month of May 1937, the effects of Yezhov's exorbitant power
began to make themselves felt in a recrudescence of terror: mass arrests
and wholesale executions made the population live again through the
darkest hours of the Civil War. Groups of several dozen "citizens" were
shot each week, then each day, without formality, without the least
guarantee of justice, or after secret trials, tantamount to pseudo-legal
assassination. On the last day of May, Ian Gamarnik, Assistant Commissar
for War, and Director of the Political Department of the Army, committed
suicide. A heavy uneasiness weighed upon military circles, when several
generals in the public eye (Levandovsky, Schmidt, Kuzmichov) were marked
down by the G.P.U., imprisoned, perhaps already suppressed; enigmatic
changes rearranged the higher cadres. Relentless blows shook the police
and the Army, Yagoda's fall opening a new phase. In June reverberated
the thunderbolt which decapitated the General Staff and struck terror
into the country: under the unheard-of charge of espionage, under the
ridiculous pretext of having "violated their military oath, betrayed
their country, betrayed the peoples of the U.S.S.R., betrayed the Red
Army," Marshal Tukhachevsky, Generals Yakir, Kork, Uborevich, Eideman,
Feldman, Primakov and Putna, all well-known "heroes of the Civil War,"
all several times decorated with the order of the Red Flag, all classed
as adversaries of Trotsky and partisans of Stalin, were tried _in
camera_, condemned to death without witnesses or defence, and executed
within forty-eight hours.

From all the evidence, it is obvious that the Russia which bears and
suffers does not feel itself one with any of its rulers, politicians,
bureaucrats, policemen, soldiers, who murder each other in secret in the
name of the same ideal; without correct information, it does not
understand, no one can understand, what is happening; the official
"explanations" -- really gross vituperations -- inspire nausea even in
the least indulgent adversaries of the men who perish in dishonour; the
oppressed people are no doubt not sorry to see the disappearance of so
many of their oppressors. But thousands of innocent people suffer on the
rebound, and there are gloomy forebodings of even greater misfortunes
beyond these unjust killings. In fact, the year 1937 will stand out as
an indescribable nightmare in the memory of Russians, contemporary with
the methodical massacre begun by Stalin under the empire of fear. It
seems that Yagoda had exhausted his capacities as proscriber,
slavedriver, torturer and executioner; Yezhov took his place to continue
with an accelerated rhythm the sinister task prescribed by the "great
humanitarian," Stalin. Although the G.P.U. was permitted to massacre
without publicity, the local press began to announce capital executions,
but in certain cases only, for reasons known to the authorities alone:
thus the intention of spreading terror was clear.

It was then proclaimed that the so-called Soviet State was everywhere
poisoned with "Trotskyism," and that in reality Trotskyism signifies
fascism, espionage, sabotage, and the restoration of capitalism. Now
Stalin and his auxiliaries have incessantly asserted with great
advertisement, that Trotskyism was non-existent, all the while
increasing the rigorous measures to extirpate it. In their accusations
against their vanquished antagonists, people recognised from the start
the very charges made by the Opposition against the ruling camarilla.
The stronger, therefore, abuse their power to kill the weaker, not
without trying to discredit them. In stigmatising them no great
Imagination was shown: treason, connivance with Polish or Japanese
spies, with the Gestapo or the Intelligence Service became current coin
(it is curious to note that the Italian Ovra has never been implicated).
Thus "nests of Trotskyists," "nests of spies," "nests of fascism," were
discovered in all the Russias, in towns and villages, in the countryside
and on the mountains, at the head of all institutions and services.
According to the revelations and denunciations of this period, the
entire framework of the regime in every field, patiently selected by
Stalin for ten years, consisted only of "double-faced" Trotskyists.

Since the unanimous and final vote of the "Stalinist Constitution" at
the Eighth extraordinary Congress of the Soviets at the end of 1936 --
the last -- removals, dismissals, and changes have succeeded each other
in every layer of the bureaucratic hierarchy; and under such a regime
they generally imply irreparable ruin for the fallen. The chief
characters of the State, identified as "enemies of the people,"
presidents of Executive Committees and of Councils of Commissars,
secretaries of the Party and People's Commissars, all unanimously
elected, disappear, and with them their relations, their colleagues,
their friends, and a multitude of subordinates. From Minsk to
Vladivostok, from Archangel to Tiflis, the echo of daily executions
alone is heard, decimating the "unanimous" Soviet staff. Intellectuals,
workers, directors of factories, agronomists, officials, railwaymen,
engineers, pedagogues, soldiers, militants, priests, journalists,
employees, doctors, veterinary surgeons, peasants, heads of new
undertakings, artists, wantonly dubbed "fascist bandits" and "Trotskyist
spies," "dogs and vipers," are riddled with bullets and fall by hundreds
and thousands into the common graves. No one knows whom to trust, nor in
whom to confide. No one any longer dares to estimate the mass
deportations. The list of suicides lengthens: Essenin and Mayakovsky,
Joffe and Lutovinov set the example; after Nadiejda Alliluyeva, Stalin's
own wife, after Skrypnik, Lominadze, Khandjian, Tomsky and Gamarnik, to
mention only familiar names, there is Cherviakov, President of the
Executive of White Russia; then I. Khodjayev, brother of two People's
Commissars in Uzbekistan; then Liubchenko, President of the Council of
Commissars of the Ukraine, and doubtless also Doletsky, director of the
news agency, and Ustinov, Soviet Minister to Esthonia. With regard to
the two latter, there is no absolute certainty; but is there any
certainty either with regard to the others, concerning whom there are
rumours of assassination by the Chekists? Under a terror of this kind,
these are only various methods of extermination, lust as the
deportations often signify death after a brief interval. We shall learn
later of hundreds, of thousands, more suicides, drowned by songs of
"glory to the greatest man of the age."

If Stalin, his Yagodas and his Yezhovs, "engineers of souls," and
experts in the art of breaking consciences, were able, by means of
inquisitorial tortures, promises and threats, blackmail and bargaining,
to stage several witchcraft trials in which complaisant confessions
outbid each other, the majority of their victims have nevertheless
refused to lend themselves to this, and it has been found necessary to
put them to death without such parody of justice or under cover of
various pretexts. Hundreds of persons, implicated by name as alleged
accomplices, have never appeared before Stalin's "justice." Soldiers
were condemned _in camera_, executed perhaps without trial. In July 1937
at Tiflis, seven former leaders of Soviet Georgia, among them Budu
Mdivani, Stalin's childhood friend, and Okudjava, intimate friend of
Trotsky, were judged _in camera_ and shot, without consenting, so far as
is known, to make lying confessions. At the end of this year of terror,
there were eight executions without trial in Moscow, of men who never
belonged to any opposition: Yenukidze, comrade of Stalin's youth and
adolescence; Karakhan, Assistant Commissar for Foreign Affairs and
ambassador; Orakhelashvili, President of the Council of Commissars of
Transcaucasia; Sheboldayev, Stalin's creature, Secretary of the Party in
northern Caucasia, and three other less important figures. There were no
deceptive confessions in this case either. The technique of extorting
confessions is painful, difficult, laborious; the results are very hard
to reconcile with the verifiable facts -- indeed impossible -- for after
the objective examination abroad of the two published trials nothing
whatever remains of the extravagant theses of Stalin and his acolytes,
Yagoda, Yezhov and Vyshinsky, the purveyors and the prosecutor. It was
therefore necessary patiently to await the witchcraft trial of the
so-called "Rightist-Trotskyist Bloc" in March 1938, to hear new false
confessions, not less absurd than the former but even more incoherent,
ill-conceived and badly planned, equally unconvincing and impossible.

Of twenty-one accused in this strange amalgam, eighteen were condemned
and executed: Bukharin and Rykov, two of the closest colleagues of
Lenin, among the principal ideologists and heads of the regime, former
leaders of the Right, thanks to whose support Stalin was able to defeat
Trotsky, who had now become Trotskyists without knowing it; Krestinsky
and Rosengoltz, People's Commissars, former Trotskyists who had disowned
their faction and rallied to Stalin at the first signs of his strength;
Yagoda, the murderer of Trotskyists, charged with Trotskyism; People's
Commissars Grinko, Chernov, Sharangovich, F. Khodjayev, Ivanov, all
loyal Stalinists; Dr. Levin, physician to the Kremlin, the doctor of
Lenin and of Stalin; Kriukov, agent of the G.P.U. and secretary to
Gorky; and finally a few very suspicious personages of lesser note. It
is not known why Rakovsky, considered the most guilty, benefited by a
relative clemency (twenty years imprisonment), as also the supposed
poisoner Pletniev (twenty-five years); both punishments were, however,
equivalent to death for men who had long passed the age of sixty. To the
monstrosities of the other trials was added the novelty of "medical
assassination." Yagoda, bringing pressure to bear on the doctors of the
Kremlin, and having at his disposal a very special pharmaceutical
laboratory, was alleged to have shortened the life of Menzhinsky, his
predecessor, of Kuibyshev, of Gorky and of Gorky's son, Peshkov. With
that crescendo which is indispensable to these repellent machinations in
order to avoid the monotony which would make them inefficacious, the
managers went so far as to accuse Bukharin of having attempted to
assassinate Lenin in 1918, and to accuse Trotsky of having been in
intimate contact with the Intelligence Service since 1926 and with
German spies since 1921, the other accused being more or less
accomplices. One part of the trial was aimed at retrospectively
compromising the memory of Tukhachevsky, Gamarnik, Putna and their
colleagues, dead and buried. As a matter of fact, it was a
rehabilitation, for they were no longer accused of espionage, the
official reason for their execution, but of toying with the idea of a
_coup d'état_, that is to say, simply of secret hostility toward Stalin.
Another part aimed at explaining the lamentable condition of "socialist"
industry, commerce and agriculture by the conscious sabotage of "enemies
of the people," with the sole aim of exonerating Stalin and his
satellites, the persons really responsible. This was the most
interesting and revealing part of the trial, for it disclosed
irrefutable realities as devastating as the trials themselves for the
regime and its rulers.

### PS.7

MUSSOLINI had taken a keen interest in this unique counter-revolution,
to the point of devoting to it commentaries from his own pen in the
_Popolo d'Italia_. After the sensational execution of the generals, his
article entitled _Twilight_ (13th June, 1937) was somewhat severe on
Stalin's regime where "massacre is on the order of the day and of the
night." But a month later, the _Critica Fascista_ (15th July)
considered, in a study of the _Fascism of Stalin_, that the latter's
"fascist" reforms proved the natural force of expansion and the
universality of the ideal of the Black Shirts. And during the trial of
the twenty-one, Mussolini himself asked (_Popolo d'Italia_ for 5th
March, 1938) whether "in view of the catastrophe of Lenin's system,
Stalin could secretly have become a fascist," and stated that in any
case "Stalin is doing a notable service to fascism by mowing down in
large armfuls his enemies who had been reduced to impotence." In large
armfuls, indeed, Stalin mowed down not only his enemies, declared or
secret, alleged or real, but also his "friends," his creatures, his
accomplices. Between the last two pseudo-judicial exhibitions, he had
mowed down not only the Old Guard of the Party and the flower of the
Communist Youth, but, after the General Staff of the Red Army, all the
heads of Soviet governmental, of national and local administration. (It
almost goes without saying that the former oppositionists, not produced
at the trials, such as Smilga, Preobrazhensky, Sosnovsky, Byeloborodov,
Uglanov, etc., must have succumbed in the jails of their "socialist
fatherland.")

From Stalin's circle there have disappeared in 1938 the majority of his
close auxiliaries, well-known Stalinists ready for anything, members of
his Politbureau, of his Central Committee, of his Control Commission, of
his Council of Commissars of his Executive Committee of the Soviets, of
his Council of Labour and Defence: Rudzutak, Postyshev, Petrovsky,
Chubar, Akulov, S. Kossior, Eikhe, Antipov, Bubnov, Krylenko,
Unschlicht, the brothers Mezhlauk, Yakovlev, Janson, Soltz, Lomov,
Sulimov, Miliutin, Kaminsky, Pashukanis, Rukhimovich, Khinchuk,
Liubimov, Arbuzov, and how many others, not to mention the
assassinations, the suicides, the punishments already stated. Five
presidents out of seven of the Executive of the Soviets, and almost all
the members or candidates; the People's Commissars in the approximate
proportion of nine out of ten. And to disappear under Stalin means to
perish suddenly in a cellar or to waste away slowly in an unhealthy
climate. Of the directing staff of the Party formed in Lenin's lifetime,
there remain, twenty years after October, only Trotsky in Mexico and, in
Moscow, Stalin.

There have perished or disappeared without publicity in 1938, almost all
the eighty members of the Council of War constituted in November 1934 to
assist the Commissar for Defence: besides the nine leaders already
inscribed on the roll of death, Generals Alksnis, Kashirin, Bielov,
Dybenko, who had pronounced the death sentence on their comrades,
followed by Marshals Yegorov and Blücher, Generals Savitsky, Smolin,
Velikanov, Ozolin, Gorbachev, Hekker, Sukhorukov, Kuibyshev, Tkachev,
Khripin, Pomerantsev, Mezis, Apse, Bokis, Admirals and Vice-Admirals
Orlov, Victorov, Sivkov, Muklevich, Ludry, Kireyev, Kojanov, Dushenov,
Ivanov, Smirnov-Sverdlovsky, followed and accompanied by thousands of
other officers of all ranks. A man with no political past, a former
secretary of Stalin who had become Assistant Commissar for War, Mekhlis,
in concert with Yezhov, ceaselessly pursues the bloody purge. It is
estimated in the U.S.S.R. that there have been more than thirty thousand
victims in the "Red" Army and Navy-red with the blood of "his" followers
shed by Stalin.

There have perished or disappeared all the chief leaders and deputy
leaders of the G.P.U., following their chief: Agranov, Prokofiev,
Balitsky, Messing, Pauker, Trilisser, Zakovsky, Slutsky, Deribas,
Molchanov, Mironov, Leplevsky, and even former Chekists in retirement,
Peters and Latsis; with them the majority of their colleagues, many of
their subordinates. There have disappeared, after the two Assistant
Commissars of Foreign Affairs, the ambassadors, plenipotentiaries or
consuls-general Yurenev, Bogomolov, Arossiev, Davtian, Rosenberg,
Antonov-Ovseenko, Tikhmeniev, Jakubovich, Bekzadian, Arens, Brodovsky,
Podolsky, Ostrovsky, Asmus. Two have saved their honour with their lives
by remaining abroad, A. Barmin and W. Krivitsky, the latter in the
service of the Commissariat of War. Raskolnikov, proud Bolshevik who had
become a humble Stalinist, must have followed their example without
bothering about honour. Another, Butenko, typical example of the young
Stalinist generation, openly threw in his lot with fascism.

There have disappeared, by a supreme irony of fate, the large majority
of the members of the Commission of "the most democratic Constitution in
the world," and those of the Commission for the revision of historical
text-books, admirers of Ivan the Terrible.... There have disappeared
almost all of those who established the Five Year Plans, theoreticians
and experts, industrialisers and collectivisers, policemen and
executioners, the directors of the principal industrial and agricultural
"giants," and inaugurators of the greatest new undertakings, the
Commissars for Industry, heavy and light, and for Collective
Agriculture. There have disappeared all the statisticians, Ossinsky,
Strumilin, Kraval at their head, whose faked calculations have long
served as the basis for Stalin's fictions and deceits.

There have disappeared the last survivors of the Communist
International, proscribers of their comrades, self-seeking flatterers of
"the glorious pilot of the world October": Helen Stassova, Pyatnitsky,
Bela Kun, Eberlein, Remmele, Warsky, Waletsky, Dombal, Borodin, and the
majority of the mediocrities who were carving out a career in the Bureau
of that corrupt and parasitic institution. They have arrested,
imprisoned or deported almost all of the thousands of foreign
communists, notably the Germans and the Poles, who had taken refuge in
Soviet territory by virtue of Article 129 of the Stalinist Constitution:
"The U.S.S.R. grants the right of asylum to foreign citizens persecuted
for defending the interests of the workers, or for their scientific
activity, or for struggling in favour of national liberation." Numerous
among these "outlaws" are those who deplored too late the fact that they
did not follow the example of their insubordinate comrades who, knowing
how to appreciate the "right of asylum" and the "happy life" in the
U.S.S.R., preferred to return to their own countries, there to serve
heavy sentences, rather than to enjoy "liberty" under Stalin and _a
fortiori_ the penitentiary regime of the Soviets.

There have perished for the most part, executed after so-called trials
_in camera_, or have disappeared in the course of this interminable
Saint Bartholomew of communists, the rulers of all the pseudo-federated
Republics: those of White Russia, Goloded, president of the Council;
Diakov, Benek, etc., People's Commissars; in addition to Cherviakov,
president of the Executive, and Generals Uborevich and Bielov; those of
the Ukraine, Bondarenko, president of the Council; Sukhomlin,
vice-president; Zatonsky, Rekis, etc., People's Commissars; in addition
to Chubar, Liubchenko, Yakir already mentioned; those of Uzbekistan,
Akhun-Balayev, president of the Executive; P. Khodjayev, president of
the Council, and his two brothers, etc.; those of Tadjikistan, Chotemor,
president of the Executive; Rakhimbayev, president of the Council;
Imanov, Kaktyn, Shirinov, etc., vice-president and commissars; those of
Turkmenistan, Aitakov, president of the Executive; Atabayev, Sakhatov,
president and vice-president of the Council; Atayev, etc., commissars;
those of Khirghiz, Isakov, president of the Council, and his principal
commissars; those of Karelia, Arkhipov, president of the Executive;
Bushuyev, president of the Council, etc.; those of Transcaucasia and
Azerbaijan, Mussabekov and Efendiev, presidents of the Executive;
Rakhmanov, president of the Council; Safarov, Sultanov, Ibrahimov,
Husseinov, etc., commissars; those of Armenia, Ter-Gabryelian, president
of the Council; Mamikonian, Kalantarian, Shakhnazarian, etc.,
commissars; in addition to Khandjian who has been already mentioned.

We must make special mention of Georgia, fatherland of Stalin,
Ordjonikidze and Yenukidze, where a "man with no political past," L.
Beria, has mown "in large armfuls" for his lord and master. After B.
Mdivani, former president of the Council, and Okudjava, Toroshelidze,
Chikhladze, Kurulov, Kartsevadze (socialist) and G. Eliava
(bacteriologist), who were executed in July of the year of terror, there
were Mgalobishvili and Agniashvili, president and vice-president of the
Council; Metvereli, Abashidze and about ten of their colleagues,
commissars; then Gogoberidze, another former president of the Council;
Kirkvelia, Kavtaradze; commissars; S. Eliava, L. Gueguechkori, the
socialists S. Davderiani, G. Makharadze; finally Orakhelashvili, former
president of the Council of Transcaucasia. In Adjaristan: Lorkipanidze,
president of the Executive, G. Ramishvili, E. Megrelidze, G. Laguidze,
and half a dozen other commissars. In Ossetia: Togoyev, president of the
Executive; Maurer, secretary of the Party, etc. In Abkhazia: Nestor
Lakoba, President of the Executive, and his two relations, Michael and
Basil, besides a dozen commissars. Nestor Lakoba, accused of homicidal
intentions with regard to Stalin, was actually the author of the
pamphlet, _Stalin and Khashim_, in which he celebrates "the greatest man
of a whole epoch, such as history gives to humanity only once in one or
two hundred years," the "genial leader, unshakable and made of steel,
our dear and beloved Stalin."

Everywhere, then, the Commissars of the People were only "enemies of the
people." Everywhere the Executives are executed. Everywhere the enemies
of the people who were executed had been unanimously elected, as were
their successors. And Lenin had as friends, comrades, and allies,
according to Stalin, only false friends, fascists, spies, saboteurs,
traitors, dogs, in a word, "Trotskyists." For a dismal catalogue might
be made way for all the so-called responsible and directing spheres of
Soviet life where the Soviets do not exist and where life precedes death
by so little. The "good," the "tender," the "gentle" Stalin --
expressions consecrated in the U.S.S.R. by those who have yet to receive
a bullet in the neck -- has spared, doubtless provisionally, only an
insignificant number of individuals who have known the past: if he is to
find substitutes for those in the front rank, it is not possible for him
to kill everyone at the same time. Thus he has proceeded step by step,
methodically, passing from the Party to the Army, from the police to the
diplomatic corps, from the centre to the periphery, from industry to
agriculture, from the press to the statistical bureaux, from commerce to
literature.

Everyone knows that Stalin is the protector of letters and the arts, the
enlightened lover of all culture: he has had Pilnyak exiled, Pasternak
persecuted, and in his devotion has imprisoned even the
pseudo-proletarian writers Auerbach, Kirshon, Yermilov, Libedinsky,
Bruno Jasensky, Tarassov-Rodionov and their like; he has hunted down the
poets Nicholas Kliuyev, Mandelstam, Selvinsky, Tretiakov; he has
deported a critic like Voronsky, a philosopher like Ivanov-Razumnik,
humourists like Erdman and Krotky, the historians Nevsky, Steklov,
Volguin, Friedland, Zeidel, Anishev, Piontkovsky, S. Dalin; the
journalists Gronsky, Rojkov, Lukianov, Lapinsky, Tal, almost the whole
staff of _Pravda_ and the very official _Izvestia_, together with the
orthodox editorial boards of the leading reviews; the writers Ivan
Katayev, P. Vassiliev, I. Makarov, A. Bezymensky, Maznin, Selivanovsky,
G. Serebriakova, to mention only a few examples. As a matter of fact, no
one would have been able, under a quintuple preliminary censorship, to
commit the slightest crime with his pen. Stalin has sterilised the best
talents of Russia, driven the real writers to moral suicide after the
physical suicide of the greatest poets. He has suppressed the _Academia_
publications, the only ones which did honour to contemporary
book-production in the U.S.S.R., and has shot or deported the editors,
critics and managers. In the realm of the theatre, he has struck down,
without avowed or avowable reason, the directors and managers Liadov,
Amaglobeli, Arcadin, Rafalsky, Nathalie Satz and others -- even
Granovsky as a posthumous insult; he has deprived Meyerhold of work and
made his theatre a corpse.

How many people has Stalin butchered who did not kill Kirov? A precise
enumeration is impossible when dealing with such a hecatomb. Every
personality in the public eye drags in his fall sometimes dozens,
sometimes hundreds of subordinates, whose wretched fate is passed over
in silence. The executions are in general kept secret, except when
express orders are given for publicity. We have been able to collect
information from only ten to twenty Soviet newspapers which are received
irregularly, according to the prevailing conditions, in the capital
where, however, the press under orders abstains from reproducing the
news: but there exist about ten thousand local and regional sheets which
are inaccessible.

According to the testimony of Liushkov, head of the G.P.U. in Eastern
Siberia, who has taken refuge in Japan to avoid the fate of his
colleagues, 40,000 persons were executed on the gratuitous suspicion of
plotting during the period when "the most democratic constitution in the
world" was being adopted and the first "electoral campaign" was being
conducted for the Supreme Council. One of his colleagues of the
Trans-Siberian, Petrov, computes at five million the number of prisoners
in the concentration camps alone, not including the millions of those
banished or the inhabitants of the isolation camps and prisons. There
has been a singular "progress" since the appearance of the work,
_Russia's Iron Age_, in which W. H. Chamberlin in 1934 reported that
300,000 prisoners were cooped up in the concentration camps of Siberia
alone, and that at least two million "citizens" had been deprived of
liberty without the pretence of a trial during the five years of the
first Five Year Plan. W. Krivitsky, a communist who has stood every test
and reached the rank of general in his department, could declare to the
_Bulletin of the Opposition_ (December 1937) that the number of
political arrests rose to 300,000 in May 1937, for the period of the
trials alone, and must have reached 500,000 by the end of the year. A
communist communique published in the _Russian Courrier Socialiste_
(July 30, 1938) estimates at seven million the number of prisoners in
the concentration camps alone. This figure is the nearest to the truth,
if we consider the draconian measures adopted since the Leningrad purge
after the Kirov murder, the surgical operations performed on the Party
and followed by mass deportations of those expelled and their families,
the amputations effected in all the cadres of administrative and
economic activity, finally and above all if we calculate the need of
penal manual labour for Stalin's public works which rival those of
Pharaoh.

The Yugoslavian communist, A. Ciliga, a sincere man and an unimpeachable
witness, one of the few who has escaped alive from the Soviet convict
gangs, has written in his book, _Au pays du grand mensonge_: "Those who
have not lived in the Soviet prisons, concentration camps and places of
exile in which are shut up more than five million convicts, those who
are not familiar with the greatest jail history has ever seen, where men
die like flies, where they are beaten like dogs, where they are made to
work like slaves, can have no idea what Soviet Russia is, what Stalin's
'classless society' means." In the absence of scientific exactitude,
impossible when such different testimony is compared, there is striking
agreement as to the order of magnitude, the hallucinatory proportions.
We must also take into account the frightful mortality which decimates
the convicts, especially the children, the repeated arrests of the same
persons, the migrations from one camp to another, and the change of work
places which make the figures fluctuate.

The same author thus reveals the approximate figures collected on the
spot, in the isolation-camp at Vekhnie-Uralsk: "At the end of 1932, a
Trotskyist who had recently arrived told us that according to an
important official of the G.P.U., condemned for a professional error,
the number of arrests rose, on the authority of police statistics, to 37
millions in the course of the last five years. Even admitting that in
the majority of cases the prisoners had been arrested over and over
again, the figure seemed to us incredibly exaggerated. Our own estimates
varied from five to fifteen millions.... When I was released and was in
exile in Siberia, I was able to verify the correctness of many of the
assertions which had seemed exaggerated and fantastic in prison. It was
in this way that I was able to verify the rumours of the horrors of the
famine of 1932, including cases of cannibalism. After what I saw in
Siberia, I consider that the figure of five millions condemned is much
too small, and that ten million is nearer to reality." Indeed in 1935,
the most staid and prudent observers arrived at this average estimate.
In 1937, at the time of the twentieth anniversary of October, if we bear
in mind all that we have said, fifteen million condemned in the various
categories would probably be the number most in accord with the facts.

At the end of the year of terror (12th December, 1937) the elections to
the Supreme Council were held, to the accompaniment of rifles fitted
with silencers. There was only a single candidate for each electoral
district, chosen in advance, nominated beforehand by the raised hands of
the electors on the recommendation of the Party and under the eye of the
G.P.U.; the voting papers were printed with the name of the official
candidate only who, moreover, benefited by every paper struck out or
altered by a mark or stain; abstention was prohibited and was controlled
by a scrutiny of passports and electoral rolls. Thus Stalin was not even
able to carry into effect his project of staging a semblance of rivalry
between "social organisations of all kinds outside the Party" -- all of
course in reality communist organisations. He had overestimated his
technical means, above all his resources in men, and he had to be
content with exclusive and obligatory candidatures. It was in these
circumstances that his press proclaimed the dazzling triumph of the
"bloc of Bolsheviks and of those without the Party," with majorities on
the average exceeding 99 per cent. Hitler has in many ways copied
Stalin, notably in the concentration camps; in respect for the
Constitution, Stalin has had only to imitate Hitler, who took the
well-known oath to the Weimar Constitution. During the electoral
operations, a certain number of the carefully selected candidates
disappeared through the trap-door of the G.P.U.; after the first meeting
of the Supreme Council, several deputies, Vice-Presidents of the
Assembly, People's Commissars, met the same fate, as if to illustrate
Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution on the inviolability of the
person, of the home, and of correspondence. Virtuoso of antiphrasis, the
"beloved father and friend of the people" declared in a speech on the
eve of the elections: "The world has never seen elections so really
free, so truly democratic. Never. History knows no other example of this
nature."

### PS.8

CONFRONTED With the massacres ordered by Stalin in cold blood, and with
the internecine feuds of the bolsheviks, one is led to draw a parallel
with the Russia of the sixteenth century and the reign of Ivan the
Terrible. It is not perhaps fortuitous that in Europe this century was
that of the massacre of Saint Bartholomew and of the Inquisition, that
Ivan IV was in the largest sense the contemporary of Louis XI, of Philip
II, of Henry VIII, of Selim the Fierce -- of cruel princes and poisoning
popes. Nor is it fortuitous that our epoch of social and political
change demands comparison in so many ways with the Middle Ages, or
rather with the hazy idea we have of them, and that it is haunted by the
related phenomena of Bolshevism and Fascism. The great social and
national conflicts which have arisen as a result of the world war also
suggest frequent comparisons with the wars of religion of this same
sixteenth century which was that of Luther and of Loyola, of thinkers
who today are curiously regaining their popularity, from Machiavelli to
Paracelsus, and besides these, whether by chance or not, of the _Utopia_
of Thomas More and of the true Humanism of Europe. But Ivan the Terrible
did not, like Stalin, control electricity, rotary printing presses,
radio, railways, tanks, airplanes, oil wells, gold and manganese mines.
The combination of Russo-Asiatic mediaeval backwardness with modern
technique and inexhaustible natural resources produces confusing effects
as much within as outside Russia and obscures the simplest things. Much
has been said about the unreliability of historical comparisons, but
nothing forbids the attempt to shed a little light upon the
uncertainties of the present by a knowledge of the past, if it be only
to bring out the differences more clearly, to relate more exactly the
known reactions of human nature to the unknown of the fugitive present
and the perpetual becoming. It is not useless, therefore, to return to
ancient Muscovite history in order to show certain new beginnings of
history, which do not in the least exclude fresh departures and definite
breaks.

Stalin, in his interview with Emil Ludwig, was pleased to distinguish
himself sharply from Peter the Great, but since then, not being subject
to contradiction, he has completely revised his views, as is shown among
other things by the corrections made on his instruction in the
historical text-books and the frequent commentaries of his controlled
press. The sycophant writer, Alexis Tolstoy, whose zeal to serve the
Bolsheviks is in inverse proportion to his contempt for them, carried
out a "social command" transmitted from a very high place, in his novel
on Peter the First and the film of the same type which aimed at
suggesting constant parallels between the "worker-tsar" and the red
tsar. But if these two personages are related, it is by their contempt
for human life, sensibility, and dignity, and not in the way intended by
Stalin.

All serious historians recognise in Ivan the Terrible the true precursor
of the reforms of Peter the Great and the most finished expression of
their common mentality. But no one would dream, if he were a free agent,
of attributing the epithet "Great" to Stalin, although everyone would
grant him that of "Terrible." The use of "barbarian methods," as Lenin
said, to force industrialisation is not enough to render "great" an
industrialising tsar, when civilised methods exist. The barbarity
excusable in Ivan, explicable in Peter, which was characteristic of
their time if we take account of the backwardness of Russia, is an
enormous anachronism in Stalin, and therefore inexcusable. Moreover, it
is in direct opposition to true industrial, economic and technical
progress, for no modern industry could prosper under the constant threat
of the knout and the revolver. As a matter of fact, very few factories,
only about twenty, survived the "worker-tsar," out of the 230 which he
left in theory and the hundred odd which were functioning in fact -- a
result of ill-omen for his imitator.

The comparison with Ivan the Terrible, on the contrary, is a great help
in understanding the bloody crises of the Stalinist autocracy. Around
the throne, the noble feudal families, the Shuiskys, the Belskys, the
Glinskys, and later the Miloslavskys, the Naryshkins, the Dolgorukys,
until the Romanovs gave the casting vote, quarrelled among themselves
for places of influence, as around Stalin the secretaries and
commissars, the clans and the cliques. The quarrels for precedence
between the _boyars_, envenomed to the point of implacable feuds, are
analogous to the antagonisms between members of the Central Committee
and the Control Commission, between the system of the Party and the
system of the Soviets, between the Police and the Army, between the
Commissariat of Foreign Affairs and the Communist International, between
Lettish coteries and Caucasian tribes. Then also, autocratic oppression
paralysed the class struggle and gave free rein to the zoological
struggle of castes. The workings of the G.P.U. under Stalin are
comparable only to the _Oprichnina_ of Ivan, an unavoidable comparison,
just as the machinations of Stalin by means of the G.P.U. make one think
irresistibly of the Terrible. The parallel even offers surprising
similarities.

When still young, spare of words, distrustful and dissimulating, Ivan
acted by surprise when he attacked the _boyars_ and, as an example,
threw the most important of them, Shuisky, to his dogs, who tore him to
pieces; then he banished several others to distant regions. The _boyars_
seized the first occasion, a fire at Moscow, to accuse the Glinsky
family of wrecking and of provoking a massacre. Later, thinking that he
had reason to complain of his favourites, Silvester and Adashev, the
Tsar wrote: "When the treason of that dog, Alexis Adashev and his
accomplices was discovered, we made our anger felt only in a merciful
manner; we did not decree capital punishments against the guilty; we
merely banished them to various towns.... At first we did not inflict
the final penalty on anyone. We ordered those who belonged to the party
of Silvester and Adashev to dissociate themselves from them and no
longer to look upon them as their leaders; we made them confirm this
promise by an oath. Not only did they not dissociate themselves from the
traitors, but they aided them in every possible way, and did their best
to restore to them their former power and stir up against us the most
treacherous conspiracy. Then only, seeing their stubborn wickedness and
their unconquerable spirit of rebellion, I inflicted on the guilty the
penalty of their crime." In this passage, which relates to a period of
relative clemency, one recognises -- one might almost mistake it for --
the future language of Stalin, though the latter is rather more vulgar.
One finds again the dogs, the treason, the wrecking, the "faction," the
false repentance, the insincerity of the "capitulators," the alleged
conspiracy, the clemency of the despot, in short the very thesis which
Stalin was to put in circulation by means of the international press in
his pay.

After the departure of Kurbsky, which corresponds _mutatis mutandis_ to
the exile of Trotsky, things became worse. Kurbsky addressed to Ivan a
vehement message of reproach, rather in the style of the future
Trotskyist _Bulletin of the Opposition_. A polemic raged; the Terrible
replied in his turn, and made use of tricks to strike at the exiled
Trotsky, that is Kurbsky, through his alleged accomplices: blackmail by
threatening dismissal, as it were, which Stalin also was to employ on
many occasions, led the _boyars_ to recantation before the Tsar. The
latter than carried out a profound administrative reform by creating the
_Oprichnina_ whose object was to "sweep out treason," like the G.P.U. of
later times. For seven years an unexampled terror decimated the "upper
layers" of Muscovite society, executions succeeded tortures, the
Zinovievs, Pyatakovs and Bukharins of the period perished with their
followers and their families. It is said that some of the _boyars_, who
were tortured to death, mingled a eulogy of Stalin, or rather of the
Terrible, with their cries of pain. Every day whole groups of
individuals were put to death. It is unknown even today, in spite of the
controversies of specialists, what were the crimes of these victims, and
perhaps it will never be known what are the secret reasons of Stalin.

When Ivan wanted to justify himself to the Poles, he wrote to them:
"Many among you say that I am cruel; it is true that I am cruel and
irascible, I do not deny it. But toward whom, I pray, am I cruel? I am
cruel toward him who is cruel toward me." And he accuses his enemies of
having poisoned his first wife. Stalin, having read the famous passage
of Lenin's _Testament_: "Stalin is too rude, etc....," in the same way
declared to the Central Committee in 1927: "Yes, comrades, I am rude to
those who break their word rudely and treacherously, who split and
demoralise the Party. I have never hidden it and I do not hide it." One
could continue these instructive comparisons: the analogy is obvious in
deed and in word. Stalin accuses his adversaries of having poisoned not
his wife, who committed suicide, but Gorky and others: a tiny difference
and, if we examine it, not to the advantage of Stalin. "We must not
think that Ivan's enemies were better than he: they were as cruel toward
their inferiors as Ivan could be toward them," observes A. Rambaud, and
if we transfer the observation it remains valid, at least for those who
head the lists of Stalin's victims.

To assure to the tyrant the maintenance of his tyranny in all its
fullness both for the present and for the future: such in both cases
appears to be the _raison d'être_ of so many crimes, the essential
reason among many secondary considerations. Of course the tyrant always
claims an impersonal ideal, varying from the divine will through
national interest to the safety of the revolution; but it is always a
question, in prosaic terms, of the oligarchic domination imposed by
violence and incarnate in an alleged superman. Amid the general
dissatisfaction due to material misery, spiritual poverty and political
oppression, the tyranny maintains itself only by a constant see-saw
supported on the social pillars, on which its favour confers a
transitory authority, and which in the long run seem dangerous to it:
and from this arises the necessity of destroying them lest, in
continuing too long, they assume too great an importance. Whether the
privileged caste be the feudal nobility or the feudal bureaucracy, it
suspects treason everywhere and constantly fears for its privileges.

We have seen how Stalin at first got rid successively of all the
political factions which were capable of eliminating him, how he
defeated each by a coalition with the others, dividing the spoils,
namely the places, in advance. Freed of any immediate worry in the
system of the pseudo-Party, he imagined he found some resistance, though
it was in point of fact more the difficulties of application, in the
system of the pseudo-Soviets where, in particular, the G.P.U. had ended
by becoming a sort of State within the State. It is possible that in
time these difficulties became a mute but conscious resistance in the
Police and in the Army. Around every director of every institution, from
the General Headquarters down to the least commissariat, in Moscow and
in the sub-capitals, there arose a sort of clientele which little by
little accumulated certain common interests and a common esprit de
corps. Stalin, a man of prudence, made it a principle to have each of
his chiefs watched over by an associate or assistant, who in turn was
surrounded by his own set and was ready to supplant the chief. These
indefinable groupings among officials, formed by circumstances for the
solution of urgent problems according to various criteria of docility,
aptitude or chance, were not in the least homogeneous: side by side with
careerists, conscientious persons well-qualified in their speciality
rubbed shoulders with informers and parasites. Individual or collective
purges frequently overhauled these unstable formations and modified
their external features. These left as a residue carefully selected
fixed groups, with their routine, their professional habits, sometimes
also the last scraps of the competence necessary to the functioning of
the state machine, particularly indispensable in the key positions of
the economic and military administration. But the purges inspired by the
narrow conservative views of the central power-safeguarding of the new
privileges, fear of the least initiative, suspicious distrust of each
and all -- lower to a minimum the level of the men and of their work. In
brief, power and knowledge contradict one another in insoluble
antagonism.

Degrading struggles between the highly selected sections of the
bureaucracy result from this lengthy course of action, struggles in
which Stalin, in the name of his intangible preponderance, is the
arbiter. There is also another result: that bestiality of the strong,
that humility of the weak, the real abuses of the one, the false
confessions of the other, in the absence of all normal expression of
political thought and individual needs, of all respect for human
personality and for any moral rule. At his ease in this milieu, in these
surroundings, which are his natural element, Stalin incites and provokes
his auxiliaries, stirs up rival passions, exploits rancour and hatred in
order to guarantee in his own way the continuance of his despotism and
the unique position of the supreme arbiter. He cuts short differences,
separates the protagonists, and profits from the situation to impose new
men. Not knowing in whom to trust and seeing traitors on all sides, he
keeps changing his favourites without changing his methods, and always
with identical results. From disappointment to miscalculation, from
set-backs to deceptions, in the blind alley where the great, new
technical and industrial enterprise marks time and often retreats, he
interprets every natural weakness as ill-will, every unlucky chance as
obstruction, every banal mishap as wrecking and sabotage. He must have
culprits to punish in order to preserve the dogma of infallibility from
on high, as well as his personal prestige.

He treats all slavish courtiers as "double-faced," or at least accuses
them of lack of vigilance; he is constantly creating supplementary
departments of the police bureaucracy, such as the "military councils"
and the commissars in the Army following the "political sections" in the
_kolkhoz_, in order to reinforce the spying system. In his eyes, all
evil being treason, all good is merely a question of police and
repression. The different bureaucratic sections in the various ranks of
Party and State, united against their inferiors but divided before their
superiors, seem to him at best as less and less apt to realise the
impossible tasks assigned them by the plans, the false calculations, the
badly worked out projects. They denounce and devour each other, and are
sacrificed one after the other according to the necessities of a vulgar
hand-to-mouth policy. At length Stalin replaces them with "men with no
political past," that greedy new generation, impatient and brutal, on
which he depends. In the economic blind alley in which the U.S.S.R.
found itself before the twentieth anniversary of October, a mass
slaughter was needed to speed things up. The Kirov murder furnished the
pretext.

These "men with no political past," who have, moreover, no culture, no
experience and too often no scruples, men lacking in science as in
conscience, provide Stalin with sad surprises, as is shown, among other
examples of the same kind, by the defection of the Soviet diplomat Th.
Butenko who went straight over to fascism. It is true that the
transition from Bolshevism to fascism has for a long time been easy to
make. This man was not an exceptional case, his defection was merely the
result of accidental causes. He was in truth a characteristic product of
the neo-Bolshevism: there are many other examples. In order to be sent
abroad, he must have passed through many sieves, and undergone many
controls. Stalin and Yezhov answered for him still, over the signature
of Litvinov, while he was en route for Rome. Nevertheless, he declared
himself their enemy of long standing, and called passionately for their
fall and that of their regime. Those who agree with him, and who work
inside Russia, work against them in another way, by making a career;
they are worth no more in the economy and the administration than in
diplomacy and politics. If the renegade in question does not represent
the whole of "soviet youth," which has been the theme of an abundant,
but vain and deceptive literature, he belongs nevertheless to that
cynical generation fashioned by the G.P.U. and formed in the school of
Stalin.

At the Congress of Soviets in 1936, it was said that 43 per cent of the
population had been born since the revolution, and consequently had only
theoretical notions of the past. Thus Stalin draws on an inexhaustible
reserve, and is visibly obsessed by this prolific increase which
authorises him, as he thinks, to do as he pleases as far as human
material is concerned; for it accords well with his inclination to "mow
down in large armfuls" the old and the adult generations, as is shown,
among other signs, by this phrase of his: "At the present time, there is
with us each year a net increase of the population of nearly three
million. This means that each year, we increase to the extent of the
whole of Finland." It means in addition, to the misfortune of Russia,
that Stalin estimates human life at the very lowest price; as if, apart
from ethical arguments, social beings were interchangeable in work and
production without regard to their culture.

If T. G. Masaryk could justly remark that "Bolshevik half-culture is
worse than the absence of all culture," the suppression of this
half-culture by Stalin has not brought Russia any nearer to the
happiness of the ordinary people: instead of clearing the ground, it has
allowed the studious youth to become imbued with schematic idiocies,
primitive sophisms, notions so utterly false, and condemned by all
experience, that the Bolsheviks themselves have had to repudiate them
one by one and "rediscover the alphabet" every day. The lack of
rudimentary culture of the new men does not correspond to the industrial
civilisation, whose carcass has been imported at great expense and
implanted with many disappointments, and still less to the high moral
level without which a society with socialist tendencies is
inconceivable. But in the new generation it is possible to distinguish,
amid the still amorphous and passive mass, two contradictory currents.
The so-called "soviet" youth, conformist, poured into the mould of the
Bolshevik organisation, uncultured, egotistical, devoted to sport,
parrot-like, boastful, profiteering, eager for gain, grossly practical,
doubtful of nothing, its head filled with orthodox pamphlets, is however
sterile, in spite of its privileges. The pseudo-soviet youth,
non-conformist, impossible to define in its silence, restless,
enquiring, thoughtful, dissatisfied, retains its critical spirit, learns
its trade, avoids politics, hides its opinions, reads the poets and
philosophers, and escapes from official influence while keeping up
appearances. Neither the one nor the other, for different reasons, can
fulfill the hopes of Stalin.

### PS.9

THE scale of the extermination carried out between and after the trials
for treason and terrorism has somewhat lessened their importance, but
their significance nevertheless extends to the whole course of action.
For the future history of Russia, its revolutions and
counter-revolutions, it is not a matter of indifference to know whether
these trials concealed some morsel of truth under the mass of obvious
deceptions. Practically every one of the lies of the accusation and of
the confessions, like the lies of the witnesses and of the speeches for
the prosecution, collapsed under the flagrant contradictions between one
trial and the next. The statements with regard to the two parts which
were verifiable abroad were all shown to be false, without a single
exception. The opinions foisted upon the accused were diametrically
opposed to those which they were always known to have held. Their own
declarations before the tribunal, about the ideas which inspired the
opposition and the alleged plots, are contradicted from end to end by
all the existing documents not specially prepared for the needs of the
case. Finally -- a proof of the "totalitarian" imposture which is really
superfluous -- a comparison with earlier trials, notably that of the
"industrialists" and that of the "Mensheviks," establishes a remarkable
identity of structure which leaves no doubt as to the technique and the
police machination: the only difference is that in the earlier trials
France takes the place of Germany; the only novelty is the addition of
terrorism.

The general thesis of the accusation was summed up in March 1937 by
Stalin in these words: "... From the political tendency, which it showed
six or seven years earlier, Trotskyism has become a mad and unprincipled
gang of saboteurs, of agents of diversion, of assassins acting on the
orders of the espionage services of foreign States." The complete
falseness of this need no longer be demonstrated, since it was
immediately obvious on the publication of the reports of the trials and
by an examination of facts, the comparison of texts, the absence of
proofs, the contradictions in which the terms annul one another, the
unexplained disappearance of several hundred accused and of thousands of
witnesses and the material impossibilities which discredit the
remainder. Moreover, certain inexplicable gaps, unjustifiable
obscurities, indisputable lies, the incredible unanimity, the absolute
isolation of the prisoners, the abnormal conditions of their
imprisonment, the complete secrecy of the preliminary examination, the
absence of any defence and of all material evidence, the obvious role of
Chekists and agents provocateurs, the fact that similar or related
trials were held _in camera_, the mechanical orgy of all too excessive
insults -- all this hardly adds weight to the theses. The implication as
Trotskyists of men well known as mortal enemies of Trotsky refutes them;
the presence of Rykov and Bukharin, and even Yagoda among the accused
discredits them. Stalin himself imprudently contradicted them a year
later by making Trotsky and Krestinsky belong to the German espionage
service already in 1921, Rakovsky to the Intelligence Service in 1924,
etc. -- that is, long before the "six or seven years earlier," and at a
period when the close collaboration of these persons with himself is
incontestable. By the zeal of this same Stalin, Trotsky had, moreover,
been abundantly accused as an agent of France, before being branded an
agent of Germany -- assertions more or less incompatible. In the case of
the military leaders, the "espionage" of 1937 became in 1938 vague,
confused and misty intentions of a political _coup d'état_. All the
charges of the indictments have the same force. There is not even the
very least valid juridical presumption of guilt.

Does this mean that no doubt exists, in the nature of things, after
these objective statements, which are rendered difficult of belief by
the resemblance of so many accused to their accusers? Doubts still exist
about too many historical enigmas, and not only in Russia, to hope that
this will be fully clarified before the death of Stalin. As for
terrorism -- the classic reply from below to the terror from above -- no
definite act or concrete plan was revealed in the trials. But the
assassination of Kirov by Nikolayev, the only real fact, together with
various other indications, proves, in spite of the active participation
of the G.P.U., the existence of an exasperated and desperate state of
mind among a part of the younger communist generation: terrorism derives
from this inevitably. Stalin had nothing to fear, in this connection,
from his former opponents, who were astute but crushed; he has
everything to fear from the simple minded, from believers, from
anonymous men. Not one of the "capitulators" dreamed of killing him;
each one hoped perhaps that some unknown person would do it, only to
profit by his gesture and to see the tyrannicide sent to what serves as
a scaffold, leaving posterity to weave him garlands. Stalin could not
limit himself to sacrificing a series of Nikolayevs without reputation,
in order to intimidate once again a tired, bored and hardened public
opinion. He sacrificed celebrated heads, chosen for secondary reasons:
old counts to settle, the thirst for vengeance to be slaked, those who
were too well informed to be silenced. In addition, with the
unprecedented police precautions with which he surrounds himself -- an
unheard of technique of protection, extending even to the minute search
of his intimate friends -- he never risks his life in the Kremlin except
by a chance meeting with some individual very close to him and of the
same type, an Ordjonikidze, for example, able for once to deceive the
vigilance of the guards making the search or to seize on the wing a
suddenly propitious opportunity. In public, where he appears very rarely
and unexpectedly in order to avoid prepared attacks, he is surrounded by
an unbelievable number of unarmed "comrades," selected with a
fine-toothed comb, and by an incalculable number of janissaries. The
preventive terror, and the fear of reprisals directed against their
families, complete the system. The chances are thus reduced to zero in
practice.

Ordjonikidze, as a matter of fact, an old accomplice of Stalin, one of
those responsible for his rise, well versed in the tricks and scheming
of his master and compatriot, was the son of man to take the initiative
when once he had scented his disgrace. But as it turned out, his own too
opportune death was immediately suspect to the inhabitants of Moscow, a
suspicion which increased after the Yagoda affair and its horrifying
revelations. Stalin alone could profit by the crime. The discovery of
the unusual laboratory of the G.P.U. does not allow the suggestion to be
brushed aside. Since Stalin has felt the need of getting rid of the
doctors of the Kremlin, the mystery of the "medical assassinations" will
not be the easier to elucidate. The chapter of poisons already held a
certain place in the history of Russia, next to the chapter of tortures;
but in the most modern times, "socialism in a single country," the
avowed end which justifies unavowable means, was required to prolong it
further by some sinister pages.

Yagoda, Stalin's henchman, was quite capable of committing, under the
cover of his "patron," the crimes of which he accused himself; one could
not be surprised if he had also acted on his own account. It may be
voiced as a conjecture that he might have got rid of Menzhinsky in order
to take his place, and of Peshkov in order to take his wife. As for
Kuibyshev, the affair is inexplicable, unless Stalin gave the order to
"liquidate" him as a disturbing witness or a cumbersome mediocrity, in
order to have at his disposal various posts to bestow. Finally, in the
case of Gorky Stalin was also the only person who had both the power and
the interest to hasten his death. In recent years he had refused him
permission to return to Sorrento, foreseeing his departure for good and
all, and for the same reason had forbidden in '935 his participation in
an international congress of "anti-fascist writers" in France. (Would
not Gorky at liberty exercise abroad, in certain cases, an undesirable
moral pressure on Moscow, would he not leave behind him, under new
influences, writings which would damage Stalin's prestige?) After an
episodic phase of friendship which was self-interested on both sides,
each judging the other necessary for his glory, for different reasons
and in different ways, their relations became cold on account of certain
humanitarian overtures made by Gorky who intervened to limit abuses;
they went from bad to worse after the secret trial of Kamenev, which
scandalised and alarmed the last remaining friends of Lenin. The "genial
leader" and the "genial artist" had nothing left to say to each other,
nothing further to expect from each other. It may well be that the first
put an end to the second to leave his hands freer for the great purge he
had secretly resolved upon. But no one can honestly give credence to the
police version attributing the devilish initiative to Trotsky, who
morally even more than physically is as it were removed to another
planet; a version charging the "terrorists" with subtle manoeuvres to
contaminate with influenza an old man of nearly seventy, already
undermined by incurable diseases, and to administer overdoses of the
remedies. On the other hand, one of Stalin's distinctive
characteristics, which has been outstanding throughout his career, is
systematically to throw his own misdeeds and crimes, as well as his
political errors and governmental mistakes, on the shoulders of those
whose discredit and ruin he is plotting.

Moreover, terrorism has no meaning or reason unless it has a personal or
collective signature; by its very definition, it aims at inspiring by
violence a feeling of terror of some person or thing; properly speaking,
it is unthinkable for it to be anonymous or silent. Terrorism without
indication of its origin fails in its object, terrorises nobody; for
that reason, the death of Gorky, like that of Kuibyshev and others,
spread not the slightest terror. On the other hand, any normal mind can
understand that it is always Stalin who profits by the crime -- if we
allow for a moment the supposition of a crime. The statement of the
unfortunate Dr. Levin, "Yagoda was threatening to destroy my family," as
an explanation of his alleged complicity, bears out what is known of the
terrorist methods of the G.P.U. under Yezhov as under Yagoda, but above
all characterises the whole terrorist regime of Stalin. The mother of
the "wisest man of our time," just before dying, said of him in
_Izvestia:_ "An exemplary son. I wish everybody one like him." The whole
of Russia expresses itself in opposite terms.

A disturbing series of questions then arises, after the Yagoda trial,
especially if we remember that, according to the gossip in the U.S.S.R.
which is inevitable in a country without a free press, several murders
of well-known people have been represented as suicides; that Budyonny
could kill his wife with impunity in order to marry another, and that
mysterious disappearances follow one another under the regime of the
"happy life." What did Stalin's secretary, Tovstukha, die of? Why did
Alliluyeva, Stalin's wife, commit suicide? Natural deaths occur in
Russia, as elsewhere; that of Stalin's mother, Catherine Djugashvili, in
1937 is probably one of them; that of Lunacharsky (1933), that of
Chicherin (1936), that of Anna Elizarova (1935) and of Marie Ulianova
(1937), Lenin's sisters, do not appear suspicious. But was the strange
laboratory of Dr. Kazakov used in only two or three cases? (And as the
crowning inconsistency in the official version, the "terrorist" doctors
are supposed to have restricted themselves to administering doses of
digitalin and other substances which by no means require a special
laboratory.) If we are to be referred back as far as the death of
Menzhinsky (1934), why not cite that of Krassin, that of Dzerzhinsky,
that of Lenin? Krassin, as a member together with Lenin and Bogdanov of
the troika which directed terrorist action in Russia after the 1905
Revolution, knew a great deal about Stalin, and did not take him for an
eagle, exactly. Dzerzhinsky's name was often mentioned as a possible
General Secretary of the Party, a man as firm but more loyal than
Stalin. If Dzerzhinsky's successor at the G.P.U., Menzhinsky, was killed
by his own successor, Yagoda, who in his turn was in effect suppressed
by his successor, Yezhov, _his_ sudden death can also be questioned.
Moreover, there is the disturbing case of Frunze, Commissar for War, who
died in 1925 of a surgical operation, carried out against the advice of
the doctors but on the express orders of Stalin. The unjustified arrest
and deportation of Pilnyak, the author of a short story on the drama,
does nothing to dissipate suspicion in this respect.

It was inevitable that the execution of the generals should concentrate
attention on the hypothesis of a military plot, even though this was not
"juridically" proved; an hypothesis according to which the chief guilty
parties would be those about whose confessions -- assumed to bear, the
biggest doubt of all, on the accusation of "espionage" -- nothing
whatever is known. Now, repression in the Army began with the
disappearance of such generals as Levandovsky, Schmidt, Kuzmichov, etc.,
who were never heard of afterwards; it preceded the trial of the
Sixteen, and continued with the arrest of Putna, mentioned in the trial
of the Seventeen where the name of Tukhachevsky was thrown into the
arena; it was marked next by the "suicide" of Gamarnik, followed by the
eight most sensational executions; then came an uninterrupted series of
arrests and executions in which were implicated Marshals Yegorov and
Blücher, practically the whole of the General Staff, military and naval,
nearly half the cadres of both the Army and Navy, and even half the
Council of War which had condemned the Eight. Under the politico-police
conditions in Soviet Russia, merely to pose the question of a plot
involving such countless numbers and fomented in the face of such an
indescribable terror, is to solve it.

Neither between officers, nor between soldiers, nor between officers and
soldiers, does there exist in the U.S.S.R. the possibility of such a
concerted plot, even if it involved incomparably fewer people. The plan
to attack the Kremlin with the aim of a "palace revolution," revealed in
the trial of the Twenty-one, could only be conceived, moreover, to break
the resistance of the garrison and, if necessary, of the special troops
of the G.P.U. But this repression has struck at the leaders of the
garrison and of the G.P.U. just as much as the Army. Thus Stalin's last
version is of a plot embracing all active forces and thus leaving nobody
to attack, a plot which would never have been put into action. Such a
version is about as likely as his more recent one which he has used as a
motive for the bloody purge in the Navy: the "young school" in the Navy,
in considering that light units (submarines, torpedo-boats, hydroplanes)
were preferable to large, costly and vulnerable cruisers and
dreadnoughts, were serving the "enemies of the people" by depriving the
U.S.S.R. of a fleet of the line; but "the glorious officials of the
People's Commissariat of the Interior cut off the head of these
reptiles."

Under the Stalin regime of universal informing and systematic preventive
amputation, if any embryo of a plot ever got as far as being uttered,
Stalin alone was in a position to take the initiative in it and to hold
its strings. This is not only the opinion of Liushkov, a specialist on
the subject, but also the lesson taught by all political experience in
Soviet Russia since the death of Lenin. The only thing that is certain
in these gloomy tales is the major responsibility, the general and
particular guilt of Stalin. Not to neglect any hypothesis, we cannot
even exclude the possibility that Stalin was not only responsible for
Kirov's assassination, as has been verified, but directly guilty of
being the secret instigator. In this case, knowing beforehand of
terrorist inclinations, he would have given orders to let them continue,
perhaps to turn the murderous attempt in the direction of Kirov, in
order later to feign indignation and undertake reprisals. The horrifying
picture of carnage itself would prove that he recognised the complicity
of the whole active population, communists included, in the alleged
plot. In such circumstances, a "plot" has another name in all languages.
It is a question of latent popular hatred, silent collective hostility
toward Stalin, and an inexorable preventive struggle led by him, by his
personal clients, his ruling oligarchy, his pretorian guard, all armed
to the teeth, in the name of a new privileged class against an unarmed
people.

Before deciding, all at once or gradually, on the vast purges in which
the trials culminated, Stalin must have weighed the pros and cons, the
advantages and disadvantages. The only disadvantages he could see were
the loss of capable men, whom he did not believe irreplaceable, and the
probable bad effect abroad, which in fact he considered negligible. As
for the advantages, he saw many. He had already got rid of rivals; he
now destroyed possible successors. With the same thought in the back of
his mind he forbade too marked public acknowledgment of those in his
immediate circle. He had once said: "To choose the victim, to prepare
the blow with care, to sate an implacable vengeance, and then to go to
bed.... There is nothing sweeter in the world!" At last he was sating
his vengeance. He forces his adversaries to bestow on him diplomas of
genius, under the threat of death, torture and reprisals, he compels
them to dishonour themselves to deprive them of a martyr's halo, and to
be sure of their future silence, sends them to their death all the same.
He uses his ex-opponents for various ends, hoping to turn public
execration momentarily from himself by presenting them as drunken
slaves, and by attributing the economic collapse to wrecking and
sabotage, thus placing on his subordinates his own complete
responsibility. He lengthens the proscriptions to destroy suspects and
to exile those of whom he is doubtful, and at the same time to make up
the penal labour forces necessary for the huge public works. In his own
way he carries out, in the interests of his personal dictatorship if not
of economy and culture, the renewal of the cadres. He also gets rid of
the people who know too much about him, about his past, his present, his
imperfections, his crimes.

He is haunted by anxiety about his biography. His oldest comrades,
Mdivani, Yenukidze, Ordjonikidze, have without a doubt paid with their
lives for too long standing a friendship. Neither they, nor Gorky and
Yagoda, who were nearest to him in their last years, nor Zinoviev and
Kamenev, who knew him too well at the time of their close collaboration
and who were nearest also to Lenin, will write any memoirs. If there are
papers hidden anywhere, it is doubtful if those who know of them will be
able to use them for a long time to come. Yenukidze, Krupskaya, Gorky
have modified or falsified the memoirs they had written, in the new
editions, to please the despot. Khandjian, after his suicide, was
accused by his successor of having allowed works to be published in
which "the role of Comrade Stalin as creator of the Bolshevik
organisations in Transcaucasia and Armenia is ignored." Another, A. K.
Karayev, has had to answer for the crime of having "concealed," in a
book which appeared in 1926, Stalin's part in the workers' movement at
Baku in former times. Such examples abound, and reveal in Stalin, side
by side with megalomania and a mania for persecution, an inferiority
complex which torments him. His tamest historians are mercilessly
chastised when they are unable to attribute new merits to him, to
fashion for him out of whole cloth a past role fitting to his future
stature. The "Histories of the Party" published up to 1937, although
bearing the official stamp -- even those of Bubnov and Yaroslavsky,
Popov and Knorin -- are declared false or void. In 1938, a new _Short
History of the Party_ was published anonymously, under strict and
salutary instructions, which superseded the works of all previous
historians and became the definitive edition. Stalin requires that in
every circumstance he shall be the leading light. He destroys the last
witnesses capable of one day producing a true testimony about him. He
avenges himself now on these for not having known how to speak, now on
those for not having known how to keep silent. And he shows the measure
of his courage, as of his "humanism," when, secure from all risk, he
insults the defeated, stamps upon his prisoners, and rages over their
dead bodies.

In the same way, Stalin never has enough of grandiloquent and artificial
praise, of compliments more or less sincere. The majority of his victims
hoped in vain to disarm him by celebrating his virtues, his talents, his
genius, rivalling each other in unspeakable servility. To quote, after
the work of N. Lakoba, but one extract from this anthology of fawning
humility, it is enough to dip at hazard into Bukharin: "... The iron
hand of the workers' most remarkable guide, the commander-in-chief of
millions of men, whose name is the symbol of grandiose Five Year Plans,
of gigantic struggles and victories, Stalin." The editorials of
_Pravda_, and of the ten thousand other papers, are in the same vein:
"Millions of adoring eyes are fixed on Stalin. His name is repeated by
the workers of the entire world with profound emotion. He is the hope of
all the oppressed. He is the father of all who struggle for happiness
and humanity." Every time the Bolshevik Fuehrer utters a few trite
words, _Pravda_ sees in his speech a "new stage in universal history,"
and loses no opportunity of declaring that "the powerful personality of
Stalin epitomises all the grandeur of the coming era of humanity," or
something else of the sort. The self-confessed enemies of the people,
traitors, spies, Trotskyists, double-faced fascists, have all uttered or
written similar dithyrambs.

Lenin was sanctified after his death; Stalin is deified while still
alive. A certain delegate to a congress speaks on his mandate in these
terms: "... At that moment I saw our beloved father, Stalin, and I lost
consciousness. The 'hurrahs' resounded for a long time, and it was
probably this noise which brought me to myself.... You will excuse me,
comrades, if, finding myself in such a state of bewilderment at the
sight of Comrade Stalin, I did not salute him." Zealous officials show
their conformist zeal by christening localities with Stalin's name, with
every imaginable ending. Other philistines organise at Batoum an
exhibition of "revolutionary relics" connected with the life of the
dictator. Others place his bust on Stalin Peak, the highest point of the
Pamir mountains, where Lenin Peak is only second highest; others erect
it on the Elburz in the Caucasus, and announce in their artificial
exaltation: "On the highest crest in Europe, we have erected the bust of
the greatest man of our time." As for the tsars, capital letters are
compulsory when printing pronouns and adjectives referring to his
redoubtable name. Eastern "poets" are paid large sums to raise the pitch
of the panegyrics: "Story tellers no longer know to whom to compare
Thee; poets have not enough pearls with which to describe Thee." Other
verses in the same vein: "O Thou, mighty one, chief of the peoples, Who
callest man to life, Who awaitest the earth to fruitfulness, Who
summonest the centuries to youth... O sun, Who art reflected by millions
of human hearts." It appears also that Stalin is "more lofty than the
high celestial spaces" and "clearer and purer than the clear waters of
Baikal"; "his eye is more piercing than the falcon's"; finally, he is
"stronger than the valiant lion," and moreover, "a magnificent garden of
perfumed fruits," and further, "the most glittering diamond of the
Party"; "like the sun, he darts his rays, golden springs of happiness."
A hideous iconography abundantly illustrates this rhetoric.

More occidental writers also fall into line, and that without much
effort. A certain Prokofiev sums up: "Everything is embraced in this
immense name. Everything: the Party, the Fatherland, life, love,
immortality, everything!" Another, Avdeyenko by name, with a marvellous
imitation of spontaneity, recites a great heroic lay, learnt by heart,
with verses in this strain: "I can fly to the moon, voyage in the
Arctic, make some great discovery, invent a new machine, for my creative
energy is oppressed by nobody -- and all thanks to Thee, great educator,
Stalin"; and the final verse: "Men of all times and of all nations will
call by Thy name all that is beautiful, strong, wise, and marvellous.
Thy name is and will be engraved in every factory, on every machine, on
every tuft of the earth, in the hearts of all men." The prize must be
given to the man who goes one better than a paroxysm. Further to the
West, where the Soviet budget (largesse, author's rights, travelling
invitations) maintains numerous prostitutes of the pen, there is in
France a fairly well-known writer sufficiently venal to publish a
biography of Stalin, studded with gross errors of history and geography
and with falsifications skilfully reproduced on a groundwork of
apologetics as degrading for the author as for the beneficiary.
Tukhachevsky and his executed colleagues had greeted in Stalin a great
master of strategy. An aviator famous in the U.S.S.R. proclaims: "Where
Stalin appears, shadows melt away ...," which proves that it is possible
to climb high and sink low, that certain types of heroism and of
shamelessness are compatible.

The crew of the _Marat_ wrote to Stalin: "Because they are the object of
Your tenderness, animated by Your paternal love and Your solicitude, the
men of our magnificent country accomplish miracles such as the world has
never seen, and multiply their exploits on land, in the air, on the
water and under the water." But Ivanov, the commander of this cruiser,
was none the less shot as a double-faced enemy of the people. It is only
too clear that these rivalries in frenzied adulation into which irony
sometimes slips, mingled with derisive extravagance, betray an intense
fear of not satisfying the tyrant's demands, and that the poetic and
literary flatteries, works written to order and paid for dearly, have
only an appearance of fervour. So many bullets in so many heads, so many
convicts and so many forced labour gangs forbid any illusion on this all
too revealing subject.

### PS.10

"THE soul of all poetry," it appears that Stalin is also the spirit of
all prose: his hired admirers attribute to him the key role in every
sphere of human activity, in industry and in agriculture, in the arts
and in the sciences, pure and applied. Every result is achieved thanks
to his "genial perspicacity," to his constant intervention "in all the
details" of all creative work. Be it a question of oil, or cast-iron, or
chemistry, or transport, or aviation, or collective farms, or
architecture, or town-planning, the "great initiator" has thought of
everything, foreseen everything and prescribed everything; he "settles
all the chief problems personally," and moreover "looks after all the
practical details himself." Even the films are due to his "daily
instructions." A new Pico della Mirandola, he knows everything, and more
be, sides; every day brings a fresh proof of that. But in 1937, on the
twentieth anniversary of October, which almost coincided with the end of
the second Five Year Plan, the internal situation in the U.S.S.R. was
such that, well-versed as they are in presenting cooked accounts and
addicted to pompous and interminable speeches, neither Stalin nor his
experts dared to bring out the doctored balance-sheet of their
precarious work. A deathly silence enveloped the solemn date, awaited as
the most portentous of the regime.

The reason is that the second Five Year Plan, although reduced to more
reasonable proportions than those elaborated beforehand in the delirious
drafts, could not be better carried out than the first in any respect,
and for the same reasons. "Industry is seven times more productive than
before the war, and the national income has quadrupled," Stalin summed
up at the Congress of the Soviets in 1936. But it is useless to quote
figures which have no stable meaning; serious indices of value and
quality are lacking, and for good reason. Stalin is more ignorant than
anyone of the real economic situation, for he receives only false
information, dictated by fear, since sincerity on the part of the
commissars, secretaries, heads of trusts and enterprises is interpreted
as sabotage and punished by death. The corrective activities of the
police svodki banish illusions without correcting the figures. The
reports, accounts and statistics do not reflect the real situation.
Every verification or inspection reveals a lie, every analysis uncovers
a snare. Comparisons in arbitrary and variable roubles teach nothing.
Quantitative progress appears fallacious when one knows the
corresponding investments, apart from the waste which must be deducted.
Craft production, so important in former times in Russia, reached its
lowest point in 1937, and does not figure in these flattering
comparisons. Estimates of the national income are so much pure fantasy.
The rise in cost and selling prices, preeminently negative signs, serve
to swell the production figures, printed on the inferior Soviet paper.
One must therefore have recourse to other criteria.

It can no longer be denied in 1937, in spite of lying propaganda, that
the general balance-sheet is disastrous: the statements made at the
trials to clear Stalin at the expense of his underlings prove it beyond
all doubt. Railway catastrophes, mine explosions, breakdowns of
machinery, waste of material, loss of live-stock, deterioration of
goods, useless destruction, unpardonable sacrifices, financial deficits,
commercial disorder, accidents and waste -- all this chaos
characterises, not the conduct of certain commissariats, but the
"Soviet" totalitarian economy as a whole. Stalin knows everything, does
everything, has his eye on everything, is responsible for everything,
declare his apologists at every turn. In accusing Pyatakov and his
colleagues, therefore, he is accusing himself in the highest degree and
confessing that all is for the worst under the worst of all possible
dictatorships. And here is one of the accessory reasons grafted, in the
construction of the trials, onto the main considerations: the
designation of people to bear the guilt of Stalin the Infallible -- it
being understood that the main and secondary considerations are now
interchangeable, now identical, and that the economic depression and the
war peril are considered by Stalin only in so far as they affect the
preservation of his power.

Just as the so-called Bolshevik system has never, according to T. G.
Masaryk, been anything but a complete absence of system, or in other
words, a series of improvisations and an accumulation of compromises, in
spite of the vaunted principles, in the same way, the so-called plans
are characterised by the absence of any real plan. If there still exists
in the U.S.S.R. a more or less directed economy, it is only by an
infringement of the plans, by violations and transgressions which are
called by the untranslatable slang name of _blatt_, which expresses the
very antithesis of plan, personal combinations substituted for stable
rules which make it possible to get around various obstacles. The
_blatt_ obviates by personal initiative the impossibilities conceived by
the central authority, but it cannot solve, against the police State,
all the problems. It puts off the final crisis of this pseudosystem
without preventing it; it protracts with its palliatives a fraudulent
bankruptcy of which arithmetical fictions, complete or partial, give no
account. There are, however, true criteria which provide the key to the
enigma.

One has only to compare the average wage in Soviet Russia with that of
Tsarist Russia, reducing them both to a common unit of measurement (cf.
Yvon, _L'U.R.S.S. telle qu'elle est_). A wage of 600 kilogrammes of
bread per month in 1913 was reduced to 170 kilos in 1935, a decrease of
more than two thirds. But it had risen to 800 kilos in 1927, at the time
of the tenth anniversary of October, the last year of the N.E.P. In 1937
it corresponded to 260 kilos, that is, less than half the pre-war level;
and here the apparent increase was due to the increased advantages of
the privileged sections of the community, incorporated in the sum total.
(Professor S. Prokopovich cleverly infers from partial Soviet data,
which by their artifice are on the whole favourable to Stalin's regime,
that the pre-war monthly wage of 24 roubles 30 had dropped to 16 roubles
50 in 1937 -- from which moreover obligatory deductions varying from 15
to 21 percent must be subtracted.) Expressed in the basic food
commodity, black bread, a simple calculation which gets nearer to the
truth than the too learned indices of the statisticians, the average
working wage at the end of the second five year period is less than half
the miserable wage of former times, one of the lowest in Europe, when
account is taken of wages in kind (social services) and deductions
(fines and subscriptions, voluntary and otherwise). The area of urban
housing facilities is under five square metres per person on paper, and
in fact it is less than half for the working class. Social insurances
stingily redistribute with one hand a minute part of what is taken away
with the other. Since the agricultural workers share the unhappy lot of
the town workers as far as wages are concerned, it is the whole mass of
the population which pays for this peculiarly cruel system of oppression
and exploitation of man by man, ravaged by negligence and arbitrary
power, venality and lies, bribery and parasitism, nepotism and tyranny,
the symbolic knout and the death penalty.

From 1927 to 1937 hundreds of milliards of roubles were invested in
industry and agriculture in order to give them a modern equipment -- but
the result has been that in fact they are operating at a loss. Even
though we know what Soviet milliards are, and what Stalin's milliards
are worth, the resources thus sunk in the means of production
nevertheless represent a considerable drain on the national income,
precisely that brutal lowering of the standard of living expressed in
wages. At this exorbitant price, the technical victories appear at their
true value. Not one of them was worth the expense, the sacrifice, the
suffering inflicted on a great people, whom history has left without
means of defence. The example of other nations, and even of Tsarist
Russia, shows that it was possible to have done far better, at a lower
cost and with more lasting results by more rational and more humane
methods.

The industrial structure, organised without forethought under conditions
of terror, is showing itself unworkable in practice, unless profound
reforms are introduced -- as was indeed to be expected: permanent
disequilibrium, irremediable disproportions, premature depreciation of
material, immobilisation of machinery, dilapidation and flaws in new
buildings, frequent damages and multiplicity of accidents, forced
interruptions of work, all indicate the vices of the "system" and the
imperfections of the regime. The quality of production daily becomes
lower and diminishes the quantity that can be used; the proportion of
defective or useless articles is as much, and sometimes more than 50 per
cent in certain model factories. Transport is going to rack and ruin;
stakhanovism is precipitating the breakdown of indispensable and costly
machine-tools. The production of consumption goods, in relation to that
of capital goods, did not in 1937 come up to pre-war level, and will not
do so even in 1942, at the end of the third Five Year Plan _(Pravda_,
August 14, 1937). The productivity of labour in the U.S.S.R. is about
one fifth that of the great industrial countries. The cost of production
is five times as high, perhaps, -- the official figures do not warrant a
sure estimate. It is impossible to calculate the losses, the thefts, the
depreciation, the deficiencies. Excessive centralisation, the number of
intermediary authorities, the abuse of power, bureaucracy, formalism,
suspicion and incompetence, in addition to the other wounds in Soviet
society, produce sterility in industrial methods and explain to a large
extent the mediocre results. It is understandable that Stalin is anxious
at all costs to find treacherous saboteurs to answer for his failures,
and why, in 1937, he decapitated more than half the enterprises by
sending their directors to hard labour or death.

Collective agriculture suffers from the same evils as state industry,
and also from evils peculiar to itself. Under the yoke of the new rural
bureaucracy, with its police psychology and its red-tape, the _kolkhoz_
show no profit and the giant _sovkhoz_ only exist by means of subsidies,
and as experience shows are bound inevitably to be parcelled out. The
losses caused by the collectivisation of cattle will not be repaired for
a long time, unless it be by private rearing. Cereal production fell
from 96.6 million tons in 1913 to 77 million in 1936, a figure which S.
Prokopovich establishes from Soviet data. But, said Stalin in December
1935: "... Reaping with the reaping-machine involves enormous losses of
grain.... With this system we are losing from 10 to 25 per cent of the
harvest." He thus calculated the losses at one milliard poods per year,
that is, sixteen million tons, nearly a quarter of the theoretical
harvest, and talked boastfully of "raising the annual grain production
in the near future to seven and eight milliard poods." In 1937, a year
claimed as exceptional, propaganda spoke of a gross harvest of 110
million tons, that is the seven milliard poods required by Stalin, who
commands the elements as he commands men, and imposes his will on the
soil, the sowings and the weather, but above all on the statistics. But
this was a figure on paper, a theoretical figure proclaimed long before
the harvest, a record figure from which we must subtract at least a
quarter for the losses admitted by Stalin, and further losses due to
ordinary administrative incompetence: a sixth of the harvest, left uncut
in the fields, rotted under the snow -- this in a country where gleaning
is punishable by death as "injury to socialist property." Moreover, the
losses sustained during transport and storage are not reckoned. The
State requisitions, at ruinous prices, about 85 per cent of the produce
of agriculture. The general poverty which results is pitiable; only
private or family cultivation, side by side with the pseudo-socialist
sector, prevents famine. In 1937 collectivisation was almost complete
(18.5 million peasant families), and to bring in the last cultivators
still outside the _kolkhoz_ (1.4 million families), prohibitive taxes on
their horses were decreed in 1938, although the year before Stalin had
reminded the Central Committee of "the principle of voluntary
membership." These new measures of spoliation will not be the last word,
for the Bolsheviks have never finished undoing what was done and redoing
what they only knew how to undo.

If industry and agriculture work at a loss and swallow up a good part of
the national income, the deficit is seen in the privations inflicted on
the working masses: in short, it is made up by millions of hours of
unpaid labour and involves the sacrifice of millions of human lives. The
test of population, which Stalin keeps concealed, speaks more eloquently
than any other. On the basis of the 1926 census there were 147 million
inhabitants, and assuming a birth rate of 2.3 per cent per annum, or an
annual increase of roughly three million, a figure which Stalin keeps
repeating, the second Five Year Plan anticipated a population of 280
millions at the end of 1937. The census taken at the beginning of that
year, after a minute preparation and with an army of over a million
officials, ended in the arrest of the directors of the statistical
bureau and of their close collaborators, the results remaining a
mystery. According to W. Krivitsky, whose excellent confidential source
of information is the G.P.U.: "Instead of the 171 million inhabitants
calculated for 1937, only 145 million were found; thus nearly 30 million
people in the U.S.S.R. are missing." Actually, if the Plan calculated
180 million at the end of the year, that would make 177 million at the
beginning, or 32 million missing. Instead of increasing each year to the
extent of "a whole Finland," as Stalin said, the U.S.S.R. has lost the
population equivalent of a whole Poland, or ten Finlands. Far from
"reflecting the victories of socialism" as anticipated, the census
reflects the defeats of Bolshevism, the disasters of industrialisation
and collectivisation, which have often been compared to the effects of
several devastating wars. Stalin has ordered a new census for 1939, and
this time he will see to it that he obtains the total fixed in advance.
But he will not bring the dead back to life, nor compensate so much
physical loss and spiritual ruin.

The information, tragic in its harshness and of an inexpressible pathos,
collected by W. Krivitsky, is borne out by fragmentary and approximate
accounts from other sources. While a correspondent of the _Courrier
Socialiste_ was already able to report five million victims of the
famine of 1932-33 _(Sozialisticheski Vestnik_, No. 9, for 10 May 1934),
an American socialist, Harry Lang, returning utterly dismayed from a
stay in the U.S.S.R., learnt from a high Soviet functionary and
published in the New York _Forward_ that at least six million starving
people perished in the Ukraine at that period; he reports that 40 per
cent of the population disappeared in certain districts of the Ukraine
and White Russia; relief organisations count 104,000 dead in 1933 among
German peasant colonies alone _(Forward_, 19 February 1936, etc.). A
disillusioned American communist, Adam J. Tawdul, learnt from Skrypnik
that at least eight million persons died of hunger in the Ukraine and
northern Caucasus; Balitsky, head of the G.P.U. in the Ukraine,
estimated eight to nine million victims in the Ukraine alone; Lovin,
manager of the tractor works at Cheliabinsk, told him that more than a
million died of starvation in the Urals, Trans-Volga and Eastern Siberia
_(New York American_, 18-29 August 1935). If one thinks of the distress
of the millions of exiles; of the innumerable ill-treated penal labour
squads; of the concentration camps, where a frightful mortality makes
hue gaps; of the overflowing isolators and prisons; of the millions of
abandoned children, of whom only a minute percentage manages to survive;
of the executions and punitive expeditions; in short of the multitudes
"mown down in large armfuls" by Stalin, one cannot be astonished at the
immense charnel-houses of this gigantic prison which with double irony
is called a "socialist fatherland."

Author and abettor of waste of substance, equivalent in a modern State
to several great wars lost; responsible more than anyone for a material
regression and a moral decline, which drag Russia far behind in spite of
her aeroplanes and tanks; Stalin finds himself caught between the fear
of a limited war in which the U.S.S.R. would be face to face with a
powerful adversary, and the desire for a general war in which she would
benefit from powerful alliances. A war thus limited would be his certain
downfall; a general war would, in his opinion, be his salvation. This
alternative guides his foreign policy, which aims at bringing the
U.S.S.R. into any coalition aimed against Germany or Japan and
incidentally against their allies. The Russian intervention in Spain
(1936) and in China (1937) clearly illustrate his tactics of moderate
intervention according to the limited means of the U.S.S.R.; he is thus
able to harry and help weaken his enemies at small cost, and so to have
a preponderant voice in the conduct of the war and the conclusion of the
peace, while preserving intact the main part of his forces for more
vital circumstances. The same perspective was willingly adopted in
regard to Czechoslovakia (1938), since the principal burden of the
struggle against Germany and Italy would fall on France and England. The
pretence of an active, warlike patriotism, under cover of democratic or
traditionalist formulae, by the Communist Parties subject to Stalin in
the West and in the East, has no other motive. A parallel work of
intermeddling by various methods of influence is carried out in
government parties, now exploiting respectable sentiments, now
inadmissible interests, and always hideous sycophancy.

Karl Marx, of whom the Bolsheviks make a use which is apt to come back
on them, as long ago as 1864 denounced: "... the immense and
unobstructed encroachments of that barbarous power whose head is at St.
Petersburg and whose hand is detected in all the cabinets of Europe...."
Since then, Russia has only changed for the worse, and as Custine said a
century ago, "the nation itself is still nothing but a notice placarded
upon Europe, dupe of an imprudent diplomatic fiction." However, by his
tortuous diplomacy and thanks to the bankruptcy of contemporary
socialism, Stalin has without difficulty achieved partial successes,
because of the deep disquiet of the old Europe, now in a state of panic
before the totalitarian States, who desire to redraw the map of the
world. With monstrous ambiguity he has been able to treat with the
pluto-democratic States, who are blind to the antagonism between Slavs
and Germans, who are not counsellors of the affinities between left and
right wing totalitarianisms, who are not capable of realising the
dangers in time to act quickly, and who are resigned in their
shortsightedness to accept without conditions any eventual cooperation
which will assure their existence in the event of war. But at the same
time, by his autocratic policy and his backward economy, Stalin is
sapping the power at his disposal, by depriving it of a popular basis,
by suppressing the elite, by shaking the armed forces to their
foundation, by undermining the State with internal contradictions, and
by exciting centrifugal forces within his Empire. It is this which
explains Moscow's glacial silence in the most critical hours of European
history since the coming of national-socialism in Germany.

Eternal Russia could hold out a long time in a defensive war, but the
regime would have to be transformed or to disappear in a war which
threatened the country in its vital parts. This contrast between Russia
itself and Stalin's regime, has inexorable consequences. A military
defeat of the U.S.S.R., or an internal crisis, might be fatal to her
unwary allies and turn to disaster. A final common victory won by the
arms and resources of her allies, and ending in general exhaustion,
would bring into force another fear expressed by Marx. If the continent
of Europe persisted in capitalist excesses, the submission of man to the
machine, the armaments race, the piling up of public debts, then -- as
the author of _Capital_ wrote in 1867 -- "the rejuvenation of Europe by
means of the knout and by a compulsory infusion of Kalmuk blood,
predicted so gravely by the half-Russian and wholly Muscovite,
Herzen,.... would end by becoming inevitable."

### PS.11

BUT young Russia, bled white by Stalin, leaves the field free for
Germanic dynamism, and holds itself on the defensive like the old
decadent western nations, which at least postpones the apocalyptic end
envisaged by Herzen and by Marx, prophets of socialism, who were often
opposed in their views. Her internal regime prevents her playing in the
history of our time a role in proportion to her importance, and in this
respect Stalin shows himself the chief benevolent agent of Germany. This
police regime is still evolving in the midst of contradictions, and will
go on evolving: until, at the first serious shock, it will undergo a
sudden change, announced by every sign, and prepared by invisible
ferments. Before it reaches a stable stage of development, its
transitory character makes it impossible to define it in a satisfactory
formula; but the most striking traits of its outward appearance forbid,
in any case, the flattering definitions proposed by Stalin.

Lenin, Trotsky and Bukharin, the three chief thinkers of the regime at
the period when it was still permitted to think, could not agree as to
its definition; the first preferred State capitalism, the others State
socialism. The subsequent evolution under Stalin has both simplified and
complicated the problem. The difficulty of choice is doubtless due to
the identity of content in the two terms. It is significant that the
same hesitation occurs in the case of the state forms of fascism. The
old vocabulary is thus ill-adapted to express new historical phenomena.
The new terms, Bolshevism and fascism, in themselves empty of political
meaning, were necessary to describe hitherto unknown social movements
and their empirical ideology. In the final analysis, these movements
show so many similarities, and are open to so many mutual plagiarisms,
they borrow and exchange so many things from one another, that the same
word, "totalitarian," another addition to the modern vocabulary, becomes
them both perfectly. Mussolini began by imitating Lenin; Hitler
continued by imitating Mussolini and Stalin; the latter, in return,
copies his two rivals, especially in their worst features. At long
intervals the three dictators, with Stalin as leader, follow one another
in the way in which they educate and discipline their subjects by
bringing them into line, throwing them into prison and putting them to
death. It is hardly possible that so many analogies between Bolshevism
and fascism in word and deed, in means and methods, in institutions and
types of men, do not reflect some historical relationship, unless one
admits the possibility of a complete divorce between the essence and the
form.

As for Stalin, he contends that even "the expression State socialism is
incorrect." In 1936 he considered that "the complete victory of the
socialist system in all spheres of the national economy is now an
accomplished fact," and that "socialism, the first stage of communism,
is already realised by us in the main." He went so far as to say that
stakhanovism "prepares the conditions necessary for passing from
socialism to communism." The facts themselves are enough to give him the
lie and more than enough to condemn him. Stalin denies "State socialism"
in the U.S.S.R. on the ground that the means of production are
collective property. But the appropriation of profit has an
unquestionably private character, and it is this which matters. Private
profit is apparent in the growing social inequality, which is more
revolting in its arrant injustice than in the capitalist countries where
it is diminishing, more intolerable in the terminology of hypocritical
equalitarianism. No society, it is true, has ever existed without a
hierarchy, without authority, without natural and artificial privileges.
But the socialist dream of founding one has in Russia turned into a
nightmare. "The expropriation of the expropriators" has led to a sort of
bureaucratic feudalism under which the proletariat and the peasantry,
debased by officialdom and the mandarinate, have been reduced to a kind
of serfdom. If the methods of production are not exactly capitalist, a
term which in any case is indefinable, it is only because, for the
majority of the Soviet pariahs, the system deserves rather the name of
slavery.

Stalin analyses as follows the "governing strata" of the Party:
approximately 3 to 4000 superiors, the "high command"; then 30 to 40,000
middle leaders, "our officer cadres"; lastly 100 to 150,000 subalterns,
"our sub-officer cadres." These two hundred thousand individuals
dominate the population politically and embrace the bureaucracy, the
specialists, the intellectuals, the functionaries who occupy
economically privileged positions. According to Trotsky, the most
favoured social categories can be estimated at about 10 million people,
that is 25 million with their families. If the population is 145
million, W. Krivitsky's figure, these privileges are at the expense of
120 million people; if it were 180 million, the figure of the Plan, they
would be at the expense of 155 million. It is a regime of privilege
because one of exploitation, a regime of police because one of
oppression. Herzen defined the old Tsarist Russia in a striking paradox
which is still valid for the U.S.S.R,: "A mixed structure without
architecture, without solidity, without roots, without principles,
heterogeneous and full of contradictions. A civil camp, a military
chancellery, a of state of siege in time of peace, a mixture of reaction
and revolution, as likely to endure a long time as to fall into ruins
tomorrow."

This mixture of reaction and revolution baffles those who like classical
situations, and lends itself ill to the poor resources of sociological
language, which, in turn, does not lend itself to the introduction of
new words and phrases. Fascism also has this disconcerting mixture;
Mussolini calls it revolution, his opponents answer: preventive
counter-revolution. Revolution and counter-revolution have very various
interpretations, and doubtless it is no chance that in the U.S.S.R., in
the quarrels over historical interpretation between the victorious Tarlé
school and the Pokrovsky school condemned to silence, the revolutionary
role of Bonaparte or the counter-revolutionary role of Napoleon, plays
such a large part. Some saw the Russian counter-revolution in Bolshevism
itself, despite the inauguration of a new juridical system of collective
ownership, others recognise it only after the imposture of Stalin's
Constitution. It can also be understood as the period when practice went
openly against theory, when the old illusions of belief gave way to the
new unbelieving cynicism, when unconscious contradiction between word
and act was transformed into conscious lying. In this sense, Lenin
represents the revolution in spite of its defeats, Stalin the
counter-revolution in spite of its pretended victories.

We must go back a little to trace more precisely the course of this
formless counter-revolution, whose effects will for long be less evident
than the causes. T. G. Masaryk, more clear-sighted in sociological
analysis than in his conceptions as a State builder, has best emphasised
the mortal error which Lenin passed on to Stalin: "When one thinks one
has reached the definitive culmination of evolution, and that one
possesses an infallible knowledge of the whole organisation of society,
one ceases to work for its progress and its perfection, and one's
principal, and indeed sole anxiety is only to preserve one's position
and power." Experience fully confirms his opinion of "this abstract
regime deduced from a thesis and put into practice by violence," "the
absolutistic dictatorship of a single man and his auxiliaries," a regime
of rigid centralism, of inquisition and infallibility: "The Bolshevik
dictatorship has its source in an infallibility devoid of all critical
judgment, of all scientific spirit; a regime which is afraid of
criticism and of the judgment of thinking men is, by this fact alone,
impossible."

The force of things and the behaviour of men have contradicted all
Lenin's optimistic forecasts, his hopes in a superior democracy as much
as his semi-libertarian ideas expressed in the _State and Revolution_
and other writings of the same period, at the dawn of the revolution.
Nothing in the individual theses of Trotsky has stood the test any
better, in particular his wordy and abstract theory of the "permanent
revolution." Lenin died too soon to write the epilogue to the
miscarriage of Bolshevism. Trotsky has not availed himself of the
leisure afforded by exile to make a true and conscientious examination;
even his memoirs do not make the contribution to history which one has
the right to expect from such a protagonist; his articles and pamphlets
vainly paraphrase a hackneyed argument without throwing light on a
single problem. The miscarriage of Bolshevism in Russia is coupled with
the irremediable failure of the International, and the lessons of
experience go far beyond the sphere of civil war. Democratic socialism
in its various forms, in the name of legitimate defence against fascism,
is almost everywhere allowing itself to be led, circumvented and
compromised by dictatorial communism. The death agony of socialist hope
in the world thus opens up an immeasurable ideological crisis. It will
be the part of the epigones of a powerless generation to make out the
balance-sheet of national Bolshevism, of international communism and of
traditional socialism, and to draw from it some useful lessons. And this
should logically lead them to examine what is still alive and what is
dead in the parent doctrine, Marxism.
