---
title: Why Marxists Oppose Individual Terrorism
author: Trotsky, Leon
date: 1911
description: Originally published in German in _Der Kampf_, November 1911. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1911/11/tia09.htm>.
...

Our class enemies are in the habit of complaining about our terrorism.
What they mean by this is rather unclear. They would like to label all
the activities of the proletariat directed against the class enemy's
interests as terrorism. The strike, in their eyes, is the principal
method of terrorism. The threat of a strike, the organisation of strike
pickets, an economic boycott of a slave-driving boss, a moral boycott of
a traitor from our own ranks -- all this and much more they call
terrorism. If terrorism is understood in this way as any action
inspiring fear in, or doing harm to, the enemy, then of course the
entire class struggle is nothing but terrorism. And the only question
remaining is whether the bourgeois politicians have the right to pour
out their flood of moral indignation about proletarian terrorism when
their entire state apparatus with its laws, police and army is nothing
but an apparatus for capitalist terror!

However, it must be said that when they reproach us with terrorism, they
are trying -- although not always consciously -- to give the word a
narrower, less indirect meaning. The damaging of machines by workers,
for example, is terrorism in this strict sense of the word. The killing
of an employer, a threat to set fire to a factory or a death threat to
its owner, an assassination attempt, with revolver in hand, against a
government minister -- all these are terrorist acts in the full and
authentic sense. However, anyone who has an idea of the true nature of
international Social Democracy ought to know that it has always opposed
this kind of terrorism and does so in the most irreconcilable way.

Why?

'Terrorising' with the threat of a strike, or actually conducting a
strike is something only industrial workers can do. The social
significance of a strike depends directly upon first, the size of the
enterprise or the branch of industry that it affects, and second, the
degree to which the workers taking part in it are organised,
disciplined, and ready for action. This is just as true of a political
strike as it is for an economic one. It continues to be the method of
struggle that flows directly from the productive role of the proletariat
in modern society.

## Belittles the role of the masses

In order to develop, the capitalist system needs a parliamentary
superstructure. But because it cannot confine the modern proletariat to
a political ghetto, it must sooner or later allow the workers to
participate in parliament. In elections, the mass character of the
proletariat and its level of political development -- quantities which,
again, are determined by its social role, i.e. above all, its productive
role -- find their expression.

As in a strike, so in elections the method, aim, and result of the
struggle always depend on the social role and strength of the
proletariat as a class. Only the workers can conduct a strike. Artisans
ruined by the factory, peasants whose water the factory is poisoning, or
lumpen proletarians in search of plunder can smash machines, set fire to
a factory, or murder its owner.

Only the conscious and organised working class can send a strong
representation into the halls of parliament to look out for proletarian
interests. However, in order to murder a prominent official you need not
have the organised masses behind you. The recipe for explosives is
accessible to all, and a Browning can be obtained anywhere. In the first
case, there is a social struggle, whose methods and means flow
necessarily from the nature of the prevailing social order; and in the
second, a purely mechanical reaction identical anywhere -- in China as
in France -- very striking in its outward form (murder, explosions and
so forth) but absolutely harmless as far as the social system goes.

A strike, even of modest size, has social consequences: strengthening of
the workers' self-confidence, growth of the trade union, and not
infrequently even an improvement in productive technology. The murder of
a factory owner produces effects of a police nature only, or a change of
proprietors devoid of any social significance. Whether a terrorist
attempt, even a 'successful' one throws the ruling class into confusion
depends on the concrete political circumstances. In any case the
confusion can only be shortlived; the capitalist state does not base
itself on government ministers and cannot be eliminated with them. The
classes it serves will always find new people; the mechanism remains
intact and continues to function.

But the disarray introduced into the ranks of the working masses
themselves by a terrorist attempt is much deeper. If it is enough to arm
oneself with a pistol in order to achieve one's goal, why the efforts of
the class struggle? If a thimbleful of gunpowder and a little chunk of
lead is enough to shoot the enemy through the neck, what need is there
for a class organisation? If it makes sense to terrify highly placed
personages with the roar of explosions, where is the need for the party?
Why meetings, mass agitation and elections if one can so easily take aim
at the ministerial bench from the gallery of parliament?

In our eyes, individual terror is inadmissible precisely because it
belittles the role of the masses in their own consciousness, reconciles
them to their powerlessness, and turns their eyes and hopes towards a
great avenger and liberator who some day will come and accomplish his
mission. The anarchist prophets of the 'propaganda of the deed' can
argue all they want about the elevating and stimulating influence of
terrorist acts on the masses. Theoretical considerations and political
experience prove otherwise. The more 'effective' the terrorist acts, the
greater their impact, the more they reduce the interest of the masses in
self-organisation and self-education. But the smoke from the confusion
clears away, the panic disappears, the successor of the murdered
minister makes his appearance, life again settles into the old rut, the
wheel of capitalist exploitation turns as before; only the police
repression grows more savage and brazen. And as a result, in place of
the kindled hopes and artificially aroused excitement comes
disillusionment and apathy.

The efforts of reaction to put an end to strikes and to the mass
workers' movement in general have always, everywhere, ended in failure.
Capitalist society needs an active, mobile and intelligent proletariat;
it cannot, therefore, bind the proletariat hand and foot for very long.
On the other hand, the anarchist 'propaganda of the deed' has shown
every time that the state is much richer in the means of physical
destruction and mechanical repression than are the terrorist groups.

If that is so, where does it leave the revolution? Is it rendered
impossible by this state of affairs? Not at all. For the revolution is
not a simple aggregate of mechanical means. The revolution can arise
only out of the sharpening of the class struggle, and it can find a
guarantee of victory only in the social functions of the proletariat.
The mass political strike, the armed insurrection, the conquest of state
power -- all this is determined by the degree to which production has
been developed, the alignment of class forces, the proletariat's social
weight, and finally, by the social composition of the army, since the
armed forces are the factor that in time of revolution determines the
fate of state power.

Social Democracy is realistic enough not to try to avoid the revolution
that is developing out of the existing historical conditions; on the
contrary, it is moving to meet the revolution with eyes wide open. But
-- contrary to the anarchists and in direct struggle against them --
Social Democracy rejects all methods and means that have as their goal
to artificially force the development of society and to substitute
chemical preparations for the insufficient revolutionary strength of the
proletariat.

Before it is elevated to the level of a method of political struggle,
terrorism makes its appearance in the form of individual acts of
revenge. So it was in Russia, the classic land of terrorism. The
flogging of political prisoners impelled Vera Zasulich to give
expression to the general feeling of indignation by an assassination
attempt on General Trepov. Her example was imitated in the circles of
the revolutionary intelligentsia, who lacked any mass support. What
began as an act of unthinking revenge was developed into an entire
system in 1879-81. The outbreaks of anarchist assassination in Western
Europe and North America always come after some atrocity committed by
the government -- the shooting of strikers or executions of political
opponents. The most important psychological source of terrorism is
always the feeling of revenge in search of an outlet.

There is no need to belabour the point that Social Democracy has nothing
in common with those bought-and-paid-for moralists who, in response to
any terrorist act, make solemn declarations about the 'absolute value'
of human life. These are the same people who, on other occasions, in the
name of other absolute values -- for example, the nation's honour or the
monarch's prestige -- are ready to shove millions of people into the
hell of war. Today their national hero is the minister who gives the
sacred right of private property; and tomorrow, when the desperate hand
of the unemployed workers is clenched into a fist or picks upon a
weapon, they will start in with all sorts of nonsense about the
inadmissibility of violence in any form.

Whatever the eunuchs and pharisees of morality may say, the feeling of
revenge has its rights. It does the working class the greatest moral
credit that it does not look with vacant indifference upon what is going
on in this best of all possible worlds. Not to extinguish the
proletariat's unfulfilled feeling of revenge, but on the contrary to
stir it up again and again, to deepen it, and to direct it against the
real causes of all injustice and human baseness -- that is the task of
the Social Democracy.

If we oppose terrorist acts, it is only because individual revenge does
not satisfy us. The account we have to settle with the capitalist system
is too great to be presented to some functionary called a minister. To
learn to see all the crimes against humanity, all the indignities to
which the human body and spirit are subjected, as the twisted outgrowths
and expressions of the existing social system, in order to direct all
our energies into a collective struggle against this system -- that is
the direction in which the burning desire for revenge can find its
highest moral satisfaction.
