---
title: Alternative Lenin
author: Widgery, David
date: 1979
description: Based on what has been posted on the Marxists Internet Archive as Post-Electronic Leninism. Proofread against, and incorporating some minor formatting changes from, the version that appears on pages 45-53 as Alternative Lenin in the collection Preserving Disorder. From <https://www.marxists.org/archive/widgery/1979/03/lenin.htm>.
...

Lenin remains a difficult figure to bring into political focus. Austere,
plain, down-to-earth, he possessed a rare combination of practical
realism and soaring imagination.

The Russian revolution saved the honour of marxism. Yet what has become
of the Soviet Union proceeded to lose it again. Official
Marxism-Leninism is now a more conservative cult than the Catholic
Church and Lenin's curt, bearded brand image endorses some of the most
repressive, boring and un-revolutionary states ever to exist.

There are more "Leninist" parties than inverted commas now, covering
every sin from the ascendant bourgeoisie of Malawi to the doctrinaire
trots of Michigan. We have to sneak past the mausoleum-guards to meet
the elusive, unpretentious genius of 1917, a leader "straight as rails,
simple as bread".

It would make life a lot easier to dismiss Bolshevism en bloc as
inherently hierarchical and inevitably dictatorial (as do the
libertarian and anarchist comrades). And more soothing to somehow
persuade yourself that the various heads of state who flank the nuclear
missiles in Red Square every year are socialist
revolutionaries-of-a-sort after all (as do most communists, some of
social-democrats and a fair few Trotskyists).

It requires more imaginative effort to comprehend that the Russian
Revolution was both overwhelmingly and genuinely a mass social
revolution and yet that it began to lose its authentic socialist
character within months of the workers' seizure of power.

Yet it is exactly this agonising and contradictory process which Cliff
studies in _The Revolution Besieged_ with commendable honesty and
clarity. The skill with which the author co-mingles the heroic and the
tragic makes this the most moving volume in what was in danger of
becoming a worthy but somewhat tedious biography.

For those of the orthodox Right and the libertarian Left who see the
Bolshevik slogans of self-emancipation and workers control as convenient
camouflage for the ambition of a minority party, Lenin is again and
again shown in his most radical light, coaxing, exhorting, applauding
and congratulating the initiatives of "the ordinary" in emerging from
the wings of history to centre-stage.

"Let us suppose for a moment that the Bolsheviks do gain the upper
hand," speculated the Petrograd equivalent of the _Daily Telegraph_,
"Who will govern us then; the cooks perhaps, those connoisseurs of
cutlets and beefsteaks? Or maybe the firemen? Or perhaps the nursemaids
will rush off to meetings of the Council of State between the
nappy-washing sessions?"

Lenin had his answer:

>Comrades, working people! Remember you yourselves are at the helm of
state. No one will help you if you yourselves do not unite and take into
your hands all affairs of the state ... Get on with the job yourselves:
begin right at the bottom, do not wait for anyone.

Socialism was to him nothing less than displaying the abilities,
developing the capacities and revealing the talents "so abundant among
the people whom capitalism crushed, suppressed and strangled".
Addressing the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets at the moment of
the seizure of power, Lenin declared "We must allow complete freedom to
the creative faculties of the masses".

The statements are too frequent and too passionate to discount, the
results too spectacular. Despite siege, blockade and invasion, in felt
shoes, chewing black bread, banging rusty typewriters and shouting down
crackling telephones, the ordinary people fought, organised, educated,
entertained, improvised and loved as never before. The country may have
been enfeebled by prolonged war, blasted by well-provisioned armies of
invasion, betrayed and sabotaged by the Cadets, bled dry by the immense,
suspicious steppes, but it was **their** soviet Russia, theirs at last.

It's this democratic control which is the key to real human freedom, not
the occasional ballot paper or the wording of the statutes. Cliff states
the matter plainly:

>The liberation of the working class can be achieved only through the
action of the working class. Hence one can have a revolution with more
or less violence, more or less suppression of the civil rights of the
bourgeoisie and its hanger-on, with more or less political freedom, but
one **cannot** have a revolution, as the history of Russia conclusively
demonstrates without workers' democracy -- even if restricted and
distorted. Socialist advance must be gauged by the workers' freedom, by
their power to shape their own destiny ...

As Cliff says elsewhere, "The workers can get many, many things from the
top, they can get reforms. The cow can get extra grass, the farmer can
give her extra hay. The one thing the farmer will never give is the
control over the shed. This has to be taken ..." All the Red
hydroelectric dams and the battleships named after The Commune come to
nothing if the workers do not control them.

Yet this book also documents, virtually on facing pages, quite how fast
"the old crap revives". Long before the banning of factions in 1921 or
the defeat of the Left opposition in 1927, the Bolsheviks took measures
which undercut that workers' democracy which Cliff sees as the
essential, indispensable element in socialist revolution.

Already by 1919, "the Red Army was undeniably as far from Lenin's idea
of a workers' militia as chalk from cheese". In a mere 11 months, the
number of secret police grew from 120 to 31,000 and the Extraordinary
Commissions (the Cheka) had their own chain of authority, over-riding
the Soviets.

The civil war sucked workers out of the factories and pulled industry
out of shape. As workers' control and various forms of centralisation
and methods of factory management were debated, Denikin and the invading
armies called the tune. "Industry was turned into a supply organisation
for the Red Army and industrial policy became a branch of military
strategy."

The first exuberant wave of workers' power was obliterated by the
firearms of the invading armies. The Red Army won a kind of victory in
the civil war, but at what a price; "the destruction of the proletariat
that had made the revolution, while leaving intact the state apparatus
built by it."

From her cell in Breslau prison Rosa Luxemburg wrote in October 1918:
"Everything that happens in Russia is comprehensible and represents an
inevitable chain of causes and effects, the starting point and end term
of which are; the failure of the German proletariat and the occupation
of Russia by German imperialism."

True, but then almost anything -- including Stalin -- can be justified
by "the force of circumstances". One notes from Cliff's account a
tendency within the Bolshevik party to redefine their political aims and
retreat from the commune-state so decisively sketched in _The State and
Revolution_ which Cliff rightly calls "the apex of Lenin's writing --
his real testament".

Mysteriously, the dictatorship of the working class shifts its location
from the Soviets to the Bolshevik party, indeed to the centralised
officials of that party. And in reality, party members, bound by voting
discipline, could dominate the Soviet lists even before their organised
rivals were banned. The state was not merely fused with the party, the
Soviets were subordinated to the Politburo, the Orgburo and the
Secretariat.

After 1920, Kamenev, Zinoviev and most outrageously Trotsky in March
1921 arguing against the workers' opposition who took up exactly this
point, began to call on the party's "right to assert its own
dictatorship".

In that critical debate, Lenin, head in hands and taking copious notes,
remained silent. In his final months of semi-coma, he reproached
himself, using expressions like "the fault is mine", "I am to blame"
and, in his last dictated note, "I suppose I have been very remiss with
respect to the workers of Russia". Nigel Harris notes in this period
"... Lenin's purely pragmatic tacking between two extremes. He seems to
have lost his moorings, to be aware of the problem but to see no social
force capable of solving it".

He attempts to quell the tide without challenging head-on the new theory
of the dictatorship of the party or re-asserting the themes of 1917. His
last speech to Party Congress, in March 1922, has a surreal quality.
"The machine refused to obey the hand that guided it. It was like a car
that was going not in the direction the driver desired, but in a
direction someone else desired: as if it were being driven by a
mysterious, lawless hand. God knows whose ..."

It would seem that the Bolsheviks not only made virtues out of
necessities but to some extent fell victim of their very organisational
prowess. The very eminence and indispensability of Lenin made his loss
so devastating, especially since, in the Cliff account, it is only
Lenin's incomparable rapport with the workers which enables him to
periodically overcome the conservatism inherent in the illegal and
highly professionalised Party.

The all-important role played by the tiny group of exile leaders
inherent in the Bolshevik mode of organisation left an enormous gap in
experience between them and the rapidly changing party rank and file.
"The proletarian policy of the party is not determined by the character
of the membership but by the enormous undivided prestige enjoyed by the
small group which might be called the old guard of the old guard of the
party," Lenin admitted grimly in 1922.

The very dependence of the underground party on skilled revolutionary
functionaries is part of the reason it succumbed so swiftly to the
bureaucrats of the old order who. Lenin complained, "wear a red ribbon
in their buttonholes and creep into warm corners". The technique of
selective appointment from above, perfected by Lenin in the early
faction fights, now re-appeared in monstrous form, used to debar party
Congress delegates from Samara who supported the workers' opposition or
to insist on the election of a "loyal list" of candidates in the
Metalworkers' Union, despite the fierce protest of the Bolshevik
engineers.

The absolute Bolshevik hostility to any kind of "utopian" speculation
seems to have left Lenin a little dazed and disconcerted when the
external changes of the revolution begun to hit people's inner
consciousness. Yet he seems to regard Kollontai, Mayakovsky and dear old
Lunacharsky as slightly childish for being concerned, in their different
ways, with this problem. Certainly, in his notorious interview with
Clara Zetkin and his polemic with the Proletkult group, he adopts old
fart positions on sexual and cultural questions.

Anyone who thinks it is "Leninist" to denounce attempts to alter ways of
feeling and living as part of the making of socialism and to resolutely
postpone such problems till somewhere over the rainbow and
After-the-Revolution will be challenged by the limitations Cliff
demonstrates in this aspect of Lenin's thinking. None of this is to
belittle a man Reich called "the greatest mass psychologist of all
time".

Rather it is to identify conflicting and unresolved elements in Lenin's
politics, two souls to his socialism. We have a responsibility to select
the aspects we now need to emphasise rather than attempt to imitate a
"pure" Leninism to order, which would be both impossible and irrelevant.

Part of Lenin's political make-up is that of the orthodox materialism of
the Second International, whose philosophy is strongly affected by
Victorian positivism, whose economics predict inevitable crisis and
immiseration and whose politics aim at socialist majorities in existing
governing assemblies. It was a misunderstood Marxism and with the
dialectic deleted in which "marxist symbolics were preserved" but from
which "the revolutionary soul took flight", as Bukharin put it at
Lenin's funeral oration.

Although Lenin's explosive rediscovery of Hegel and Marx and he and
Bukharin's radical new analyses of the unstable nature of modern
imperialism were to topple that era of mock-marxism, Lenin was, until
1914, a disciple of Kautsky.

Cliff does not stress enough the extent of the reappraisal which led to
the production of _The State and Revolution_ and the degree to which its
view of the party, the revolutionary state and socialism itself, revise
the traditional Bolshevik formulae. The research in the famous blue
notebook was undertaken to repudiate the "semi-anarchist ideas"
Bukharin had submitted in July 1916 in an essay called _Towards a Theory
of the Imperialist State_. At this time Lenin still held the orthodox
view that "socialists are in favour of using the present state and its
institutions in the emancipation of the working class."

But in reviewing Marx and Engels on The Commune and the sharp exchanges
between Pannekoek and Kautsky in 1912, he comes to the view that what is
at stake is not a contest with the bourgeoisie over the state but
**against** the state. Not an effort to take office in old chambers but
make power in new forms. He sums up with characteristically explosive
punctuation. "One could perhaps express the whole thing in a drastically
abbreviated fashion as follows: the **replacement** of the old ('ready
made') state machine and **of parliaments by soviets of workers deputies
and their mandated delegates**. This is the essence of it!!"

This re-assertion of the commune-state and the adoption of the
Trotsky-Parvus theory of permanent revolution, itself inspired by a
re-reading of Marx, make possible the _April Theses_. And at the Finland
Station, "_State-and-Revolution_" Lenin has to struggle against the
legacy of "_What-Is-To-Be-Done_" Lenin in the form of a conservative
party who found his ideas scandalous. **This** is the Lenin we need to
rediscover after a half century when the dialectic was frozen over far
deeper by J.V. Stalin et. al. than Herr Kautsky could ever manage.

Yet the problem is that the species of Leninism which entered the vacuum
on the European and North American left after the collapse of the mass
movements of the 1960s and early 1970s was too often of 1903 not 1917
variety. The leaders of these largely self-appointed "vanguards" are
really 20th century Kautsky's, well-read, confident that they possess
all the necessary socialist knowledge if only the damn workers would
read their articles.

Post-graduate unemployment has supplied them with a labour force of
functionaries and even surrogate workers, all of whom can he depended on
for their loyalty to the official view. The party rank and file exists
in a guilty limbo which has a very sketchy understanding of
working class experience.

The "discipline" demanded of members of such groups is the obedience of
automatons. Luxemburg precisely pinpointed the ambiguity in Lenin's
praise of discipline:

>It is not making use of the discipline impressed upon him by the
capitalist state, with a mere transfer of the baton from the hands of
the bourgeoisie to that of the central committee, but only by breaking
through and uprooting this slavish spirit of discipline that the
proletariat can be prepared for a new discipline: the voluntary
discipline of social democracy.

Rather than educating and being educated by the discussion of real
experience, proletarian hostages are grabbed, lectured and exhibited as
evidence. Formulas from _What Is To Be Done_ and much virile talk about
"building the Party" and "iron discipline" wrenched out of context and
ill-understood. Sexual politics are taboo, obviously since
Machine-Leninism can't face the intimacy of their critique of hierarchy.

Standing in the same place for seventy-five years does lend one a
certain authority, I suppose, but it would have given Lenin, for whom
things changed all the time, fifty fits. And of course, if the working
class spurn the proferred copies of _The Spark_ or whatever and go up
the pub to talk about Jeremy Thorpe's sex life, this only proves the
abysmally low level of consciousness, backwardness and economism, the
vanguard suspected them of all along.

The "trouble with Leninism" is not that it has been fetishised or
repeated mechanically or contains destructive or male-dominated
tendencies. All these misfortunes can and will befall a theory of
organisation within capitalism without rendering it irreparable.[^fn-1]
The real problem is that the flowering of 1917 was so swiftly nipped in
the bud that the fruit we have inherited has been largely damaged and
diseased.

The blossoming-blighting process which Cliff documents froze over
Leninism and only mass revolutionary working class action is able to
melt it from its icy limbo. Lenin is therefore trapped in his moment,
surrounded by a thicket and awaiting political rescue: "An old communist
conceives an embryo of longing". One day, his Modern Prince will come.
Until he is woken with the proletarian kiss, the problem is not that
Leninism has failed, but that it has not been tried. And alternatives to
Leninism are old reactions in new disguises, forms of terrorism,
reformism and anarchism which were politically surpassed by marxism a
century ago.

This is very sad because the revolutionary essence of the Lenin of _The
State and Revolution_ is profoundly emancipatory, heartily contemptuous
of people who think in the past tense and deserves a lot better. But as
long as Leninism remains on this pathetic level, it provides the perfect
excuse for people to revert to its mirror image liberal-anarchism (the
other big late 1970s political growth industry), give up any organised
collective attempt to change the world and sit around and discuss their
relationships.

It is even sadder because even if everyone suddenly started buying _The
Spark_ and suddenly a scale-model replica Bolshevik party were
re-incarnated on Clapham Common, as Lenin himself has warned, it would
be most unlikely to fit our needs. In an important passage in 1918,
Lenin suggested "the whole difficulty of the Russian revolution is that
it was much easier for the Russian revolutionary working class to start
than it is for the West European classes, but it is much more difficult
for us to continue".

They have ways of making sure it never happens here, like Len Murray,
_Crossroads_ and the _Morning Star_ (as well as the SPG and the army).
But when it does, the problems of sheer need which crushed the
Bolsheviks are less pressing and the comparative strength and confidence
of the modern working class is immensely more promising. If we need to
be much more sophisticated to take power, it won't be so difficult to
hold it.

"Leninism", said Norman Mailer in one of his annoyingly insightful
moments, "was built to analyse a world where all the structures were
made of steel -- now the sinews of Dragon Lady could hide them under her
nail". We don't just need a 1917 rather than 1903 Leninism, we need a
post-electronic Leninism whose politics can move with astonishing ease
from the details of a strike to the problems of childrearing, which has
the centralised striking power to win street battles but the imagination
to create inspiring carnivals, which is seeking not Euro-Reforms but a
new way of life, love and government.

For those who got a bit bogged down with the rather excessive attention
to organisation in the first two volumes (and the political campaigns
which accompanied their publication), do read on and see what it was all
in aid of. Volume three really does offer an alternative V.I.[^fn-2]

[^fn-1]: "irreparable" is "invalid" in the MIA transcription, and
possibly in the original _Socialist Review_ version. We have used the
word ("irreparable") that appears in the Preserving Disorder collection.
-- red texts note

[^fn-2]: In _Preserving Disorder_ this piece is entitled _Alternative
Lenin_ and the original publishing details are given incorrectly as
"First published in _Socialist Review_, 1975". For some reason this
version omits the final paragraph. -- MIA note
