---
title: Capitalism and its Revolutionary Destruction
author: Wildcat
date: Mid-1980s
description: Originally posted on the Subversion group's website. This version has been proofread and formatted to better match a scan hosted by the Sparrows' Nest Library and Archive at <https://www.thesparrowsnest.org.uk/collections/public_archive/659.pdf>.
...

## Introduction

This pamphlet has been produced as a **first draft** to give brief
introduction to the ideas of the **Wildcat** group. We are producing it
not as some definitive statement revolutionary theory, but rather as a
tool for dialogue. As our discussion and activity develop, many of our
ideas will be modified, become more detailed and more clearly related to
what's happening in the class struggle.

If you think that the following is in any way a contribution towards the
revolutionary destruction of capitalism we welcome any correspondence or
/ criticisms you may have. Obviously we also look forward to working
with other revolutionaries on both a practical and theoretical level.

## Capitalism

We the working class create the wealth of society. But we do so only for
the profit of the bosses on terms dictated by them. As workers, we are
forced to work long hours in conditions which endanger our physical and
mental health. We have no control over what we produce, how it is
produced or what it is used for.

Every aspect of our lives is dominated by the need for money. At most,
what we are paid allows us to consume a part of what the bosses decide
it is profitable for us to produce. Even then the goods we buy often
fall apart before we have paid for them. The food we eat is adulterated.

The working class is the dispossessed class. We depend on selling our
labour power to the bosses. But since labour power, as a commodity, is
bought and sold like any other commodity, the bosses can refuse to buy
it when it is no longer required. Ever greater numbers of our class are
denied even the "privilege" of wage labour, and forced to rely on state
handouts or scavenge on the margins of the economy.

For the bosses who own and control the means of production, all
production has a single aim: profit. Nothing is produced unless it can
be sold profitably, however much it may be needed. For the sake of
profit mountains of food are destroyed. Resources are denied for basic
health care. The houses and cities we live in are allowed to decay.
Instead resources are devoted to arms and armies so that the bosses can
send us into war against rival profiteers. Resources are used to
maintain and arm the police forces which defend the bosses from our
anger. Nor do the bosses stint on luxuries for themselves.

None of this would happen in a rationally organised society. It is the
outcome of a society propelled by the lust for profit.

## Parliament and Rights

For all these reasons the working class has no interest in the continued
existence of this society. However, we are continuously encouraged to
see ourselves as members of it, as the public, as citizens, as possible
voters. Such ideas have a history.

In the early stages of capitalist ascendancy, the up-and-coming
capitalist class attained state power through various political
revolutions. Universal suffrage, people's rights, the rights of man,
justice, the democratic state: these were its slogans. The practical
needs lying behind them were: the freedom of trade; the right to private
property; and certain political freedoms, which, together with the
rights of the isolated individual, were designed to ensure faith in the
"people's" state, ie. in the power of the new ruling class.

Obviously it still suits the enemy today if we see ourselves as sharing
interests with them. Take a look at the wide spread incitements to take
part in 'public debates' on whether such-and-such a government or
political lobby has "right" or "wrong" policies, or on which party
should be in power. Central to the "freedom of choice" allowed to those
who see themselves as part of "the public" is the right to vote.

Nobody who coherently grasps the **fundamental reality** that this is a
class society could possibly doubt that the revolutionary destruction of
capitalism implies the destruction of **all parliaments**. Today,
parliaments are no longer even the executive committees of the ruling
class, but an elaborate con trick to make us feel consulted. It follows
from all of the above that revolutionaries do not, under any
circumstances, participate in parliament or elections.

## The End of Capitalism

Capitalism represented a great advance over previous societies, such as
the medieval feudalism which it replaced in Western Europe. Under
capitalism the world has progressed from a state of universal scarcity
to one of potential abundance. But the drive for profit which has led to
the rapid growth of the productive forces under capitalism, **also**
prevents them from being used in a rational way to benefit the whole of
humanity. This will be the task of a new society: COMMUNISM.

The era of capitalism is coming to an end. The continued existence of
capitalism threatens the survival of humanity. The crisis of capitalism
is propelling the world towards economic and ecological catastrophe, and
towards nuclear annihilation in war between rival capitalist states.

## World Crisis

The most important result of the crisis is the declining quality of
life, in almost every country, of the vast majority of the population.
This is happening at the same time as one of the greatest technological
revolutions in the history of humanity. This contradiction shows the
bankruptcy of the capitalist system.

In the underdeveloped world workers assemble the latest computer
technology in sweatshops whose conditions would have shocked Marx and
Engels; while the majority of the population there sinks towards
starvation and destitution. In the industrialised world, despite the
automation of industry, the pace of work increases while wages stagnate
or fall. Unemployment leads to "third world conditions" in our cities.
In the so-called "socialist" countries there are rationing and
lengthening food queues -- except for the ruling elite.

## World Class Struggle and the Myth of National Liberation

This experience of the working class and dispossessed masses throughout
the world has produced world-wide struggle against the effects of the
crisis. The necessity for this struggle is the best disproof of the
various false nationalist solutions to the crisis.

The struggle continues in the "liberated" countries of the
underdeveloped world. National liberation is no solution to the crisis
there. In the 19th century some liberation struggles led to the creation
of new nation states which played a dynamic role in the development of
world capitalism. This is no longer possible. Today, the new rulers may
achieve a measure of political independence from the great powers but
they can never free their country from the grip of the world economic
crisis. For the working class in these countries "liberation" simply
means exchanging one set of bosses for another -- the new ones as
violently opposed to working class struggle as the old ones.

The struggle continues in the countries of the Russian bloc, such as
Poland. The so-called socialism in these countries is simply state
capitalism. The Russian bloc is not only just as capitalist as countries
in the West, it is also just as imperialist. Despite their conflict of
interest with the ruling class in the West, the Russian rulers form part
of the **same class**, and are just as much our enemies.

In the West the struggle continues under Labour Party and "Socialist"
governments just as much as under conservative ones. Across the world,
left-wing governments attack the working class just as much as
right-wing ones. The socialism which the left-wing parties claim to
stand for is in fact state capitalism. Nationalisation of industry is a
state capitalist measure which offers no benefits whatsoever either to
the workers employed there or to the working class as a whole.

## State Capitalism

Nothing could be further from the truth than the idea that state
capitalism equals socialism, or a step towards it. There are as many
left wing versions of state capitalism (such as Stalinism) as right wing
ones (such as Nazism), as well as "democratic" ones (such as Roosevelt's
"New Deal" in pre-war America, or present-day Scandinavia).

In mixed economies, nationalisation -- like privatisation -- has been a
common method of carrying out wholesale industrial restructuring. In
19th century Europe, nationalisation was used to help develop
"infrastructure" (railways, post, credit...). In Russia after the defeat
of the revolution, the class which owned the economy was faced with
conditions inherited from the defeat of the working class revolution.
Large scale private capitalism was politically ruled out. State
capitalism provided the means by which the "underdeveloped" country was
able to catch up in capitalist development with the world leaders. After
World War 2, the Russian model of bureaucratic state capitalism was
exported to Central Europe by means of military conquest. It was also
adopted as a political model of development by many "Third World"
national liberation movements.

In Western Europe nationalisation played an important role in the
reconstruction of economies devastated by the war. It ensured that
capital was invested where it was most needed. At the moment, however,
the priority is to increase competition in the labour market, and
privatisation is proving an efficient means to this end.

In the Russian bloc, there are superficial differences with the West.
Most capital is owned by the state, there is no free market in labour,
and the poor have the "right to work". Fundamentally though the
conditions of life for the working class are the same. Capitalism still
exists, because workers sell their labour-power and consequently are
dispossessed of the means to freely create the conditions of life. Just
like in the West there is a ruling class which lives off the surplus (in
the form of **surplus value**) produced by the workers. In Russia this
class consists of a central Party elite which owns the state.

In practice state capitalism is rejected whenever, for example, there
are strikes against nationalised industries or "socialist" governments,
or when there is rioting or looting in "socialist" countries.
Nevertheless, the idea that state capitalism is or could be beneficial
to the working class is still a powerful force holding back the class
struggle. Despite the fact that "socialist" and "communist" parties
continually attack the interests of the working class, the belief that
they are "workers' parties" is still very strong. Advances in the class
struggle, if they are to happen, will bring working class people more
and more into conflict with these parties, and with the far left
organisations. The latter either "critically" support the mainstream
left or else they crave more extreme versions of their policies for
managing capitalism (such as nationalising everything, or
self-management).

## Frontism and Anti-Fascism

We are opposed to all capitalist front organisations, such as CND. We
are also opposed to the anti-fascist fronts which seek to channel
peoples' resistance to fascism and racism into support for capitalist
democracy, which maintains the very system which is responsible for
these evils. We stand for independent working class **direct action**
against racists. The idea of a front of workers with "progressive"
capitalists against "nasty" ones was used by the left to mobilise the
working class into the holocaust of the Second Imperialist World War.

## Nationalism and War

The nation state is the political organisation of capitalism. Under
communism nation states will disappear. As communists we oppose every
attempt to rally the working class to the cause of nationalism whether
in the name of "national liberation", the "defence of freedom and
democracy" or the "defence of socialism". We call on the working class
to oppose all wars between rival capitalist states by taking up and
intensifying the **class war** against capitalism in all its forms,
against all governments and bosses, black and white, "socialist" and
conservative. We call for mutinies in the armed forces of all warring
states, and for united action of working class people in uniform on both
sides against both their ruling classes.

Bosses throughout the world are united in their ferocious opposition to
our struggles. The working class must unite against them.

## Religion, Sexism and Racism

Nationalism is only one of the many reactionary forces which at present
divide and weaken the working class.

**Religion** arose as a means for individuals to find some order in what
otherwise appeared to be an inexplicable and irrational world. The
development of science and industry means that the world can now be
explained without resort to mysticism. But the capitalist ruling class,
like others before them, has institutionalised religion. Irrational
respect for religious authority is used to gain obedience to an equally
irrational social system.

Many of the most barbaric atrocities, carried out for reasons of "faith"
and/or reactionary self-interest, are publicly justified in the name of
religion. Numerous forces within the ruling class have not been slow to
ferment and capitalise upon religious frenzy. Islamic or Judaic
fundamentalists, Sikh or Hindu zealots, sectarian rampages from Belfast
to Beirut, Christians bombing U.S. abortion clinics: the examples are
endless.

**Racism** has deep roots in the colonial history of capitalism. Much of
the wealth of early capitalism was founded on the enslavement of black
people. In modern times, in times of economic boom, immigrant labour is
used to perform the most menial and low paid work. In times of crisis
racial minorities are the first to suffer its effects.

Across the world religious and racial divisions are maintained and
exploited are by the ruling class to set working class people against
each other.

**Sexism**. The sexual division of labour and the general oppression of
women existed in class societies prior to capitalism. However, as with
racism these divisions have been maintained and incorporated by
capitalism for its own ends.

The very word "family" has its origins not in some image of domestic
bliss but is from the Latin word "famulus" meaning a household slave.
Under capitalism the family unit becomes a unit for the production and
reproduction of the labour force, where the role of the woman is to
"service" the male worker by looking after the home and children. This
usually happens even when she has to go to work as well.

It is the institution of the family wage which makes women economically
dependent on the male "breadwinner". When in work, women are treated as
second class wage-slaves in much the same way as immigrant workers
throughout the world. They are a surplus pool of cheap labour to be
shuttled in and out of the workforce to suit the needs of capital. The
man is made responsible for wife and children by effectively making them
his **property**. The work ethic -- and even scabbing -- are justified
by the male "having the family to think of." Everyone has their place in
capitalist normality.

The maintenance of oppressive sex roles contributes to the sexual misery
which reflects and reinforces the general lack of real community under
capitalism. The family is one of the prime institutions for reproducing
these roles in male and female children. Women are subject to widespread
discrimination and sexual harassment including rape and the threat of
rape. Gay men and women are discriminated against insofar as they
present a threat to "family values" and sexual "norms".

It is not some "unity of the oppressed" across class barriers which will
end oppression. All these oppressions are an integral part of class
society and can only be ended with its abolition. This does not mean
that these oppressions will **automatically** start to be fought when
the class struggle advances in other areas of society. They must be
actively fought **now** both because of their effect on our daily lives
and because they prevent the working class unity necessary to overthrow
capitalism.

## The Struggle Today

As the crisis deepens, the class struggle in Britain and other
industrialised countries continues and is more and more faced with the
need to intensify. This struggle is not just the day to day fight by
employed workers over wages and conditions but involves a much broader
section of the working class. The families of employed workers play a
central role in the struggle against redundancies. The unemployed take
to the streets. School students are rebelling. Ever-wider sections of
the working class have been drawn into recent riots, and riots are
becoming feature of workplace struggle as well. All these struggles,
whatever their immediate aim, are at the same time a struggle against
the growing police repression by which the bosses hope to contain and
defeat us.

We cannot predict which section of the working class will take the lead
in future struggles. What is essential is that all these different
struggles link up and unite in a single struggle to put an end to
capitalism.

## Trade Unions

One of the biggest obstacles to this happening is the trade unions.

The best that can be said about trade unions is that in the past they
merely bargained for a slightly bigger slice of the cake for their
members. But the unions existence as "mediators" depends on the
continued existence of capitalism. They have never sanctioned struggles
which might threaten the rule of the bosses.

In this period of economic crisis there is no more room for compromise
and bargaining. Struggles are marked by increasingly open conflict
between unions and their members. Militant workers are quite willing to
defy their union leaders. But this is often linked to calls for "rank
and file control" of the unions. But it is not just the political power
and privileges of the union leaders that makes the unions our class
enemies. It is the inevitable result of the unions' acceptance of
capitalism. Any rank and file organisation which remains within the
traditions of trade unionism will sooner or later -- usually sooner --
go the same way as the existing unions. The unions as a whole are now
part of the capitalist system, with the job of keeping order on the shop
floor, selling our labour power to the bosses, and selling the bosses'
austerity programmes back to us.

If all else fails, and these days it usually does, the unions tell us to
"vote Labour" or "launch a campaign". In this way they help divert
workers discontent into the charade of capitalist democracy.

Workers continued acceptance of the unions and the traditions of trade
unionism has been a major cause of the failure of recent struggles.

Trade union traditions are based on compromise, obedience to the
rule-book, and acceptance of capitalist legality. They reinforce the
division of the working class into different trades, industries and
regions. Based on the organisation of employed workers, trade unionism
also reinforces the divisions between men and women, and between
employed and unemployed. Union traditions limit the participation of the
majority of workers in a struggle to the simple act of withdrawal of
Labour, while the leaders reach agreement on their behalf.

All this is the very opposite of what is required in the struggle for
communism.

## The struggle for COMMUNISM

### A. Seizing Control from the Unions

Despite the limitations of today's struggles they contain the seeds of a
future struggle for communism. We already know from the experience of
past struggles how, in broad outlines, this transformation will occur.

In its present stage the struggle in the workplace is generally marked
by a conflict between a militant minority who more or less clearly see
the need to break from union traditions, and the largely passive
majority who accept them. So long as this is the case the minority are
forced to act independently and often against the wishes of the
majority.

For a while the fate, of an entire struggle may depend on the courage
and resolve of a small minority of militants. They need to organise
themselves independently to carry out whatever actions are necessary.
They are in the forefront of attempts to raise the aims and broaden the
scope of the struggle. They strike up links with other similar
minorities, working together to try to spread the struggle. They produce
leaflets arguing their case. One of the most positive results of all
this is often that they try to understand the wider political
significance of what they are doing, by contacting and discussing with
revolutionary political organisations. However they are right to have a
sceptical attitude towards all such groups.

But a small minority cannot win the struggle on its own. Nor can its aim
be to replace the existing reactionary trade union leadership with its
own "enlightened" leadership. Their primary aim must be to get more and
more people **actively** involved in the struggle, in the organisation
of the struggle, and in the discussion of strategy and tactics. On this
basis a new form of organisation can emerge during the course of mass
struggle through which the working class can seize control of its
struggle from the trade unions.

In the communities, a similar process will free the struggle from the
reactionary influence of religious and so-called 'community' leaders.

### B. Organising Ourselves

From the mass struggles which have occurred in: East Germany '53,
Hungary '56, France '68, Spain in the late Seventies and early Eighties,
Poland '81.... as well as the historical experience of the Russian and
German Revolutions: we can see what the basic form of this organisation
will be. It will be based around mass assemblies of everyone actively
involved in the struggle, both in the workplaces and neighbourhoods,
meeting daily or in permanent session. These assemblies will elect
delegates to regional and international assemblies to co-ordinate the
struggle. These delegates will be chosen, mandatable, revokable and
dismissible by the meetings which elected them.

Unlike capitalist democracy which is based on the passivity of the
individual, this working class **self-organisation** is meaningless
unless it is based on mass struggle and the active participation of the
vast majority of those involved. It reflects the collective fighting
spirit of the working class.

Many mass struggles that have taken this form have been defeated.
Attempts to preserve the form when the active, potentially revolutionary
content has disappeared has only left empty organisational shells. Where
they have not simply disappeared they have played a reactionary role in
subsequent struggles.

Nevertheless such forms of organisation, whilst not guaranteeing the
development of the class struggle towards communism, provide the **best
framework** for an active and militant class to control and extend its
struggle.

As part of that militant class the most clear-sighted minorities will be
active in pushing the struggle forward. Inevitably in the early stages
there will still be a conflict between the majority views of the
assemblies and these minorities, who must maintain their independent
existence and activity. But eventually if revolution is to succeed, the
great mass of the working class must become conscious communists.

### C. Revolution

By then the stage would be set for the seizure of power by these mass
assemblies, organised into Workers' Councils -- a modern form of the
Räten and Soviets of the revolutions in Germany and Russia after WW1 --
in a revolution which overthrows capitalism.

In communist society the Workers' Councils will provide the initial
means by which people will maintain an equal and active part in the
running of social affairs.

### D. Violence

The violence inherent to capitalist society will disappear under
communism, a society based on the free association of individuals. But
the revolution itself will inevitably be a bloody affair. Even the
limited struggles of today, for very modest demands, provoke a violent
response from the ruling class. But this is only a foretaste of the
ferocious violence which the ruling class is **already preparing** to
use against a future revolutionary struggle. At all times -- before,
during and for as long as is necessary after the revolution -- the
working class must be prepared to use whatever violence is necessary to
drive its struggle forward and seal its victory.

To those who deplore the need for bloodshed, we reply: there is no
alternative. Nevertheless, the experience of past mass struggle suggests
that, at its highest points, the movement tends to acquire an
irresistible force which simply **cannot** be opposed. The stronger, the
better organised we are, the less actual violence will be necessary.

### E. The Transformation of Society

The organisation of communist society will be based or the collective
'administration of things', not on the political power of a ruling
minority over the majority. **The State**, which throughout history has
been the organisation of ruling class power, **will have been
abolished**.

The struggle of the working class, **as a class**, to seize power is,
**at the same time**, a struggle to transform society towards communism.
This struggle continues after the seizure of power. It takes place on
many different levels.

It is a struggle to spread the revolution to all parts of the world, to
remove pockets of resistance. To guard against sabotage, and to destroy
all remnants of capitalist organisation -- that is the structures of the
state, parliament, the unions and the various parties which claim to
represent the working class.

It is a struggle to overcome the limits which capitals has placed on our
imaginations -- to find ways of organising ourselves and relating to one
another which enable us to develop the full potential of the new
society.

But fundamentally it is a struggle to replace competition by
cooperation, production for profit by production for need. This will
make it possible to redevelop the large areas of the world devastated by
capitalism, and to institute a system of global planned production. A
communist society such as we envisage is only possible on the basis of
material abundance. The potential for this has already been created by
the development of capitalist industry and agriculture.

Goods will be freely available and free of charge. Money will disappear.
However, communist society will not be like a huge supermarket where
passive individuals simply help themselves. Work will be done because we
want it to be done and want to do it -- not because we **have** to in
order to survive. The focus of interest in our lives will shift away
from passively consuming, to include the new form of productive
activity. This does not mean that overnight all productive activities
will become passionately interesting... but a free society will strive
to make them so by continually transforming the aims and methods of
production. There will no longer be a mad scramble to exploit resources
without concern for the future, or a rush to buy the "latest model"
which gives the illusion of inventiveness and newness.

The separation between work and leisure will actually disappear. People
will freely associate to creatively use and transform their lives, by
creatively using and transforming goods, activities and the environment,
in an attempt to satisfy **all** our developing needs and desires.
Community and communication will emerge in this common project: people
will no longer be mere objects in the production process. The essence of
communism is the passionate transformation of the world and of
ourselves, in the creation of a **world human community**.

## Revolutionary Organisations

Our role as revolutionaries in all this is, through our propaganda,
agitation and active involvement, to publicise, support and encourage in
today's struggle all tendencies which help lead to the spread of
revolutionary ideas and a revolutionary spirit within the working class.
And wherever possible to actively escalate the class war towards
communism. As long as communist ideas are only held by a small minority,
communists are forced to organise in political groups. But this is not a
situation we wish to perpetuate. Some groupings of class-conscious
working class people get together through the experience of a struggle,
others get together through sharing political ideas. As the mass of the
working class becomes active in the practical escalation of
revolutionary struggle this separation will tend to disappear.

There are many other groups throughout the world which -- broadly
speaking -- share our ideas but this "movement" to which we belong is
very fragmented and torn by divisions, some real and some petty. Whilst
not underestimating the difficulties involved, we seek to resolve the
differences between us, both through discussion and where possible joint
activity, as a step towards the unification of our movement at an
international level.
